Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.




Wednesday, 17 July 2019

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. You have seen the Order Paper; we are trying to reduce what appears on it so that only active business of the House appears on the Order Paper. 

We have a challenge with item No. 5 on the designation of Members to committees in accordance with rule 157 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. Hon. Ssemujju, acting on behalf of the Opposition, came and asked, “What type of committee is the Committee on Climate Change?” This information was not readily available to him and therefore, he was not able to make a list of Members from the Opposition to go to the Committee on Climate Change. 

For your information, the Committee on Climate Change is a standing committee, and the Government Chief Whip is accordingly advised. Therefore, we will be dealing with these designations tomorrow. That is the only alteration I will cause on the Order Paper this afternoon. 

Let me also announce that the Parliamentary Forum on Ethics and Integrity will be launched by the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament on Tuesday, 23 July 2019 at 9.00 a.m. in the Conference Hall. All Members are invited to register and attend this important event. Therefore, those of you who have registered as members have been invited. Those who would like to hear discussions that will evolve around ethics and integrity can also go and attend this meeting. Thank you.

There are Members who had asked for the Floor; the honourable member for Dodoth East County had requested for the Floor but I do not see him here. Honourable member for Kampala District, I ask you to wait because the minister responsible has said he would like to come and respond to your issue and he is on the way. Let me have the Member for Rubanda District.

2.11
MS PROSSY AKAMPULIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand on a matter of national urgency concerning the Students’ Loan Scheme. We are all aware that we have the Students’ Loan Scheme that is meant to help our children who cannot afford to pay school fees but can take up a loan and pay after they have finished their education.

However, Mr Speaker, I learnt that the deadline for applications was Monday, 15 July 2019. When I was in the village, I tried to move around and ask whether anyone knew that the deadline was on the 15th. I talked to the district Chief Administrative Officer and the District Education Officer and the information they gave me is that they were sent an email two weeks ago and asked to circulate the information to the whole district. In my district, with the statistics we have, only 15 or 20 per cent of the people can afford radios, most especially the students. This clearly means that most students did not get the information. I do not know what is happening in other districts but in my district, the students did not get the information and the deadline has passed.

Mr Speaker, my prayer is that the deadline for applying for the Students’ Loan Scheme be extended so that students can be given time to apply. Full information should also be given to the districts so that they can advise students. It is also surprising that the forms were here last week yet they were not in the districts. By the time I reached the district to start giving out the forms, the deadline had passed. 

Mr Speaker, I also pray that the Ministry of Education and Sports goes to various schools and educates them about the Students’ Loan Scheme. If they cannot educate all the teachers, let them call school leaders so that they can get the information and then go and educate the students when they are still in school, instead of sending out the information through radio. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we will take up this matter with the Minister of Education and Sports this afternoon and see whether it is possible to extend the deadline. We will come back and inform the House tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The deadline has expired and people who were supposed to have acted within the deadline did not know about it. That is the information that has been given to the House.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, as I said, I will take up this matter with the Minister of Education and Sports and inform the House on the way forward tomorrow, Thursday, 18 July 2019.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.15
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of urgency and concern. It is a personal and public matter that touches on the moral fabric of this country, the responsibility of all leaders, and the attachment that all leaders have to their offices and statements that they make both in public, on TV and radio.

A maverick prosperity preacher who has a sizable congregation in Kampala, a one Pastor Bugingo, has made statements in his church to women, men and children shaming and disparaging his wife of 29 years, mother of his children and a fellow pastor in their church. Whereas there is freedom of worship and speech in this country, the practice of religion has become problematic in some of these worship places. 

Mr Speaker, we have watched with pain the utterances of Pastor Bugingo on television stations, and listened with agony to the insulting words the same individual has been spewing out on several radio stations, because he owns both a television and radio station - Salt Media. In his own words, he said that a woman, who has made him suffer for lack of sex for 10 years, made him spend money on treatment and on cotton wool because regular pads were insufficient to stem the flow caused by fistula, is not worthy to be married. 

Mr Speaker, as leaders, we condemn this. Actually, we are in shock. As mothers and human beings, we are in pain. No person should be condemned because of an illness. The future of our society, our moral fabric and respect for people is under threat. 

Mr Speaker, the fight against fistula and the advances made in destigmatising it as an illness of shame and an illness that does not accord the bearer the right to be an honourable member of society has been dealt a major blow. We know very well that agencies, including the Kabaka of Buganda, are working hard to stop, treat and destigmatise fistula. 

I pray that the relevant ministry treats this as a matter of urgency. I further pray that the debate on a code of conduct for religious leaders starts in this country. In addition, I pray that what is happening refocuses us to think about our national values as a county.

Further, I pray that the minister informs this House if there is an opportunity to handle this matter and stop such utterances through our airwaves that inform other men that when your wife gets a problem during labour, it is enough for you to discard her. Mr Speaker, my prayer is that we take this matter seriously. Thank you.

2.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Baryomunsi Chris): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand in for the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance because he is not feeling well. 

First, I would like to thank the Woman Member of Parliament for Kampala District for the issue she has raised. Indeed, obstetric fistula is a condition some women suffer as a result of their maternal responsibilities. Therefore, it is wrong for anyone to condemn a woman simply because she has that kind of condition, irrespective of the differences one could have with their spouse. I wish to join you in condemning that kind of irresponsible talk, especially when it borders on abusing women.

As Government, we took note of the offensive communication   uttered by the said pastor and Uganda Communications Commission (UCC), which regulates the media, took note of it.  They have since written to Pastor Bugingo, warning that his utterances offend the existing laws and therefore directed him not to offensively communicate again.

In addition, UCC has recovered the footage and recordings of his utterances and they are being studied. If UCC confirms that that they offend the minimum broadcasting standards, which are in the law, then appropriate action will be taken against him. Otherwise, he has received the warning from UCC not to further engage in that kind of offensive communication. (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving way. The clarification I would like to seek is whether Government has the same standards. 

Mr Joseph Kabuleta, who is a pastor, was in jail for four days for offensive communication. In fact, he was released without a charge. However, for Pastor Bugingo, you only warned him to stop offensively communicating. In the circumstances, does Government have standards or is it just behaving like subsistence farmers who deal with things as they happen?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, hon. Ssemujju Nganda. The standards were set by this very Parliament when we enacted the communications Act, which has, in one of the schedules, the minimum broadcasting standards. Those are the standards Government follows. That is why I said that UCC has already secured the footage and recordings to study the utterances by Pastor Bugingo. Once UCC and Government are satisfied that the law has been broken, appropriate measures shall be taken. Otherwise, Pastor Bugingo has been warned to stop henceforth from that kind of communication he has been making.

To answer your question, hon. Ssemujju, it is true we have standards set by the law and we do follow and implement them to the letter. 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to find out from the minister whether Government has a mechanism of regulating the activities of some of these pastors.

I have one of these pastors in my constituency who lines up women during his sermon and asks them to talk about their bedroom experience. The innocent women come up and begin to talk to that effect. That pastor is called Yiga Augustine. He has a radio and television station. I would like to find out whether you have mechanisms of regulating some of these things.

DR BARYOMUNSI: First of all, the broad framework of Government is that there is freedom of worship. This has given an opportunity to many evangelists and people who want to establish churches, but these churches and faith based institutions have to be registered. It is true that there is a concern, especially recently, that there is commercial evangelism, which some people call the “Jesus industry”, and some people could be infringing on the law. However, there are a number of laws which we have in this country where if they get offended, people including church owners could be prosecuted.

I know that there has been a debate on whether we should have a standalone law to regulate the conduct of faith based institutions. I know that the minister responsible for ethics and integrity is doing some work in that direction. However, the answer to your question is: Yes, churches and faith based institutions are regulated under the existing laws and nobody should use the pretext of faith to break the law. If actions by religious leaders or evangelists or any actors in that area offend the existing laws, then they can be brought to order.

We encourage Ugandans to report to law enforcement agencies if the actions by their pastors or priests                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                are bordering on infringing the rights of the worshipers, or if anything borders on breaking the law. We can take action once those reports reach police or any other law enforcement agencies.

We also caution all Ugandans, including pastors and religious leaders, that the rights of believers have to be protected and respected all the time. Nobody should use the pretext of faith to infringe on the rights of believers in the various sects. However, we do promote freedom of worship in Uganda. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the Shadow Minister for Information and National Guidance. For a long period, the minister I shadow has been missing. That minister also has a minister of state, hon. Nantaba, and the last thing I heard about her was that the President had told her not to leave her home.

The minister in charge of information is the spokesperson of our Government and he also has a bigger role of guiding the country. Mr Speaker, I seek guidance on whether it is not procedurally okay for you, on behalf of all of us here and the whole country, to require the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to tell this country where the Minister for Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance and his state minister are and what happened to that ministry.

I have always seen the honourable minister in charge of housing, Dr Baryomunsi, on television and radio stations. If he is the one who is available, wouldn’t it be procedurally okay for him to be given the ministry, since the others are not around, so that we start dealing with a spokesperson that is present. Maybe this is why we have so many problems in relation to that ministry, because both minsters went missing. That is the procedural matter I wish to raise.  

I am so concerned that I may not also exist because I am supposed to be a shadow of some people who are missing and there is no explanation whatsoever on their whereabouts. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Nambooze is proposing that I appoint Dr Baryomunsi to be the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance. That proposal is unconstitutional, it is not sustainable and it is ill-fated; so it cannot be sustainable by the Speaker.

However, I think that an appropriate response has been made to the issue and the House has understood; that is most important. It is not about who said it but what was said.

2.33
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Mr Speaker, I have a matter of national importance from the people of Busia Municipality. 

As I speak now, for the last one month we have many women and children dying in Masafu Hospital and Busia Health Centre IV due to lack of medicine –(Interjection)– Yes, due to lack of medicine and majorly malaria treatment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, you are saying that malaria is killing people.

MR MACHO: Right. This has become an issue because sometimes when we would get shortages we would rely on Kenya, but our brothers and sisters have tightened their policy in their hospitals across Busia; one must have their national ID to be treated.

I, therefore, pray that the Government intervenes as quickly as possible so that we can have medicine to treat our people.

My second prayer is at our health centre IV in Busia is turned into a community hospital. 

To add to your concern, it is true that many times we bring these issues to the Floor of Parliament but the ministers concerned are not here. Right now, for instance, we have many patients and I came hoping to get an answer today. I do not know whether the problem is because we have ex officio Members in Cabinet and they are now planning for what to do next since we have started politicking. That is why I suggest that in future, we as a ruling Government should have ministers who were elected-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was that the urgent matter you wanted to raise to the House?
 
MR MACHO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was making my point that ministers should come and listen to our matters of national importance because our people expect answers. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Very soon, we will have shadow ministers and ministers in waiting; I do not know how those ones will be called. However, the point is taken. This concern has been raised by Members many times, that the line ministers should be here to respond to some of these issues. 

These are urgent matters that should be dealt with promptly; they should not come back as business to follow. Why should malaria killing people be on the Order Paper for tomorrow and the next day? The minster responsible should be able to make undertakings on how to deal with these matters so that people can hear what the response from the Government is. Is there any response from Government in this matter? 

2.35
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) Ms Mary Karooro Okurut): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Indeed, as you say, these are urgent matters that should not be recurring day after day. Therefore, after this session I will step out and inform the Minister of Health so that they can attend to the situation with the urgency that it deserves. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this matter is not coming up tomorrow; it is going to be dealt with today, so please call any of the ministers of health to come and deal with this matter. Thank you.

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have 180 pupils and students under the care of the Uganda Czech Development Trust/Caritas of the Archdiocese of Prague, a Non-Governmental Organisation (NGO) supporting needy children in the districts of Buikwe, Mukono and Buvuma. They are represented by hon. Robert Kafeero Ssekitoleko, hon. Janepher Egunyu, hon. Isaac Mulindwa, hon. Paul Musoke, hon. David Mutebi and hon. Judith Babirye. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Thank you. 

2.37
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I raise an issue of national importance, not in relation to Aruu County but the whole country. It is about the national identity cards and the process of replacement. 

Mr Speaker, national identity cards have gained prominence all over Uganda to the extent that you cannot transact any meaningful business without a national identity card. In some places, people even dishonour passports and prefer national identity cards. Thank you to all who made it possible. 

However, we have a challenge because the process of replacing a lost national identity card has become so cumbersome. National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) has centres in nearly all the districts of Uganda but those centres cannot help Ugandans obtain a national identity card. People spend up to Shs 200,000 to travel to Kololo in Kampala. They have to pay for transport and accommodation and yet they cannot get a replacement or a fresh national identity card. 

It took three months for even some Members of Parliament to get a replacement of their national identity cards; for example, hon. John Bagoole Ngobi here. The Minister of Internal Affairs is here. If MPs cannot get a replacement of their national identity cards in three months, what about an ordinary person from my village in Opolacen who would have to travel to Gulu Town?

Mr Speaker, we request the Minister of Internal Affairs to give an elaborate procedure to all Ugandans, detailing the steps, centres and costs involved in obtaining a national identity card and how the replacement can be done. The minister should also kindly tell the House what the NIRA upcountry centres are doing. We are paying rents and salaries for staff but they still cannot help the people at those centres. Lastly, why does it cost Shs 50,000 to replace a national identity card and yet you obtain it for free? 

All these are issues that people are grappling with all over the country. We know very well that NIRA is doing the registration of voters and the data is transmitted to the Electoral Commission. As a result, many people will be denied the opportunity to vote in the next elections. Also, many people, including some of us, may even fail to be nominated because we will not have valid national identity cards. Can the country get answers? Thank you.

2.40 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We do acknowledge the problem our people have been getting in not only replacing national identity cards but also getting new ones. 

Let me explain the figure first. The cost of replacement is Shs 50,000; it was deliberately put there and it was even approved in this Parliament in order to make us take good care of our identity cards. The reason we give the original ones for free is because we think it is an entitlement, which Ugandans must have. Having got your preliminary entitlement, we expect you to take serious care of the identity cards. 

Secondly, NIRA is not registering voters. It is registering and is expected to register all Ugandans and issue them with national identity cards and national identification numbers so that at a certain given time, all Ugandans have identities in terms of a number and subsequently, a card. 

Having said that, there are these encumbrances that you were raising, and we know Kololo is not the best. I would like to answer those other questions in a more comprehensive statement, including the current steps we are taking. Now that the budget has been approved, I will let you know the immediate steps NIRA is taking to go down to the district and ease the process of issuing new identity cards and new registration and also about the replacement of identity cards.

I suggest that you give me until Tuesday next week, Mr Speaker, so that I come with a comprehensive statement and make the country aware, so that we do not only make statements about what should be done but also where the people should go. Thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, before the minister takes leave, we would like to also know why the national identity cards expire. The national identity cards we are carrying have expiry dates. Probably, in your subsequent statement, help me understand why my national identity card would expire. I am here forever; I am not going anywhere. Thank you.

MR OBIGA KANIA: I will do that. However, preliminarily, I can state that your citizenship does not expire and that is why in your national identity card, there is something called the National Identification Number (NIN). That NIN is yours until you die, but the reason the identity card will expire is that the data in the identity card, for example the reflection of the pupils and other identification features, may change over ten years. That is why we replace it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we save the clarifications for Tuesday when the minister makes his statement? This will not help us now. Let us have a statement on Tuesday and then we can have a debate. The minister has volunteered a statement, which is a good thing, so that this matter is clarified

2.44
MR SAMSON LOKERIS (NRM, Dodoth East County, Kaabong): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to raise an issue of national importance. It is national in character but it is from my area, Karamoja. 

Mr Speaker, you remember that sometime back in 2002, Government of Uganda undertook a process to remove guns from Karamoja. They removed illegal guns, to the tune of 30,000, and Government promised to provide security for our people. As a result, we have been having relative peace for the last seven years. However, I would like to raise a concern that in the northern part of Karamoja, there are now rampant raids by the Turkana, Dodoth or the Jie in the area and people are living in fear.

We heard that the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) had recruited Local Defence Units (LDUs) to reinforce them in providing security. However, they have been taking these young boys to join UPDF and there is now a gap in our area where they cannot provide adequate security. Because of this, we have got information that some of the people are acquiring guns and the guns are being misused to raid cattle and kill people. We have lost a number of soldiers and LDUs and this is uncalled for yet Government promised to provide us with security.

Secondly, we have a related issue, which I raised sometime back in Parliament, about the international boundary between Karamoja and Kenya. Dr Baryomunsi is aware of this because we have written letters about it. We have an area in Uganda, which is up to five kilometres, that the Kenyans have invaded and they have put up schools and other facilities. We have been raising this concern but Government is adamant. We have a problem because when the UPDF is pursuing cattle rustlers or criminals, they tend to assume that they have reached the border and they come back telling us that these people have crossed into Kenya. 

It is a very critical issue if the state does not know its boundaries. Land is being grabbed by a neighbouring nation but we are not taking action. Two days ago, there was a meeting in Nairobi between South Sudan and Kenya -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is going beyond what you are raising.

MR SAMSON LOKERIS: My prayers are that:

    1. The Government should be given an ultimatum to ensure that they get in touch with the Kenyan Government. They should also inform us when they will open this boundary so that we can secure our country.
    2. The UPDF should be supported and given logistics to ensure that those gangs, which are coming into this country, are removed; otherwise, we shall go back to square one. 

Those are my prayers. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, on re-armament in Karamoja -

2.48
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have noted the concerns of the Member; some of them call for further scrutiny. However, on the issue of the UPDF being in charge of security, I would like to assure the honourable member that the UPDF is in charge of not only Karamoja but also the entire country.

The issue of boundaries is an international legal question. Mr Speaker, you are aware that if you invade me in my country and I manage to repulse you, I have a right to hot pursuit. It is an acceptable principle of international law and therefore, there cannot be an apology.

However, regarding the rest of the issues raised by the Member, I will go back to the ministry and follow them up. I suggest that we have further dialogue with my colleague. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you; except that in this case, he is saying that the hot pursuit is still within Uganda. How can you do hot pursuit in your own country? They stop before they have reached the Kenyan border.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, the honourable member did not seem to be sure of - (Interruption)

MR SAMSON LOKERIS: Mr Speaker, is it in order for a Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs to insinuate that I do not know what I am saying? I have just come from my district where I have been interacting with the division commander. We were told that when they fly with a helicopter, they can tell where Uganda’s border is but should they try to pursue, it may cause a war. 

Therefore, is it in order for a minister - maybe because he does not know where Karamoja is and its boundary - to insinuate that I am ignorant?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he said that you were not clear. He did not say that you are ignorant but that you were not very clear and so he could not respond. Can we finish with this?

MS ROSE AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to make it very clear to the honourable minister that we have been raising this issue of the border since the Ninth Parliament. If I may inform this august House, part of Ik County that hon. Hillary Lokwang represents has been taken by the Kenyan Government. They have even built a technical school and a police post there.

Therefore, I do not see the reason why the minister is saying that we are not sure about what we are saying. Sometimes the soldiers and police officers there even harass us when we go to see our communities. Therefore, it is real, honourable minister, and as Government, we have to do something. Thank you.

MR LOKWANG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Part of my constituency belongs to north-western Kenya. About seven kilometres -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does it belong to Kenya?

MR LOKWANG: They have already occupied that place and put up permanent structures. When we go there, they check us and solicit money from people who cross into that place. Recently, my ambulance went to pick a boy from there but they said that I should first call the Kakuma government in Kenya. This is in my country and my constituency! Even the customs check point is in Uganda, in Ik County, and not at the border.

How are we going to handle this issue? These people have invaded my constituency without my consent –(Laughter)– and they claim that because God made that place flat and not mountainous, it does not belong to Uganda. They do not consider legitimate borders. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you had consented, do you think it would have been okay? (Laughter)

MR LOKWANG: Mr Speaker, it is my appeal that the minister dispatches a team because one time while in Lodwar, I told the Governor of Kenya that since his people are in my country, they can also become my voters. Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is true that we have areas at various borders of the country where there are disputes. It is also true –(Interjection)– I am a minister in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the Government Department of Surveys and Mapping falls under my ministry. I am now responding as the line minister. 

I am giving information to the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs because he was on the Floor. I would like to say that there are areas with disputes and there is work going on to redefine the borders of Uganda. Specifically, for the Uganda-Kenya border -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the purpose of the Hansard, are they redefining the borders or reopening them?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Reopening the borders. It is true that the Members of Parliament from Karamoja have been raising this concern. 

Uganda has been working with Kenya, both at political and also technical level, to reopen the borders. Two months ago, we had a meeting in Nairobi as ministers responsible for lands and also a meeting between the Presidents where this issue was discussed. The agreement was to allow technical teams from both the governments of Kenya and Uganda to carry out the work of marking these borders. Indeed, it is the area of Karamoja and Lake Victoria where there are disputes. We agreed that our technical teams should work together to resolve these issues. 

What I would like to pledge is that next week, I will come with a statement in respect to how far our technical teams have gone in reopening these borders between Uganda and Kenya. That will answer and update our Members of Parliament from Karamoja who have this pending issue. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have that statement on Wednesday then? Okay, the statement from the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development about the concerns raised by Members will come on Wednesday next week.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I listened to the minister, I realised that he has only referred to Kenya and parts of Lake Victoria. However, there is the border with Congo and also issues with South Sudan and Uganda. I think it would be procedurally right for the minister to come with a comprehensive report on all the borders where these issues have been arising over a period of time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you be able to do that by Wednesday next week?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Yes, we could bring a comprehensive paper. However, I know that for some of the countries, it requires teams from Uganda and the other side - I know like South Sudan -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the brief update you are going to give on Wednesday accommodate all this?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Yes; we shall give a comprehensive statement concerning all the borders.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we now go to the Order Paper.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You gave a very serious directive last week to the effect that the minister responsible for labour makes a statement in line with -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That statement is coming tomorrow.

MR KASIBANTE: Mr Speaker, because the matter is escalating, I wanted some guidance. Just last night, I almost slept at a funeral when I was invaded by some of my constituents complaining that their daughter called Hilda Namatovu is stranded and stuck. She fell sick two weeks after securing a job in Saudi Arabia in a city called Dammam. She has not had any medical attention for the last week. The employer claims she can no longer even feed her because she has already spent money on her yet she is not productive.

They tried to contact the company that linked them to this employer but the company is demanding an equivalent of Shs 4 million before they can process Hilda Namatovu’s travel back to Uganda.

We spent the day like we were at a funeral because she is almost dying. We attempted to speak to her but she can only speak to her people when her employer is at home with the Wi-Fi connection which is rooted on his own telephone. When the employer goes away from home, she cannot speak to anyone outside the home.

I just want guidance on how we can go about this because the issue is escalating. These are only symptoms of a very big wound, which we need to heal. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you for the procedural matter you have raised. Honourable members, like I guided last week, this statement should come tomorrow. The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development should be able to deal with this tomorrow in a comprehensive way.

However, on the issue of injuries and falling sick and things like that, there should be an arrangement. I know there is an arrangement between the people who take these children to work and the people who employ them. Any injury or anything like that should be the responsibility of the employer and the company that sent them there. That is in the agreement; I have looked at some of them.

Therefore, if there is a problem of enforcement, I also know that there is an umbrella organisation for all these labour externalisation companies; this matter should be addressed by that umbrella organization. This should stop these issues of an individual being injured and then they demand for money from parents. This should be handled by the agencies and the institutions that they have. I am sure they also have insurance systems and so on and so forth. We cannot be operating like we are starting things from scratch. We have systems that govern these kinds of things. 

Therefore, I still think that the agencies and the umbrella organisation that governs them should have in place mechanisms for dealing with issues of injuries and repatriation in case of sickness and injury of this nature, so that families and the people who go there are not burdened. However, part of that should also come in the comprehensive statement. Otherwise, the individual cases that have been highlighted should be responded to as urgently as possible. 

MS KAHUNDE: Thank you, Speaker. I have risen on a matter of national importance several times regarding the ranches in Kiryandongo; even last week, my colleague and I were here raising the same but we are not getting any response. 

Our people continue to be intimidated, harassed, evicted and surrounded with gardens but with no response. Is it procedurally right, Mr Speaker, for us to continue presenting issues concerning our constituencies without responses from the responsible ministers?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business, is it proper for Members to raise issues and get no response from your ministers? Is that proper?

3.03
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I would beg you to let the honourable member repeat what she said so that I get it better because I did not hear it well. She speaks so fast that I could not understand. (Laughter)

MS KAHUNDE: Thank you very much. Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister, Kiryandongo District has been facing a challenge to do with ranches. These ranches have bona fide occupants on them. Some of the ranches have been fraudulently given to investors and we do not know whether it is right or wrong. 

However, we have raised this matter here several times. We have said that our people are being evicted, surrounded by sugarcane plantations and not allowed to cultivate their land, not compensated and not resettled. We have been to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, the Prime Minister’s Office, the office in charge of land matters at State House, and we have petitioned the Office of the President but with no response.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my people want to be told where to go. They have not been compensated neither have they been resettled. They have no answers and they have been left in the hands of the investors, who intimidate and harass them with guns every day. We need a response on whether it is a directive from Government for the people of Kiryandongo to be treated the way they are being treated or not. We also need to know whether there is a solution to this matter or not.

Mr Speaker, we have raised this issue more than five times here. I pray for your response, Sir.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is now clear. However, I think the situation of ranches in Kiryandongo has been in the system for a long time. Some of the ranches have been given to the people and others have been de-gazetted. Therefore, I think the best I can do is to ask the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to come with a proper report here. This is because right now, I cannot say what is happening there. 

Therefore, we shall ask the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to come and tell us about the ranches so that our honourable Member of Parliament gets the answer she is looking for. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. This has been one of the pending issues and I have just been briefed by the clerk at the Table that it has been forwarded to your senior colleague, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, to respond to tomorrow in a comprehensive way. Therefore, this matter might be dealt with tomorrow but if there is a gap, then you can take the procedure you have just outlined to Parliament. Thank you. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE TRAFFIC AND ROAD SAFETY ACT 1998 (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

3.07
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Azuba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Traffic and Road Safety Act (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read for the first time. The Bill is accompanied by the certificate of financial implication, which I hereby lay on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, this Bill stands referred to our Committee on Physical Infrastructure to handle within the framework of the rules and report within time to have this matter handled by Parliament. Thank you. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT ON THE PARLIAMENTARY PUBLIC OUTREACH FORUM FOR KIGEZI SUB-REGION HELD FROM 29 TO 31 MARCH 2019

3.08
MS CATHELINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report on the Parliamentary Public Outreach Forum for Kigezi Sub-Region held at Cephas Inn, Kabale. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. That is an activity of the Parliamentary Commission. We will have time and see what was discussed, what the outcome is and whether this thing is working for Parliament or not. We will find time and have that discussion.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE PAN AFRICAN PARLIAMENT COVERING THE PERIOD OCTOBER 2018 TO MAY 2019

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the Member for Kabula County? Can any other Member lay this report on the Table? The report is here. Should it have been laid by a Member of the Pan African Parliament or any other Member? Is there any Member of the Pan African Parliament here? Can we have this document laid on the Table by the Member for Kasilo County, who is also a former Member of the Pan African Parliament, hence he has institutional memory? 

3.10
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Mr Speaker, allow me, as a former Member of the Pan African Parliament representing Uganda, to lay these reports on the Table: 

    a) A report of the Parliament by Members of the Pan African Parliament on the activities covering the period October 2018 to May 2018;  
    b) A report of the High Level Consultative Convention on accelerating ratification, domestication and implementation of the Protocol of the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights on the Rights of the Women in Africa. This was held in Maputo and it is ordinarily called the Maputo Protocol; and 
    c) A report on the fact finding mission on women issues in the Africa Region. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Similar to that, we will have time to deal with these reports and have the recommendations from them dealt with. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The procedural issue I am trying to raise is that hon. James Kakooza, Member of Parliament for Kabula County, was not a Member of the Pan African Parliament at the beginning of this Parliament. 

In the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC), we raised an issue that we wanted to change Prof. Latigo’s membership to the Pan African Parliament midway. Prof. Latigo raised an issue and said that he is there for the entire five years. However, it is not provided for in the treaty that you can change membership midway. 

The procedural issue I am raising, in which I need your legal guidance, is: Under what law was hon. James Kakooza appointed to the Pan African Parliament? Under what law did we change the then Pan African Member so that hon. James Kakooza could replace him? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. First of all, hon. James Kakooza was doing this on behalf of hon. Anifa Bangirana who submitted this report to the Clerk, which was signed by the Members of the Pan African Parliament. 

Secondly, on the day the Pan African Parliament was being constituted, there was a direct communication from the Speaker, and the records captured it. This House approved that on the side of the Independent members, the first Member called was hon. Veronica Babirye Kadogo and she would serve for two and half years and then hon. James Kakooza would serve for the remaining two and a half years. The question was put to this House and adopted. Therefore, that is the basis on which hon. James Kakooza is a Member of the Pan African Parliament. If you need further guidance on that matter, the Hansard will be extracted for your purposes and your satisfaction. 

However, on the issue of Prof. Ogenga-Latigo, the rules are clear about how a Member can stop being a Member of the Pan African Parliament. These issues have been discussed and Members of the Opposition side have been advised. What you need to do is in the rules and the only rules that would have been applicable in the case of Prof. Ogenga-Latigo would have been the case where his membership – Let me look it up.  

It lists out conditions for vacation of membership of the Pan African Parliament. Just like how you would stop being a Member of Parliament, it is also what is in our rules governing cessation of membership by a Member of the Pan African Parliament. Since it has come without my earlier preparation, let me look at it. I would be excused to not quote from memory but rather look at the rules themselves. It is one of my trainings - never quote laws from memory but look at them.

The Pan African Parliament is in Appendix D of our Rules of Procedure and in rule 4, you will find tenure:

“Tenure

(1) 	Subject to the Protocol establishing the African Community and the Pan-African Parliament, the term of a Member of the Pan-African Parliament shall run concurrently with his or her term in Parliament.

(2) 	The Seat of a Member of the Pan-African Parliament shall become vacant if he or she-
    (a) dies;
    (b) resigns in writing to the President of the Pan-African Parliament;
    (c) is unable to perform his or her functions for reasons of physical or mental incapacity; 
    (d) is removed on grounds of misconduct;
    (e) ceases to be a Member of Parliament;
    (f) is recalled by Parliament;
    (g) When Uganda withdraws from the African Union.” 

Those are the provisions. If you find that the removal of Prof. Ogenga-Latigo can be housed under any of these, come back to the House and we handle it.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO APPOINT AN AUDITOR TO AUDIT THE ACCOUNTS OF THE OFFICE OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

3.17
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kakumiro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to appoint an auditor to audit the accounts of the Office of the Auditor-General: 

“WHEREAS Article 163 (9) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and section 36 of the National Audit Act, 2008 mandate Parliament to appoint an auditor to audit the books of accounts of the Office of the Auditor-General;

NOTING THAT Parliament is a public entity and all its procurements must be in accordance with the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (PPDA) Act, 2003;

AWARE THAT in accordance with the PPDA Act and regulations, the Parliamentary Commission, which is the procuring and disposal entity of Parliament, invited bids through the Open International Bidding method for the procurement of on auditor to audit the accounts of the Office of the Auditor-General for the period running from financial years 2017/2018, 2018/2019 and 20l9/2020;
 
FURTHER AWARE THAT M/s Kisaka and Company Certified Public Accountants emerged the best evaluated bidder to provide the audit services;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that: Parliament appoints M/s Kisaka and Company Certified Public Accountants to audit the accounts of the Office of the Auditor- General for the period running from financial years 2017/2018, 2018/2019 and 2019/2020.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded by the Member for Usuk County who is a Parliamentary Commissioner, Member for Adjumani District and Member for Ngora County. Would you like to justify your motion? Honourable Commissioner, does your motion need justification?

MS NABBANJA: It is self-explanatory.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is a self-explaining motion. It is fulfilling a statutory obligation. The motion that I now propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to appoint an auditor to audit the accounts of the Office of the Auditor-General and the name is M/s Kisaka and Company Certified Public Accountants. That is the motion I propose for your debate and the debate should start now.

3.21
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Auditor-General should have, under the Parliament Act, appointed the auditor to audit the Office of the Auditor-General. Also, the Auditor-General appoints private auditors to audit on his behalf. 

There is a conflict of interest, which we must sort out now. Is M/s Kisaka and Company Certified Public Accountants not one of the auditors that have been shortlisted to provide private services for purposes of the Auditor-General? If we are going to do this, then it should be decided here that M/s Kisaka and Company Certified Public Accountants must be one of those who should be struck off the list of those who audit on behalf of the Auditor-General. We would like the commissioner who has brought this to tell us vividly what she considered. Did she delete that company from the list or they are still there?

Secondly, the Office of the Auditor-General has been audited for long, yet the reports of the Auditor-General have not been laid on the Table in this House. This is a big problem. It will be wrong for us to assume that the Auditor-General has been audited and the reports are not presented here. I recall sometime back, we appointed the auditors and they audited the Auditor-General. Before we audit again, where are the reports, which were audited earlier on?

Mr Speaker, I am raising this because there are issues we must deal with so that the Auditor-General – Of course, for you to be a good dog, you must prove that you are not eating elsewhere.

Finally, the Office of the Auditor-General has done whatever it has done. I would also like to add that if we agree to appoint M/s Kisaka and Company Certified Public Accountants, the commissioner should add that they should carry out value-for-money audits in the Office of the Auditor-General. They should not only look at the financials but also do value-for-money audits. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this issue is clear. This matter will go through a process and it comes to us for approval. We rely on the institutions that advise us on what we should do, especially on matters of this nature that are statutory. When they come through this format, we cannot open it up for discussion. Normally, it does not happen in that way. 

The issue raised of the particular company being recommended to Parliament for approval and also being shortlisted by the Office of the Auditor-General to do its own internal audit would not be of knowledge to the processes here. However, we can make a direction to the effect that if we approve, that means any names appearing on the list of those competing to audit the Office of the Auditor-General internally, which are similar to this name, should be withdrawn. 

That is a different process from what we are doing here. However, we can send this information that we have approved so and so, should such a name appear among the people competing to be one of your internal auditors to do your internal audit, please, do not consider them because Parliament has since appointed them as such.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, it is not for internal audit. For example, the Office of the Auditor-General is supposed to audit Parliament but they may not be able to audit and instead appoint a private audit firm to do the audit. That is not internal audit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, it should read, “…any other company shortlisted for doing work that should have been done by the Auditor-General”. Okay. “The firm appointed by Parliament should not participate in any other audit that is delegated by the Office of the Auditor-General.” That would be correct, to capture the spirit that if we appoint you, you cannot again be appointed by the Auditor-General to carry out other audits on its behalf. Is that correct? 

Secondly, on the issue of value-for-money audit, I think we should use the term “audit” as a generic term to encompass all audits, including value-for-money audits. 

On the last point, which was on – I have just dealt with value-for-money - There seems to be a problem with what the law says about that because only the Auditor-General can lay the report to Parliament. In that case, it would have to be the Auditor-General to lay the reports of the audits on itself to Parliament. This is because if we approve Kisaka, it will not have access to this House to bring the report of its audit. It would still be the same Auditor-General to bring the report, among all the audits that have been carried out to Parliament for Parliament to take action. 

I do not think there is a problem unless it is going to edit the report, which is not possible. The Auditor-General is only going to bring that report to Parliament as part of what was audited by a different entity but it is the only entity, which is mandated to report all audits of public funds to Parliament. I think that is okay.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, my understanding is that the Office of the Auditor-General serves under the supervision of Parliament. The Auditor-General is an office under your direct supervision and you are the one who has gone ahead to seek the approval of Parliament to come up with an audit firm to audit the Office of the Auditor-General. In this case, my interpretation is that once this audit firm that we have agreed upon to audit the Auditor-General does its work, it has to submit the report to you, the authority that gave it the contract, and not the client that has been audited. 

Therefore, this audit firm that we are about to approve will deliver the audited report on the Office of the Auditor- General to you because you are the appointing authority. It cannot report back to the institution that it has audited.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give to the House is that the accounts of the Office of the Auditor-General, for the previous years, have been audited and the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which has delegated powers from the Speaker to oversee policy matters of the Auditor-General’s office, has considered the audited accounts and we are yet to present the report to the House.

Secondly, I do not know what this motion intends to achieve but I would like to make this point; one of the conditions for a private firm to be given an assignment to audit the Auditor-General’s office is that it must not appear on the list of private auditors who do work on behalf of the Auditor-General. Therefore, I wonder how this debate about whether the firm appears on the list comes before the House when it is clear that even before the firm is presented to us, all those processes would have been checked by those charged with that responsibility.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, on value-for-money audits undertaken by the Office of the Auditor-General, I wonder whether this is debate for today or whether we can consult you for further guidance on how this matter can be handled. This is because this is a firm that does work on behalf of Government entities. Therefore, if we begin to doubt what they are doing in a forum like this, before we even get to the core of what the motion intends to achieve – Mr Speaker, these are some of the areas we would like you to guide the House on. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I have done my best to guide on how we should handle this matter. What you have just said is what I said. Can I put the question to this matter? If you are talking about value-for-money audit, that is part of audit. Regarding public funds, the entity designated by the Constitution to carry out the audit is the Office of the Auditor-General and the only institution mandated by the Constitution to report to Parliament is the Office of the Auditor-General. There is no other person. 

Therefore, you cannot now say that some other thing should come through the Parliamentary Commission to Parliament. No. The Constitution says the responsibility of auditing all public funds is with the Auditor-General and that is the only person mandated to bring documents and lay them before the House. Therefore, we are not going to entertain any subsidiary documentation that comes through any other way.

If any audits have been carried out by entities that we have appointed, the proper way of that audit report coming to Parliament should be with the total summation of all the audits that have been done on behalf of the Government of Uganda and through the accountability processes under Article 163. I do not see any diversions here.

If there is a debate on the motion, I will entertain it. The others are procedural matters that will be handled administratively. Okay? Is there any debate on this motion?

3.33
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a unique situation because the Auditor-General audits everybody and now he must also be audited. If you have audited me and given me the report to carry, can’t I say, “I lost that report along the way?” (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, the point I would like to make is, I have read reports of the Auditor-General for many years and I have raised this matter before; I do not want to call it “the quality” but the details in the report are changing. The earlier reports of the Auditor-General – in fact, that is why accountability committees now take long. It is because they do the audit by themselves. If you read the –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I normally insist on relevance. You are talking about reports of the Auditor-General yet we are talking about the entity to audit the Auditor-General. (Laughter)

Can we save that debate when the matter regarding the quality of the report of the Auditor-General comes? Would it be a relevant debate, honourable member?

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I agree with you but the point I am driving at is: to find out from the movers whether this motion intends to authorise the firm being hired to do an extensive audit or is it limited to a specific audit? That is the reason I was raising the matter of quality. 

Otherwise, if we are going to look at the financial aspect as hon. Nandala-Mafabi said, like the value-for-money-audit – that is why I brought up the matter of the quality of the work that is done. I would like to find out whether the movers of the motion will be kind enough to tell what sort of audit they envisage? Otherwise, we are not privy to the details of the contract.

Mr Speaker, I know we are going to approve the motion but we have not looked at the contract and the instructions. Yes, you have selected this particular firm but what are the instructions? That could be why hon. Nandala-Mafabi was asking, which is exactly what I am trying to also ask; it is as simple as that. Is it going to be a comprehensive audit and is it in the agreement that they will go beyond auditing finances and value for money including the quality of work?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is not going to be the fast time that this is done. This is something we have been doing. These motions have always come this way because the law requires that to happen. Can I put the question to that? Let me put the question to this motion.

Honourable members, I now put the question for a motion for a Resolution of Parliament to appoint M/s Kisaka and Company, Certified Public Accountants to audit the accounts of the Office of the Auditor-General.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE AMIRALI KARMALI

3.39
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Amirali Karmali, commonly known as “Mukwano” for his contribution to the nation.

Mr Speaker, the motion is moved under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and it reads: 

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda, with grief, received the sad news of the death of Mzee Amirali Karmali, a leading Ugandan entrepreneur and founder of the Mukwano Group of Companies;

AND WHEREAS Mzee Amirali Karmali, at the time of his death, was a renowned businessman having started humbly as a shop assistant, then moved into trade of agricultural produce, before venturing into many other businesses that made his group of companies become one of the most successful investments in Uganda and the region;

NOTING that Mzee Amirali Karmali was among the few Ugandans of Asian origin that persisted and remained in the country during the turbulent times when Idi Amin expelled Asians from Uganda;

COGNISANT that Amirali Karmali’s business and empire of Mukwano Group of Companies has thrived greatly and produces most of the household items used in the region –(Mr Ssemujju rose­­_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is a motion to pay tribute but you want to raise a point of order to the Prime Minister even before it is presented. Are you saying that the motion is not sustainable? 

MR SSEMUJJU: No, Mr Speaker, this is a point of order. Mr Speaker, I fully understand the sensitivity of motions of this nature. However, there are people who will be reading this Hansard and they need to get the record clear. 

It is true the Government of Field Marshal Idi Amin was responsible for expulsion of Asians but that government was not constituted by a single person called Idi Amin. It had other actors including Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali. 

Therefore, the point of order I am raising is whether the Prime Minister is in order to distort history - because the parliamentary record is also history - by editing out names of other people who took the decision to expel Asians.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister reads in parts thus: “NOTING THAT Amirali Karmali was among the few Ugandans of Indian origin that persisted and remained in the country during the turbulent times when Idi Amin expelled Asians from Uganda…” That is the statement from the Prime Minister and that is his choice of the words. Hon. Gen. Ali, would you like to say something? (Laughter)

3.43
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Ali Moses): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have always said on the Floor of this House that I will never deny that I was a member of Amin’s Government; I will never deny that and therefore, I am not even denying it now.

However, what my honourable colleague does not know is what I am going to tell him now. He should not have even bothered people to raise this point of order because he does not know. I wish you asked me quietly. Since he always has intentions to embarrass me –(Laughter)- I do not think he has a right to do so, which is unfortunate.

First of all, that expulsion did not affect the Mzee we are talking about. He did not go -(Interjection)– it doesn’t matter; he was a victim of that decision.

Secondly, you cannot personalise a government because Gen. Moses Ali is here and therefore, this motion should not be moved. For your information, I was in the army and I was a Major undergoing a staff college course in Britain for one year; I spent 1972 in Britain.

I came back in January 1973; so, this decision that was taken - a simple Major in the army had nothing to do with it. You better check your facts before. I am your brother; ask me to go out with you and I will tell you. I know that you do not know all that I know –(Laughter)– so what is your problem, why can’t you first check?  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules of this House are clear; when you are making reference to another Member, it should be factually correct. Now it has turned out that there are some factual errors in the statement.

By the time the Indians were being expelled, Gen. Moses Ali was not in Cabinet; he was a soldier - a Major - and was training in London. So, he could not have been personally part of this decision; that is what he has stated and your point of order was in relation to Gen. Moses Ali.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling on the matter. I will continue from where I had stopped.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, sir. 

“…COGNISANT THAT Amirali Karmali's business empire of Mukwano Group of Companies has thrived and produces most of the household items used in the region including personal care products such as petroleum jelly, soap, cooking oil, drinking water and other products; 

It further deals in other businesses such as logistics, real estate, banking and employs over l4,000 workers hence improving the livelihoods of many Ugandans;

FURTHER COGNISANT that Amirali Karmali endeavoured to see that the products made by Mukwano Group of Companies trade in the regional markets, such as Kenya, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Sudan, South Sudan and Rwanda thus earning Uganda substantial revenue in foreign exchange;

ACKNOWLEDGING THAT in 2011, Amirali Karmali was decorated with the Distinguished Order of the Nile Class One Award for his distinct performance in production and enterprise development and his company has severally been recognised among the top most taxpayers in the country;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows;

1. 	That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda at large for the loss of Mzee Amirali Karmali.

2. 	That Parliament takes cognisance of the contribution made to the economy by Mzee Amirali Karmali.

3. 	That we pray to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and grant Mzee Amirali Karmali eternal peace. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by the Members for Butaleja, PWD Eastern, Kyegegwa, Busiro East, Kira Municipality, Fort Portal Municipality, Mitooma, Kioga, Kaberamaido, Adjumani.

(Motion seconded.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: However, as the Prime Minister justifies his motion, let us be clear. The public records show - at least the ones I have listened to and read - that Gen. Amin said that he had a dream when he was in Karamoja that the Indians should be expelled. 

He did not say that there was a Cabinet decision. A reference to a decision of President Idi Amin would be a proper one because it was a dream. Two people cannot dream the same dream.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we are here to pay tribute to a great entrepreneur who has played a significant role in Uganda’s economy. Mzee Mukwano, as he was and is popularly known, was one of the country’s leading entrepreneurs.

Government deems it fit to celebrate the industrious, humble and generous business icon who has contributed tremendously to the economy of Uganda and improved the quality of lives of many people.

Mukwano was born in 1938 in Gomba in Mpigi, which was then Masaka District. His father, Ali Mohammed Karmali, came to Uganda in 1904. Under the watchful eye of his father, Karmali learnt to trade in cotton and coffee.

The family later on moved to Fort Portal where he bought a second hand lorry and started a career as a truck driver. He traded around in the region; majorly in Kenya, Rwanda and DRC.

During the time of expulsion of Asians by President Idi Amin in 1972, Mzee Karmali stayed behind because of his commitment to Uganda.

As a testimony of his ingenuity, not only did he survive under the difficult conditions of the time but he actually thrived. In 1986, Mzee Karmali Mukwano was a big trader importing the much needed commodities such as textiles, soap and other items to meet the local demand of the people.

He was one of the very first traders who made a fundamental shift from trading into manufacturing when NRM came to power. In fact, he worked with the NRM Government over the last three decades to rebuild the economy and also the country.

His industries kicked off production in 1988. He started by manufacturing soap and cooking oil, which were scarce at the time. Due to his hard work, these industries have since expanded into manufacturing plastics, petroleum jelly, drinking water and detergents. He has also expanded bulky storage, warehousing, tea industry and other enterprises. The depth and breadth of his business empire means that almost every Ugandan household has at least one product from Mukwano Industries. 

Over the last few days, I have read tributes paid to Mzee Amirali Karmali. He was more than just a manufacturing giant. Beyond the many jobs he created and the goods and services his extensive business empire churned out, he helped thousands of students with scholarships through his charity work.

Above all, Mzee Amirali Karmali was a simple man who wore his great achievements lightly and carried himself with an uncommon humility. He was a very humble man for a person of his great wealth.

Mr Speaker, Amirali Karmali passed on at his house on 10 July 2019. His life is so intertwined with the history of this country and his significant contribution to reviving the economy over the last three decades is definitely highly appreciated. 

To the bereaved family, His Excellency President Yoweri Museveni, the Government and the people of Uganda wish to express their heartfelt condolences for this great loss. Government and the country owe Amirali Karmali a great deal of gratitude for his patriotism and hard work over the years. 

In times like this, people like Amirali Karmali serve as a reminder of what it means to be a productive member of society, an upright citizen and a good Ugandan. May Allah grant Mzee Amirali Karmali eternal peace.” Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.59
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Prime Minister for moving Parliament to pay tribute to the late Mzee Amirali Karmali, commonly known as Mukwano. I stand here to second and support this motion.

Mr Speaker, Mukwano was a very modest person. He ate the same food like all his employees. I have friends I was with in the university who have worked there. Sometimes, when he still had some energy, he would line up to eat the same food like his employees. 

He was a very rich man but very modest. There are fewer people who would do that. I have worked in companies and I have seen what happens there. Some people including those who are not in companies tend to become bigger than their companies or organisations. This man, however, never became bigger than the company. That is why Mukwano and their products are more known than Mzee Amirali Karmali. In fact, if he walked on Kampala streets, very few people would recognise Mzee Mukwano. I do not know any part of Uganda that does not know Mukwano products. 

Therefore, I would like to pay tribute and ask all of us who are in positions of responsibility to emulate the life of the late Amirali Karmali. 

Mr Speaker, there is something unique about the Ugandans of Asian origin and maybe Asians wherever they are. It is something Africa has failed at. I saw in the newspapers; people were worried that maybe the empire would crumble. I know for a fact that it had been a while since Mzee Amirali Karmali had the energy to run the company. His son, Alykhan was running the company for nearly 20 years. 

The unique thing about the Ugandans of Asian origin is that they do not build the empire around themselves. For example, Mzee Amirali Karmali is no longer around. Therefore, even when he was the bearer, he was not the only visionary person in the company. That is why you can count so many Madhvanis to date. People may not know the original Madhvani; Aga Khan or Mehta. For Africans, starting with even their own families, the day you die is when the relatives will share your children and what your aunties will take. They will even never disclose the sources of their income to their wives.

I have told young people in my constituency that even when they go to the bathrooms, they carry their wallets. They do not want their wives to see what is in there. Someone, if he remembers from the bathroom that he forgot his wallet, will run back to pick it. Who does he fear? He fears his wife. That is why we are shared when the head of an African family has died.

Amirali Karmali, his children, the two that I know - Alykhan and the daughter - have been running this empire for a very long time. As I said, it is a lesson especially to those of us who are in politics who think the country should be built around one person. Every major decision must be taken by that person. I remember we were discussing defence one time here - it is in the records of this Parliament - when that person was still holding the portfolio of the Ministry of Defence. 

He was involved in buying even simple things like a pick-up. The Mukwanos do not do these things and that is why their empire continues to grow. This problem bedevils almost all the African countries where strong men are stronger than the brand they purport to be selling or building.

I, therefore, would like to pay tribute to a man who knew that a human being would have a life and would go whether he likes it or not. He did not become a sole person in his company. He allowed his children and other people to grow. That is why I can assure you that if you knew Amirali Karmali, for the last years he has been down, nothing has changed in that company. That is what we want to see in our country; building of institutions including private ones. 

Institutions must be built and they must outlive the individuals who start and or manage them. In fact, I thought the Prime Minister, who was fairly tutored by former President Milton Obote, would be able to support the building of institutions that are going to outlive people and not those that you will go with.

You may remember that Somalia, under Siad Barre, was such a strong country that at one time they threatened Ethiopia and the latter had to go to Cuba for help. Since Siad Barre left, Somalia has been run by individuals so that every village has a warlord. You can only prevent that if, in your lifetime, you build institutions, prepare transition, prepare the human resource and you do not leave things to happen by themselves. 

Therefore, I would like to pay tribute and thank Mzee Mukwano for institutionalising even what was a private company. I have already made note of his modesty and I would like to conclude by re-emphasising the point I made of continuity of his businesses.

You can trace Mukwano’s wealth, as the Prime Minister has done, from being a shopkeeper to the time of his death. Today, we have people who become rich within seconds; the entrepreneurs of our time. You do not know the source of their income but you see that they are building hotels and companies. That is why they crumble because they have no art of starting and running a business.

Therefore, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as we remember and thank Mukwano, we also need to create an environment where people can do business honestly, earn and build. The moment you begin strangling businesses and make people - I know Kiggundu will never forgive the Prime Minister and Mzee Kivejinja because you were with him in Nairobi in the external wing of the NRM as you were recruiting people. You know how he died, with his empire shared by mafias. We were just going through that during COSASE; how these banks were crumbled and sold on phone.

Therefore, it is possible for this country to create more people like Mukwano the moment you create the environment. However, if the entrepreneurs must necessarily be your supporters, you will have less and fewer people like Mukwano. I mentioned Kiggundu specifically because you were with him in Nairobi but he died a very disappointed man, his empire collapsed by a Government that he helped to bring into power.

In a nutshell, I would like to ask the Prime Minister to help and create conditions in this country that will create more people like Mukwano because that is how you will get more employment opportunities. We will then stop lamenting about Ugandan girls going outside because I am one of those who are reluctant to blame first of all the girls but also where they go. This is because if you are a country that cannot provide employment to your people, they will be extremely vulnerable. Uganda now competes with Ethiopia, which has two million domestic workers in the Middle East. 

If we had 1000 Mukwano Group of Companies in Uganda - genuine ones and not plastic ones or those being aided, this country would stop exporting domestic workers where we are only competing with Ethiopia.                      

I would like to second the motion and ask colleagues to do the same. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion that has been moved, spoken to and seconded is that Parliament, by a resolution, pays tribute to the late Amirali Karmali, commonly known as Mukwano, for his contribution to the nation. That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now. Those of you who stood before the motion was proposed will not speak, with the exception of the Deputy Prime Minister.

4.09
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I would like to bring up a few things, which might not have been noticed. First of all, Mukwano chose to have Uganda as his country. When you decide on any endeavour, please be sincere to it. Be able to face all the hazards and ultimately, you will be called a successful man but success does not come easily.

I do not know whether some of you were around but when we came to power, there was scarcity of essential commodities and one of them was soap -(Interjection)– Well, crashers will always be part of human beings on earth. Therefore, whether they are crashers or not, I am just bringing up one aspect of Mukwano and what he and the leadership did.

We had tallow imports and you know that it was by allocation of foreign exchange and he could not raise enough money. Therefore, we could not provide soap, let alone sugar or the most favourite beverage - beer - to the citizens of Uganda. 

What did Mukwano do? He was called by the President who said, “We have a problem of producing soap for our people. What do you want the Government to do to assist you to produce enough?” He said, “I want to be given more foreign exchange so that I can import tallow.” That was done and in a very short time, the problem of soap for the population was resolved.

What I am trying to say is that this man has remained modest and has been patriotic to his country. We are not here to say how many hurdles he overcame; they are many but we can pick up the lessons.

Mukwano stabilised us and took his earnings to make sure that he attends to the other essential commodities. Some of us in Uganda tend to be experts on everything, even politics. We think we are the best in everything. Concentrate and be focused and people will begin to ask what food you eat. Do not lose direction despite the hazards and you will be able to make meaningful contributions to your country.

We cannot all be die-hard freedom fighters or politicians that can shout on the top of every anthill. However, if you take up a calling, please stay with it and you will be able to make a mark. For Mukwano, it is recorded that he had only four shirts. They could wash one today while the rest would were waiting. You do not need everything to appear to exaggerate your image.

Therefore, the question is: the lesson we are learning from Mukwano is that one must love their country. That is a lesson to all of us and it is good that Mukwano has given us the occasion to raise that question and we shall be able to find solutions to it. Whatever that may come, do not worry about it, just be dedicated to the country and the country will be able to at least honour you and you will be able to give tangible contribution to this country, which will be admired by others.

Therefore, I thank Mukwano. He has shown us the way forward. It is my prayer that God not only gives you an abode in heaven but also lets your spirit continue to haunt Ugandans so that they become dedicated to their country. Thank you. (Applause)

4.17
MR CLEMENT ONGALO-OBOTE (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to represent the views of Kalaki District in paying tribute to this humble yet great man who epitomised the apothegm that Uganda is truly gifted by nature because with nothing in his hands, from the soils of Uganda, he was able to build his empire that we all know as Mukwano Group of Companies. This truly shows that Uganda can be and will be more prosperous than it is now if we all put in the hard work that it takes. 

I hope that our young people, who flood the internet with prayers for quick riches, will develop the mind-set; my colleague, the Opposition Whip, said that we need to foster an environment. I also believe that we need to foster a mind-set in our people that with hard work, one can indeed rise and become rich. That people do not need short cuts; all they need to do is to work hard. 

This man was truly great. The word “Mukwano” became a household name. It took me years even after learning Luganda to know that Mukwano was actually a Luganda word. I thought it was an international word that meant something else. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.19
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Mukwano. From what we have just heard, Mukwano was a man who really made a household name in this country. 

I heard that the name “Mukwano” is a Luganda word that means friendship. He made friendship with the Kabaka; people accepted him, then the children and they were accepted as Ugandans. That is a good spirit.

Mr Speaker, I represent the people of Lira and much as Mukwano is based in other places. Lira has Mukwano Group of Companies and it has employed many people. They buy from our constituency and I would like to bring the condolences of the people of Lira for the great work that Mukwano so did, and they are continuing to do.

I appreciate him for his humility. Rising from a son to driver of his parents and to this household name, is a great thing. Many of us are saying that we should know how we are generating our wealth. 

Mr Speaker, I do not know the kind of Asians that are coming to Uganda of recent and this House has lamented to that effect so much. They are not the kind of Mukwanos that we are paying tribute to. Otherwise, these days we have Indians who urinate on their workers, that they are spraying cockroaches, pouring red pepper in the anuses of their workers under the guise of disciplining them. 

I would wish that as we pay tribute to the late Mukwano, the rest of these Indians, coming to Uganda now and in the recent past, should emulate the late Mukwano. If they are not investors by making and just forcing themselves to be investors, they should restrain themselves from punishing Ugandans. 

Fare thee well, Mzee Mukwano. Thank you.

4.21
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The people of Tooro highly appreciate the role Mukwano played especially in revamping the tea industry. He established factories and created opportunities to over 10,000 workers. Actually, many of them came from Kanungu and Kigezi region at large, to Tooro. So, hon. Baryomunsi, your people have been beneficiaries to that effect.

When you look at Mukwano, it would be wrong to call him an Asian or Indian because he was a true Ugandan patriot. He was very committed to this country. I have always told people who are tribalistic - because that is the disease we suffer from in this country - we have gone so tribal. There is too much ethnicism. Even when you look at what is happening out there when someone is killed it becomes tribal, which is very dangerous to the country.

I would love - if you want to show you are a very powerful tribe, let us know you by what you manufacture. Let us see your innovation and technology spread around the country like what Mukwano did. Otherwise, this issue of many elites amongst us here in Uganda championing tribalism and surviving on ethnicism, is so dangerous for this country. Let us learn why we are getting poorer as African people. 

One of the reasons is we are failing to embrace technology, going into manufacturing; we are not going into the arena of value addition but only now politicking and getting easy money, which is dangerous for the future of this country. That is unsustainable money. I think that is why men like Mukwano have to be not only lessons for the youth who are out there but us, the leaders. Mukwano challenges us the leaders; he challenges our spirit; and our leadership and commitment to this country. 

I really pay tribute to that man. I knew him personally. He sold me one of his houses in Fort Portal and he lectured me on how to do business. I have a lot of appreciation for Mukwano. 

I would love Ugandans to write a book about him and the Mukwano spirit such that it can spread among Ugandans and we produce more entrepreneurs. Rest in peace, Mukwano. 

4.25
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion and also pay tribute to a great man on behalf of the people of Mbale. 

I have great memories and respect to a man who rose from a truck driver. He made it and helped this country by employing Ugandans, creating employment and producing most of those items that were required in this country. 

Mukwano was a true Ugandan, who even chose to remain in this country during that difficult time. He remained a true Ugandan. He lived with Ugandans, ate with them and learnt their culture. He spoke Rutooro and Luganda. 

Let me tell you one thing that brought me close to this man, Mukwano. I lived on KAR Road in Kololo, number three as you go to Uganda Management Institute. I had a house there. I was posted to Rome and left somebody in charge of my house. At that time, the houses were being allocated to sitting tenants. The person I left behind to take care of my house instead illegally sold it to Mukwano.  

However, Mukwano had employed a Ugandan called Wotima who was working in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development at the time. When I came back from Rome, I went to Wotima and told him that, that was my house. When Mukwano heard of that, he said he did not want problems and so he sold off that house. He did not want any problems because he had now become a Ugandan and that house had been sold to him illegally. He said that he would not own that house so he sold it to somebody else. 

You can imagine such a person! He had learnt the culture of Ugandans; he was a true Ugandan. He never acquired something like we see some of these people – I do not want to mention – who have acquired a lot of properties through fake means. Nevertheless, the man worked from being a truck driver to where he has left all these properties. 

What does this show us, Ugandans? That you must work for what you own and what you are going to leave behind. You leave behind a name for people to talk about, not for a person who has stolen. 

Mukwano is gone and he has left a name among Ugandans. There are properties everywhere; the tea that is even sold abroad is from the Mukwano Industry. Therefore, we are missing a true Ugandan. 

May his soul rest in eternal peace. I thank you.

4.28
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Every time we have an opportunity to pay tribute, I always ask myself only one question; what are these people we are paying tribute to saying back to us? 

I think it is as simple as this; whatever good you have seen in me, do for the good of our country. However, as soon as we get out of here, we do different things. I would like to thank everybody who has given us a good report on who Mukwano was. I did not know him personally but I enjoyed many of the things he produced. 

One of the things I saw in him was commitment to this country and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister said it; he was very committed. He put everything aside. He was lighter skinned than most of us but he knew he was Ugandan. He could as well have been an Indian but he was Ugandan. He was committed. Are we committed to this country?

He was honest. When he was given this foreign currency to buy Tallow, he could as well have bought a house in India or Britain. Many of us have done that. He bought Tallow, brought it here and made the soap for the poor people of this country. I think that is a challenge to us. We are the privileged class in this country today. When we get money, what do we do? Let us keep that money back here. Let us create jobs for our people. Let us build facilities to create jobs for our people. 

Mukwano could as well have created a labour export company but he created jobs here for the tea pickers in Fort Portal and the sunflower growers in Lira. He did everything for the good of this country. I would like to say that in whatever we do, let these not be formalities. Let them be experience sharing times and when we get out of here, we make Uganda a better place. 

My Chief Opposition Whip said something about creating entrepreneurs; I think as Government, we should really look at the people who have helped us build this country. A few days back, there was this old man called Sembule, whose factory died but he was committed to this country. However, we support the foreign investors and forget our own investors. 

We have the great old man, Gordon Wavamunno. He has issues and I do not know what happened. His last post reads, “What did I do to the NRM?” He is an investor who we should support as a Government. 

I would like to say that let us love our country. Let us not love ourselves. I do not want to use the word, “steal” but we do steal from our country. We should give back to this country. We should not ask, “What does the country give to us?” but “What do we give to this country like Mukwano did?” We are now celebrating his life. He has done a lot of things. 

The key words in Mukwano’s life were integrity. He was honest. He had responsibility to his country. He had compassion. There are stories of how young people would go to his office and say that they had failed to find fees for their university education and he would give them money without asking too many questions. We ask too many questions to help the people God has put in our hands to help. I do not want to preach. 

Finally, whatever we do, let us do it with excellence. Mukwano’s soap has been excellent. I use it all the time. His oil, mugs and other products have been excellently produced. Let that be something we learn from that experience. May his soul rest in peace. 

4.32
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for putting this important matter on the Order Paper. I would like to salute the Prime Minister and support this motion. 

On 1 January 1992, as a fresh graduate on my first job, I had more than 12 files of Amirali Karmali. That happens to be Mukwano. At that time, he was the leading importer. I also saw and I am saying it is possible for importers to become industrialists and manufacturers. I saw that. I also saw him become an exporter. 

Amirali Karmali was modest and simple. At one time, I was sent by my headquarters to deliver Christmas chocolates and related products to him as our biggest client. Speaking Luganda and Rutooro, he asked for his “mberenge” and “binyeebwa” and gave away the chocolates to his workers. This is the modest industrialist we are talking about. 

Amirali Karmali Mukwano was using Kenyan fleet trucks such as Freight Forwarders Kenya Ltd (FFK), Intraship Kenya and Hanif Somji, Amint Jan from the Swiss and then Intraship which is Spedag now. He was the first Ugandan to have the biggest fleet of trucks. I can also remind hon. Moses Ali when his trucks came back, Mukwano was the biggest transporter in Uganda. I participated as a transport logistics officer and managed his trucks until his son, Alykan Karmali, came back from his studies. It was during that time that he went to Tooro to start the tea estate.

At the time when the Government was struggling to revamp Tooro-Mityana-Igara tea estates, Mukwano moved to Tooro region and changed the situation. When he started growing tea is when we started using his trucks for export of goods to Mombasa.
 
One time, we were faced with a challenge of bringing in the tallow, which the Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of East African Community Affairs, Kirunda Kivejinja, has talked about. We did not have enough wagons with Uganda Railways and we talked to Kenya Railways; there was a problem because we could not arrange cabotage 20-40 wagons for the tallow. We talked to Mr Enos Tumusiime, the then manager and he booked his own wagons to bring the much needed imports because at that time, the demand was very big. I hope when Rift Valley came, they helped him to find that cheaper alternative transport for his cargo. 

The late Amirali Karmali was very interesting about the question of succession. When Alykan came back from Europe, we thought he would be a problem because he was very vigorous. Mzee Mukwano managed his drivers and workers in his own way. Most of the drivers were from Masaka and they would come driving their Peugeots. They would leave consignments here, run to Masaka and come back on Monday and Alykan could not tolerate that. 

However, Mzee Mukwano allowed his son to manage his business and would only say, what is the problem? With Alykan coming in, we saw more consignments, fleet and industries coming in. I would like to speak to our Ugandan importers that it is possible to become industrialists. Mukwano helped us to see a Ugandan fleet. We used to have foreign fleets from Tanzania and Mombasa.

It is also interesting that when he started growing sunflowers for vegetable oil, you could only compare Mukwano with BAT in the north starting from Kiryandongo in Lango and even at that time when there was war in Acholi; it was Mukwano who started working as a small out grower with a nucleolus project for vegetable oil. 

His intention was to stop importing the products required for his industries so that he can use local products for the vegetable oil industry. Now, that we are going to have our own oil, I hope they will be the first to reduce that import of that raw material and use our own raw materials as a country.

On behalf of the people from Bunyoro region and Buliisa where I represent; on behalf of the practitioners of procurement, logistics and supply chain, transporters and shippers, which I practiced and had the opportunity to interface with him, I would like to pay tribute to the old man I found the biggest importer turned biggest industrialist but left us when he is the biggest exporter. I thank you very much.

4.38
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Bible says, when a person dies, he goes with his deeds. Mukwano has left all the wealth behind but he has gone with his deeds. 

We are aware that one day, we will die. Ecclesiastes Chapter 9:5 reads: “A living person knows when he is going to die.” When we die, what legacy are we going to leave? I would like to convey my condolences to the family of Mukwano, the people of Uganda and more so, to the National Resistance Movement (NRM) because Mukwano was one of our principal cadres in mobilisation and wealth creation. 

In most cases, when we come here, we blame the former presidents; Idi Amin and Milton Obote. In our culture in Butaleja, you are expected not to blame a dead person. When Idi Amin expelled Indians from Uganda, he did it in the interest of the country. I would like to request Members that whenever we come here, we should not talk about that. That is why as NRM, we are still in charge of the country.

In the NRM caucus and on this side, we sit ably and together with the grandson of Idi Amin and with the family of the late Milton Obote. As NRM, we unite with everybody. As members of Parliament, I pray that when we meet together, we should unite together instead of fighting. Let us forget the issue of tribalism.

Mr Speaker, last weekend when I was in my constituency, they told asked me whether they will still get soap since Mukwano had passed on. According to what the Prime Minister has mentioned here and what Members have said, Mukwano personally stopped managing the group but the children, workers and relatives were still operating. I know that the factories are going on and we would like to thank the Government.

I saw hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju in the motion but I do not know how we shall get the records because he was just noting on the papers. I do not know whether it is him who was not ready or the Prime Minister. 

There is an issue. Last week, we were here and one of our principal cadres, the Minister from Moroto, Edward Athiyo, a principal citizen passed on. The Speaker then said that Government should come up with a clear policy. Hon. Prime Minister, why don’t you help the Office of the Speaker? They may think otherwise. Right now, we are paying tribute to Mukwano, yet there was a senior citizen who was one of us and a minister; he passed on but no motion has been brought. It would be better to serve people on first come, first serve basis.

Hon. Prime Minister, which reasons shall we give to the people of Karamoja? Their person died three weeks back and no action has been taken by the Government. Mukwano passed on last week and we are paying tribute to him. They may think that they have bribed Parliament to pay tribute. I am speaking about this because at the end of the day, they will blame Government. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I think the Deputy Speaker will allow you to address the House on closing remarks. We would like you to tell us when the motion for the senior member from Karamoja will be brought. I would like to thank you.

4.44
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Mr Speaker, there are three attributes for which I would like to pay tribute to the late Mukwano.

The first attribute is, even though the late Mukwano’s origin is India, he invested his money here and he never took it back to India. However, the few people who have made money in Uganda, sometimes in a manner which is unprecedented, invest it out of the country and Ugandans miss the opportunities, which that money should have generated for them. I would like to thank and pay tribute to the late Mukwano for that.

Secondly, while in primary school, they used to bring Mukwano products to the school where I studied – (Interjection) - in Kasese. I did not study from anywhere else. One thing that I know about the products of Mukwano, from the time I was in primary school, is quality. Quality was one of the late Mukwano’s priorities. 

I do not know why in this country, whenever we have an opportunity to do something, we do not focus on quality. However, right from my primary school times, I have not seen any contestation about the quality of Mukwano products. The customer was his priority.

The third attribute for which I would like to pay tribute to Mukwano is the size of his family. One can see that it is not a very big family and yet this is a person who has been extremely rich. One of the reasons poverty continues to be propagated in this country is the size of families that we have. I think it is high time this country started looking critically at the number of people per family. 

Mr Speaker, I can say that even when he had a lot of money, he was not extravagant and that is why Gen. Moses Ali said that Mukwano had four shirts. He was not extravagant but here, when people have contracted loans, they use all the money to buy shirts and trousers yet they know that they will have to service these loans. I think there is a lot that we should learn from the late Mukwano; he was himself and he never pretended. 

I was quietly talking to my colleague that in this House, Ndugu Rugunda could follow in the footsteps of Amirali because I can clearly say that whereas I disagree with Ndugu Rugunda regarding political ideology, he is a down-to-earth man and I thank him for that. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I would like to ask Ndugu Rugunda to be an ambassador to Ugandans and use his position to make sure that Ugandans actually behave themselves. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You should have helped the debate by telling us the number of shirts you have. (Laughter)

4.50
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Prime Minister for the motion and I also rise to support the motion.

Mr Speaker, one wise man said that there is nothing like being great and proud as those two things do not move together. If anybody is egotistic, proud and arrogant, even if he or she thinks of himself or herself as great, the truth is that, that person is not. I think the late Karmali actually fulfilled the saying of this wise man because despite his great wealth valued in trillions of shillings, which can be computed to billions of dollars, he was humble.

Mr Speaker, this leads me to question why we are poor in our country yet people start businesses here, make business empires and great fortunes and yet the majority of Ugandans remain poor. I think poverty is in our mind set and it is a high time that we changed the way we do things in this country.

One of the reasons we see our people scrambling to go out of the country is because they think that there is great wealth outside there yet we see Chinese coming from China to set up businesses in Uganda. They prosper and make big money, which they take to China. I think it is important for us to reform our minds, think again and appreciate our country and wealth and harness it to make ourselves rich.

Mr Speaker, we have a problem in this country of an impatient generation. Ugandans are very impatient and because of that impatience, the breeding ground for corruption has been made fertile in this country. Our people will not wait long to be rich. People like the late Mukwano built their business empires over decades. 

However, our people who are graduating and getting jobs today want to own estates, fleets of vehicles and drive the latest customised vehicles. I think this is very wrong. The impatience, which is in the young generation today, needs to be addressed because it does not serve to pull this county out of corruption.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like to talk about life after death. We are members of Parliament and we are honoured that God has lifted us up and made us leaders in this country. We can call ourselves successful and I think we are. However, one question we must always ask ourselves is, “What happens to me after I leave this life in this body?” We have to go somewhere and it is for that reason that I call upon everybody listening that the way, the life and the truth is in Jesus Christ. [Members: “Amen.”] - Hallelujah! (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity you have given me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For a moment when you said you were going to talk about life after death, I thought you were going to recount your experience. (Laughter)

MR LUBOGO: Mr Speaker, it was a biblical experience. Thank you. 

4.54
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for moving the motion to pay tribute to Mukwano.

I saw it all. At my age now, I have been able to witness what Mukwano has done in this country. He was a seasoned, celebrated but also shrewd businessman who inspired many as a role model and a mentor in the business world.

Mukwano’s business expanded up to Tanzania, Rwanda, Kenya and Democratic Republic of Congo, not forgetting South Sudan. He was a patriot, a Pan Africanist as well as a nationalist. The declaration of the economic war in the 1970s led to economic stagnation and a type of business referred to as “magendo” characterised by smuggling, hoarding of commodities and speculation, among others. Essential commodities like paraffin, sugar and salt were being hoarded. This led to the creation of what was known as Food and Beverages, which was located around Uganda House. If one wanted essential commodities, they would first apply before being cleared to go to Foods and Beverages (U) Limited to get them.

Between 1980 and 1986, there was a Ministry of Supplies, which was manned by hon. Moses Apiliga as the Minister of Supplies. He could even supply Tata Lorries, food stuffs and all these essential commodities and if you wanted anything, you had to first apply for them through hon. Moses Apiliga, to Foods and Beverages (U) Ltd.

From 1986 onwards, Mukwano reversed the whole situation. All the essential commodities we have been talking about like sugar, salt and soap were found everywhere. You would not need to line up for them. One would just go to any shop with their money and buy.

Lastly, the reason I said I saw it all is because after I had just come from the seminary, I was one of the youths from 1980 where businessmen from Arua, especially the “Arua Boys” would come through me. As a youth, I had a shop here at William Street. So, they would come to me to take them where they would exchange dollars for Ugandan currency because at that time, it was difficult to get dollars; they were very scarce. Indeed, it was only Karmali Mukwano who was controlling the inflow and outflow of dollars and the “Arua Boys” would pass through me to buy the dollars. Thank you very much. May his Soul rest in eternal peace.

4.58
MS HELLEN GRACE ASAMO (NRM, PWDs Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the Ugandan Asian citizen.

The character of the late, as has been said, was humble and this teaches us a lesson that being humble and patient can build a better future.

This great man built an empire and he ensured that he left a legacy. In Uganda, when most founders of businesses die, the businesses also die. I think we are going to continue having Mukwano products and we shall continue feeling like he has not died. Death is inevitable and we all know that we are going to die but sometimes, we do not prepare to leave a legacy.

Mr Speaker, the late Mukwano’s business empire produced products for all the customers regardless of their incomes. He produced cooking oil of different quantities; both large quantities and the small packets for our people in the village. I think he had a mind on how to serve the people. He did not look at one category of Ugandans.

Mukwano promoted local content. He is one of the investors I have seen who have really used our people and moved his business nearer to the people. For example, when you go to Gulu, you find sunflower and tea gardens. He took his business nearer to the people to be both employed and to get markets for their products, which many investors do not do. They come with everything including the drivers and sweepers.  Mukwano deserves gratitude for having employed our people and made sure that our people also get some business.

Mr Speaker, we are beginning to see the loss of the great businessmen; late Mulwana and now Karmali is also gone. Maybe as a country, we need to think about how to upgrade the business enterprises. How do we train the young people to know that even business other than the white collar jobs can give them employment?

I would like to pray that Government comes with a programme that will help the young people to appreciate that they should start with the small they have and then grow the business.

Finally, I would like to thank Mukwano Group of Companies for supporting Uganda through taxes. Thank you, Mr Speaker. May the soul of the deceased rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have Members that have already caught my eye and they are on my list. Let me finish with them and when your name is not there, then you start standing. I do not want to see you keep standing up and down. Can we have the Member for Butaleja.

5.01
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I join my colleagues in supporting the motion to pay tribute to the fallen senior citizen of this country, Mukwano. On behalf of the people in Butaleja, I would like to send condolences to the family. 

The mark that Mukwano has left in Uganda cannot be erased for the next more than 1,000 years. Mukwano is one of the biggest employers of Ugandan youth in this country including my voters in Butaleja. Many are employed in Mukwano Industries Uganda Limited. 

Mukwano is one of the greatest contributors of the tax base in this country. Although, some Ugandans who are at his level keep on invading taxes, we should learn a lesson that when we have such big businesses, we must support the country’s economy.

Mr Speaker, we have a big problem in Uganda here. When we come up with such big investments as Ugandans, we always forget to train our own. Mukwano is a good example, like others have said, who trained all the family members how to handle business. As Ugandans, when we begin our businesses, we die with our skills and knowledge leaving nothing for our children and grandchildren. This should be a great lesson to us leaders that when you invest in something, we should endeavour to train our own so that we leave behind a loyal legacy.

We have seen events where we leave children behind and they sell off what we have worked for, for many years. This should, therefore, be a great lesson to us.

Lastly, Mukwano has been a great supporter to our communities, especially during Christmas, Eid, Easter and many others. He has been very supportive to the women; I have seen it with my own eyes.

I would like to thank him for his great contribution to this country and I pray that God grants him eternal rest. May Ugandans also copy a leaf from him. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, do not press on the microphones when you have not been called because it interferes with the next speaker. For those of you who would like to speak from there, you know what to do.

5.04
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Mukwano. When I heard about the demise of Mukwano, I was saddened. The people of Kioga share in the grief of this loss.

The death of Mukwano made me take a trip far down my memory lane to try to understand the personality of this great man. I got to understand that he undertook to do everything on this planet earth with his whole heart. He lived each day as only that day as if there was no tomorrow. He looked to the future but he did not live in the future.

He attacked each challenge that came his way with determination; no wonder he was able to live in Uganda even after his race was expelled by the late President, Idi Amin. He rejoiced in his suffering knowing that it would breed endurance; endurance breeds character and character produces hope.

I would like to believe that it was this hope that made him a great entrepreneur that we talk about today. If this is not so, then I do not know what would best describe the character of the late Mukwano.

Today, Mukwano Group of Company has spread in many parts of the country but particularly, in Amolatar. There is a specific activity of cultivation of sunflower and simsim that was promoted by Mukwano Group of Companies and these are high value crops. My people cultivate them to earn income. If you are in Amolatar, the biggest warehouse that you see in Amolatar Town is a Mukwano building for storage of sunflower and simsim.

As the people of Kioga, we greatly feel the loss of this great entrepreneur. Well-done you good and faithful servant; many people will miss you and may the Almighty God rest your soul in eternal life.

5.08
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. There is a Danish saying, which states thus; “good men must die but death can never kill their names.”

Today, we are celebrating a great man whose life has been enjoyed by each and every one of us; either indirectly or directly.

Mukwano was a genuine Ugandan; when the honourable Prime Minister was moving the motion, I had expected him to explain the circumstances under which he stayed when other Ugandans of Indian origin were expelled by President Amin.

I have tried to recollect my history and found out that when the Government of President Amin was expelling those Asians, it accused them of possessing British passports. Mukwano possessed a Ugandan passport and to that effect, he was a Ugandan; he could not have fallen into that trap. 

Mukwano was never a fake investor. His commodities have always been genuine. We have fake investors masquerading today and their only justification of having counterfeit commodities to us is their colour of skin, which is white. He had the same colour but always produced genuine commodities.
I have to also commend the Government of President Amin for saving Mukwano, though I condemn the same Government for expelling other would-be genuine investors.

There are lessons that we must learn from the late. Government should learn how to sieve genuine investors. We have masquerades and I call them so because they do not qualify to be termed as investors by what they produce.

Real investment must be in real things not counterfeits. It must not be hidden. Whatever Mukwano possessed was his. He never hid behind curtains because he had got it genuinely.

Today, we have people whom we think are investors and yet, they are brokers to other people who do not want to be seen because they know how they acquired that wealth. Mukwano owned what belonged to him.

His business empire has survived and it will always survive because of one magic. It was passed on when the owner still energetically lived. He could be consulted, give guidance and advice. We should learn to have time to pass on what belongs to us today including leadership such that we can guide the heirs; as they can consult us.

Uganda can only survive if we pass it on to the next generation when we are still living to guide it. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

5.13
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Obongi, I would like to support the motion.

What is the motive of talking of the good of someone who has done well when that person has left the earth? In my view, this is for us to learn from his deeds in order to replicate them in our daily lives as individuals and companies.

There are issues that are connected to the industries, Asians and Ugandans in the debate that need to be brought out. First, the industries owned by Mukwano, as I saw it, did manufacturing. There were also people distributing, wholesaling and retailing. Some of these people were in West Nile. I saw a company known as the Ozuu Brothers Company Limited. They have a very big depot in Arua and it is labelled Mukwano Industries Uganda Limited. It is Mukwano’s business but inside, you will find a West Nile Ugandan. When you go further down, you will find other smaller companies and retailers doing trade in the products manufactured by the same industries. That is why I thank Amirali Karmali very much.

We would like to juxtapose this with what is happening today - the complaint of Ugandans against some foreigners who are manufacturers in the country. In the construction industries, there is a company that owns the manufacturing plant. The person who distributes is also from the same country. The wholesaler is also from the same country and the same applies to the retailer. Some of them have even opened supermarkets for selling one piece. No space is left for the Ugandan traders to be suppliers, distributors, wholesalers and retailers. So, how can Ugandans be happy with such a monopolistic trade that we have in Uganda today?

We are individuals but we also belong to associations. Some of the good things we have as individuals are reflected on our communities. If hon. Fungaroo is good, they will say the community where he comes from is also good. Sometimes, when the community is bad, they may say even hon. Fungaroo is bad because his community is bad. 

Therefore, we would like all Indians to learn from Amirali Karmali’s good deeds and behave like the Mukwano Industries Uganda Limited did in their trade so that Ugandans share in the prosperity they got in our country. 

Secondly, I would like to end with this point. I would like my comrade, hon. Waluswaka, to hear this. He said here that one of the reasons he stood up to support the motion was because the late Amirali Karmali was a cadre of NRM. There is no problem with that. What I am bringing here is this; since I got into multi-party politics and got elected to Parliament in 2006, there is a very big outcry in the world of traders. Those who subscribe to the Opposition are harassed just because they are members of the Opposition. We, as Ugandans, created this atmosphere of multi-party democracy. Therefore, let traders be free to support NRM and the Opposition. If they so wish to be members of NRM or the Opposition, let them be.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to bring this to your attention. You are the Prime Minister of a Government in power. The NRM party also has its own leaders. The respect I give you is from the Government point of view, though you also belong to the NRM party. However, members of NRM are harassing traders a lot. 

In West Nile, if they see any trader sitting with a member of the Opposition, they threaten him or her. Seated behind you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is hon. Ababiku from Adjumani. She owns a radio station there. That is her business. We went there, as leaders of FDC and we were given the rules and we paid for the talk show. She had no problem with us just like we had no problem with her. However, as we were going to have the radio talk show, the RDC and leaders of NRM reigned in and caused the suspension of journalists. (Interjections) Those are business service providers. 

Therefore, in the world of business, there is this kind of harassment. Journalists who used to earn by providing services at Aulogo FM, which is owned by my colleague, hon. Ababiku, have been suspended. They are not going to earn any income to support their families because they were organising to host a radio talk show, which was in accordance to the rules. They asked the radio station to stop and the management stopped the programme. So, what is the point of suspending Mr Amacha Goli and another journalist for hosting members of the Opposition on a radio talk? What kind of environment are you creating for the business community in Uganda?

I support the motion and I pray that God listens to the prayers people are saying here in memory of the late Amirali Karmali. I also say that members of the business community who have courage to be members of NRM should continue doing so and members of the business community who support the Opposition should come out clearly and support the Opposition without fear or favour. I rest my case.

5.20
MR ABDU LATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are not mourning the late Amirali Karmali but celebrating his successful life. We have heard many good attributes and praises directed to the late Amirali Karmali. How I wish he was here to listen to what is being said. I believe that as Parliament, we may not be giving out medals but we can find a day where annually, a list of people who are still alive and have contributed to the progress of this country is brought here so that we praise them when they are in the public gallery. We need to recognise their contributions. I request that you take it up. We could identify ten people from every region who have impacted positively to the development of this country.

Secondly, when you look at the late Amirali Karmali, we believe that in all homesteads, whether rich or poor, you can hardly miss out Mukwano products. Mukwano has been inclusive. Even if you go to the Prime Minister’s home, you would hardly miss Mukwano’s products. He has impacted a lot on our lives.

When it comes to employment, we have seen many investors who come with their workers. In his investment, 70 per cent of the workers may not be Ugandans. However, when it came to Amirali Karmali, he was a true Ugandan in all forms.

Amirali Karmali lived a very simple life. That is why even his burial was a decent and simple send off. What lessons are we learning from that? 

Mr Speaker, I would like to request the Government that having seen and realised that Mukwano has contributed to the development of this country, I wish that we get a technical institution and name it after him as a way of recognising his contribution to the development of this country.

Finally, Mr Speaker, Mukwano has trained his children and right now, when you look at the father of the late, the late himself and those who are now manning Mukwano Industries Uganda Limited, the lesson to us is, let us always train our children in what we do and empower them in as far as our businesses are concerned.

We have seen businesses that have lived for many years simply because of succession planning, training and ensuring that you train your children in how you manage the business so that when you die, they know that we have this amount of money in various banks and these properties. They will also realise that it was not easy to acquire all this property. When you die without training them and they come into the business, they will feel that things can be as easy as running that business, which is not the case.

Mr Speaker, on behalf of the people of Kawempe North, I extend my deepest condolences to the family and I pray that the Almighty God forgives him where he went wrong because we know that death has never been the end of our life. It only opens a door to another life. Assalamu alaikum.

5.26
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the motion and on behalf of the people of Otuke, I would like to pay tribute to Mukwano. I remember that him as a very kind, generous, humble and simple person.

The reason I say this is that in 1994, I came from Lira as an athlete. I did not have shoes and I was looking for sponsorship to fly to Portugal to represent the country. I walked to his office without shoes and he gave $ 400 cash. Later on, I won a gold medal for Uganda. That gold medal could have been for the late but unfortunately, things did not happen. 

My colleagues, what I have learnt from the late is being humble, kind, simple and generous are some of the virtues that we miss in our country. I keep on wondering each and every time I fly to the western world - I came back two weeks ago from Australia where I had speaking engagements to community schools, universities and rotary clubs. For your information, in three years’ time, the Australian Government is going to produce a movie, which is worth $ 15 million about my story.

Everyone must have a legacy before you die. We must learn to be generous and humble to one another. I learnt much from Mukwano, having seen him in 1994 and I think that is what gave me the encouragement to begin a charity.

Mukwano has done a lot for our country. If you imagine that one person can employ over a million people, supposing we had about 10 or 100 people like him? We would do great things. I advise my colleagues that we should emulate Mukwano. It does not mean building a huge factory but you can open a mechanical wing, a small institution or a small medical centre. These are the things, which will change our community. We do not need to wait.

This man was a Ugandan by birth and I would encourage each and every one of us to learn from this person who has done great things. 90 per cent of Ugandans know who Mukwano is. Almost everyone in Uganda has tasted what Mukwano has done.

I would like to thank you, on behalf of the people of Otuke. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

5.29
BRIG. GEN. FLAVIA BYEKWASO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Rt hon. Prime Minister for this motion that I rise to support. I will begin by re-echoing what Imam has said that we are not mourning but celebrating a great life.
The Bible says that there is time for everything; a time to live and a time to die. It was time for Mukwano to die. However, the same Bible says that when we die, we only change form meaning that Mukwano has just changed the form from how we know him to another form. Therefore, he still lives with us. As such, there is every reason to pay tribute to him.

I stand here for myself and for the people of Gomba where I come from. On behalf of the people of Gomba, we are proud to have fathered a great man, a humble man, a great entrepreneur and a Pan Africanist, patriotic and a nationalist. 

I also stand here as a UPDF representative. Other institutions have not supported the UPDF fully in the realisation of a defence forces shop that subsidises us because of our meagre incomes. However, Mukwano came up with a policy where he brought us goods and sold them to us at factory price. Therefore, he did not make a profit on the goods that he was selling to the UPDF.  Therefore, I stand here to say that we have lost out. 

This also shows how he appreciated the work of the UPDF. Many Ugandans just enjoy what we do but they do not want to recognise that they are because we are. Many of us here, including members of Parliament, find it so hard to recognise what the UPDF go through, the conditions they are living and working in; working 24 hours a week throughout the year but when –(Interjections)- Yes, sometimes you have not supported us but it took Mukwano to realise our work. On this note, I would like to request that all Ugandans should borrow a leaf from this great man, members of Parliament inclusive.

What I would like to learn from him, which most people do not seem to take note of, is discipline. We need discipline in all aspects and I think this is the reason we can stand here today and say that the Mukwano Industries Uganda Limited will not collapse; it is just because of discipline. I am sure it is on account of indiscipline that some businesses start, flourish a bit but collapse. It is because people will be deceived a bit that they now have the money; they begin living an extravagant and indiscipline life.

Therefore, we should borrow a leaf from Mukwano. Where discipline is, everything becomes sustainable and flourishes. Discipline tells you that even when you have a trillion of shillings, you do not have to go to the Mars because tomorrow you may not have it.

I am proud to say that the reason all of you are proud of the UPDF is because of officers are a disciplined force; of course, not without some blemishes. They are just due to the misbehaviour of a few individuals but not as an institution.

The other lesson is about the use of acquired wealth in national interest. A Member was lamenting about the opposition being harsh - but yes, wealth must be used in national interest whether you are in the Opposition or in Government. What is important is national interest. People should not think that because they have the money, they can be antagonistic to the Government; the long arm of Government will catch them.

The last call is to Government to support all entrepreneurs because we were told that either the President or the Government reached out to Mukwano to see how he could be helped to move up, becoming who he was. Therefore, it is a call to the Government to support whoever comes up and to create an environment that is conducive for everybody to be Mukwano because if we want to have the so desired middle-income status, we would wish to have as many Mukwanos as possible. Therefore, it is a call to Government to support and to extend to everyone but not doing it selectively. 

Sometimes, we hear that someone has been bailed out but others left out. Therefore, this is a call that the bailout should go to everybody to make sure that Uganda reaches an income status that we so badly desire. I would like to thank the Prime Minister and to ask God to rest Mukwano’s soul in eternal peace. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have had a long debate. As we close, let me now have the following Members: I will start with Adjumani, Igara, Ngora County, Maracha and Kinkizi East.

5.37
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister for bringing the motion. I join the rest in supporting the motion and thanking you for putting it on the Order Paper.

We are celebrating the life of the late but also missing him because regardless of the age, wisdom remains. I strongly believe the country is mourning.

We recognise the tremendous contributions and achievements he has made to this country; especially in the area of employing our people. Regardless of his origin, by the fact that he was born in Uganda, I want to maintain in my mind that the late was a Ugandan and the family are Ugandans by all deeds.

Mr Speaker, we have lessons to learn especially in shaping the capacities of our families. Many businesses in this country collapse as soon as the key person dies. We need to learn from that. Even when Members of Parliament die, it has a lot of effect in their families. It means we need to change our mind-set and change the way we do things.

In the areas of industrialisation, he did very well. I would like to recognise what the President of the Republic of Uganda has emphasised during the State of the Nation Address and the Budget Speeches; the importance of the private sector.

I request that we relate this to the local content, the business community that we have in this country. Can we reprioritise our policies and strategies so that we can give birth to many Mukwanos in this country? When you have many of them, the multiplier effect into the lives of Ugandans would be realised.

As I conclude, this submission, on behalf of people of Adjumani, I would like to say one thing to clear the air about what happened in Adjumani, which hon. Fungaroo talked about. I feel there are certain facts, which are not clear and not right.

Mr Speaker, indeed, there was a halt of a radio talk show at my station and we did joint investigation because the allegation was on the security threat about the leaders who were supposed to be hosted. There were people who were planning to disorganise the leadership of FDC in Adjumani. 

Therefore, the security team in Adjumani advised that we needed to halt until the FDC leaders who moved from Kampala joined by hon. Fungaroo were sure about the security status. In the course of joint investigations, the staffs of the media house that I own have been exonerated and were reinstated on Monday this week. Therefore, the two staff of Aulogo/ Media Services are working contrary to what has been alleged by my honourable colleague.

I would like to thank the Government because we worked as a team to ensure that there was security in Adjumani provided for everybody. May the soul of the late rest in peace. Thank you.

5.42
MR RAPHEAL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to pay tribute to the late Mukwano. Specifically, I would like to point out and to focus on the immense contribution by the late Mukwano to the tea industry. 

I would like to thank him for the following: promoting private sector investment in the tea industry. At the time of Idi Amin, tea was left to grow into bushes. When the NRM decided to rehabilitate the plantations, in the Ankole-Kigezi Region, we had three factories - Igara and Kayonza were under the Uganda Tea Growers Corporation. These were privatised and owned by the private farmers. Then, the third was Ankole Tea Company, which was taken over by Mukwano under his Rwenzori Commodities Limited. 

He became the leader and we followed in terms of rehabilitating, maintaining and keeping a good tea industry. Whereas at that time, there were only three tea companies, he has left that region with seven tea factories. All the additional tea factories were by private local owners simply learning by example, that if an individual can do this, in Mashonga and the Ankole Tea Company area, then the rest could do it and three others are underway. 

Secondly, promoting value addition to tea - again, he led and we followed, especially in terms of improved marketing, improved packaging and improved branding of our teas. That is why now you see in the shelves, all of us are trying – you see a special brand for particular tea simply because we want to catch up with Mukwano.

Promoting good quality tea - I remember in the various meetings we had, as tea factory owners, he or the people from the Rwenzori Tea Company would emphasise two plus one. If you are going to get money from tea, you must pluck only two leaves. He introduced plucking using equipment and I can see the various companies following this example. 

Employment for our people - the tea industry in Uganda employs more than 70,000 people and Mukwano’s empire accounts for about a quarter of this. Look at the level of household incomes in the tea growing areas and you give tribute to this Ugandan for giving us encouragement; increasing foreign exchange earnings for the country.

On a day like this, when we pay tribute to somebody who has died, it is also important to focus on the legacy; we, who are left behind, how do we maintain and even improve on what he has left?

Mr Speaker, allow me to make the following specific requests to the Government; I am glad that at the last Africa Tea Convention held a few weeks ago, Rt hon. Prime Minister, you were there and you opened the tea convention. 

Today, there are four things that I would like to specifically recommend to Government.  Mukwano, wherever he is will really rest in peace. The prices of tea have virtually collapsed. Around February/March, a kilogram of tea from my garden would fetch me Shs 600. Today, we are talking about not more than Shs 250. 

In all other countries - I remember even here when the price of maize went down, Government came up and helped the farmer to stabilise the price. What is done by other countries is that Government negotiates directly with the consumers of our tea. At the moment, 90 per cent of our tea is sold through the auction market in Mombasa and we fetch less money than other countries, which are able to sell directly to the consumers, especially in the Arab countries. 

We hope that Government can take this up so that we, the farmers in Uganda, do not have to incur the transport and storage costs in Mombasa but we can sell directly to Iran, Egypt and other countries.

Farmers suffer from high costs of inputs. A 50 kilogram bag of fertilisers today goes for about Shs 130,000 and this is very high. In those times when these inputs go up, we should look at a kind of subsidy or stabilisation for the farmers. If today we could get a bag of fertilisers at Shs 80,000, you are sure that the farmers would be assisted quite a lot. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, tea remains an activity that is almost entirely in the hands of the farmers. Coffee has an authority to support and regulate it. Cotton also has a Cotton Development Organisation responsible for it and so on – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, can we come back to the motion? 

MR MAGYEZI: Yes, Mr Speaker. Under tea, the prayer is that Government strengthens the regulation. This was at the heart of the late Mukwano. If he is down there and sees the tea industry collapsing, I think he will ask himself what he left behind. 

Finally, I am aware and I know very well – because I was a director in Igara Tea Company and we would meet in our research institute. We only have one research institute, Rwebitaba Zonal Agricultural Research and Development Institute and Mukwano was supporting that directly. 

Today, we depend on clones from Kericho in Kenya. If somebody is talking of an institute in the names of the late Mukwano, I would give this one. Can the Government strengthen tea research by strengthening the research institute at Rwebitaba? May his soul rest in peace. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.50
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Prime Minister for the motion. I would like to begin by saying that I support the motion. 

There is a very important book that I normally like reading called the Bible. Revelations Chapter 21:4 says, “He will wipe away every tear from their eyes. There will be no more death or mourning or crying or pain, for the old order of things has passed away.” I needed to read the Bible because it is very important to me; it gives me an inspiration. 

I would like to say that this young man in the early 1990s, who became an old man, has done a great job in this country that everybody appreciates. He was a risk taker. As you know, that is the time when the situation in Uganda was very turbulent but he took those risks in establishing factories, worked on them and improved the way things were happening.

This man was also a visionary. He was trying to envision how Uganda would look like. He is a son of this country. He is a man who worked hard to promote the development of this country and he is on record that he promoted education. 

He supported schools and gave scholarships. I would like to give some few examples. He gave scholarships to six students in Mengo Senior Secondary School and two students in Vienna College, Namugongo, as early as 2004. This means that he was pro-humanity. He loved Ugandans if he can go ahead to support these ones. That is why I am very happy because this man actually helped this country to fight against very many problems. 

I would like to quote some specific sayings by three people. I would like to mention some specific sayings by three people but I would like to mention only two. There is a man called Zig Ziglar. He said to the late Mukwano, you were designed for accomplishment, engineered for success and endowed with the seeds of greatness. The late Mukwano suits this description by Zig Ziglar.

This man achieved greatness from nothing to one element that nobody can question. Shakespeare once said, “be not afraid of greatness” because we have a lesson to learn from this man. He became a great man from scratch. Some are born great, some achieve greatness and others trust upon them.

Mr Speaker, I would like to say that Mukwano started factories in this country when people were sleeping. For example, the Baganda say that when you sleep, money can bypass you. The late Mukwano was not sleeping. He was a man who worked hard to make sure that he transformed this country. If we had 10 “Mukwanos”, I do not know how Uganda would look like. That is why we must work hard to improve on the working environment, especially in the area of business because the cost of doing business in Uganda is very high. Despite Mukwano achieving greatly, there are also challenges that we must tackle in doing business in this country.

As I windup, if you looked at the logo of this company, it has two hands. One is greeting the other, which means friendship. I wish Ugandans would embrace the element of friendship that the late Mukwano promoted in this country. I think this country would be very peaceful. It would be a country where people would live without attacking one another. This was a man who was talking about friendship. As you look at another person, that is your friend and why should you attack him? 

For example, Mukwano is manufacturing goods that everybody enjoys whether you love or hate smearing yourself or using perfume, in fact, you would be enticed. Whether you liked or did not want to eat fried foods, you would actually be interested in tasting because the man manufactured all these goods for the common good of this country.

As I conclude, I would like to say that Mukwano was a man who loved Uganda. I do not know whether we love our country like Mukwano did. He loved this country and that is why he did a lot of investment here. I wish Ugandans borrow a leaf from this man and we begin to work with a lot of energy. I am certain that this country would be transformed. Since the late Mukwano did a good job, I would like to thank him for the job he did. If you read the Bible, it says, Jesus is the way, the truth and the light. At this stage, this becomes a big challenge. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank Mukwano for the job well done. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.57
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha County East, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Paying tribute is not one of my areas of strength. However, knowing who Mukwano was, I will attempt to pay a very honest tribute not from personal experience because I did not have the opportunity to meet him or ask for assistance from him neither did I work for his company. 

I would to join the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in seconding and supporting this motion, that the late Mukwano was indeed, a true nationalist. I have been listening to submissions and I thought it was not necessary to soil his tribute with the unnecessarily and uncalled for political statements. They are people who were trying to use the opportunity of paying tribute in a way to imply that the previous governments had totally failed. I am sure if the late Mukwano was alive, he would not agree with your version concerning these issues.

I would like to say that the late Mukwano was a genuine businessman. He provided the true definition of wealth creation and not wealth stealing. This is how I summarised his legacy. He was able to demonstrate that you can succeed without stealing. This is one of the biggest tragedies of this country. People confuse wealth creation with stealing wealth. These are two different things. In my opinion, one of the key things we need to learn is the fact that the man was a living dictionary of wealth creation. Those who go around promoting wealth creation in the country, you should go back to the drawing board to understand how the late Mukwano did it. Otherwise, you may end up promoting wealth stealing. This is really what I thought we should pass forward.

The private sector that the NRM administration started championing from 1986 can best be defined with the achievements of the late Mukwano. Forget about people who masquerade in the private sector seeking bailouts and raiding the treasury to pump money in the private sector, let us follow what Mukwano did for us to genuinely develop the economy of this country. As the private sector is now, if we plug off the line that is connected to Government resources, you will see it collapsing. Let us go back and look at what Mukwano did. It has been a long day and I do not want to keep Members here.

The last interesting one is that the late Mukwano has shown us what true succession means. If what I have read in papers is correct, that it is now the daughter who is in charge, we can no longer hear these stories of people complaining that it is supposed to be a man to lead in business. This has passed without any unnecessary quarrels. These are the three important things that I thought I should put across. 

Mr Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

6.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the Prime Minister for moving the motion and I rise to support it.

When Alexander the Great, one of the greatest kings was on his deathbed, he decreed three things. He said that once he dies, his casket should be carried by senior doctors to tell the world that doctors and medical workers cannot stop death. He also decreed that when his body is carried in the casket, his hands should be outside for the world to know that although he was great and very rich, he had gone back with nothing. He further decreed that they should sprinkle the path where they were going to carry his casket with gold and all the riches to remind us that however great we rise, time comes when God will call us.

Therefore, the lesson we pick is what Karmali is teaching us to espouse the virtues of humility, simplicity, modesty, frugality, honesty and so on. That is one of the greatest lessons we learn from Mukwano; that even when he was great and very wealthy, he remained humble and very simple.

Secondly, Mukwano’s business empire has grown from strength to strength, largely in the last 30 years, according to the motion moved by the Rt hon. Prime Minister. This clearly shows that an environment exists in Uganda for someone to do business, thrive and prosper. Mukwano is an example of someone who has been able to build a business empire, which has been very successful. 

Indeed, there are many other actors in the private sector who are doing well and whose businesses are thriving under the current environment. It is, therefore, not accurate to portray the image that the only business, which is successful, is that of Mukwano. Yes, he has been successful but there are also other successful and genuine private sector actors who are doing well. The challenge that I see and this point has also been raised by previous speakers, is that we need a mind-set change among Ugandans. 

Mr Speaker, at times, when we engage with our constituents, a big section of the public thinks that they can prosper by getting handouts from leaders, yet prosperity can only come from hard work as we have seen from Mukwano.

Therefore, as leaders, we have a lot of work to do to educate our population in order to change our mind-set that through hard work, they can be able to prosper. For those of us who are believers, the Bible - and I am sure even the Koran - is quite instructive about hard work. The Bible says, you shall live by the sweat of your brow. Therefore, we have a lot of work to do to teach our people that through hard work, you can prosper. The Government has also provided a conducive environment for people to do private business and prosper.

Recently, I was conversing with the Minister responsible for Housing of Kenya. He was here a few months ago and he was surprised that he came to Uganda and he was safely driven from Kampala to Arua at night. He left Kampala at 8.00 p.m. and reached Arua without any problem. He said it cannot happen in Kenya that you leave the capital city at that time and go upcountry. He was mesmerised that in Uganda, we have a peaceful environment where people can do business and move at night. 

Therefore, the environment is conducive but we need to mobilise our people to take advantage of the existing environment to engage in businesses and prosper.

The other challenge of family sizes was raised by hon. Nzoghu and I would also like to emphasise it. The Ugandan population still believes in having many children. One time, I was almost not voted by a section of my voters because they thought I had few children. I have two biological children and one of the men who was confronting me had 12 children and he could not believe that an educated person like me, who earns fairly decently, could only have a few children.

Therefore, we need a mind-set change; that Ugandans should produce by choice and not by chance and they should have manageable family sizes. Huge family sizes weigh down our people and that undermines their ability to prosper even when they work hard. Therefore, as leaders, we have a lot of work to do and we can learn a lot from Mukwano.  May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. We have had almost two hours of debate on this motion. It is a delightful and an instructive motion. We have talked about a simple man with a big empire. Amirali Karmali, popularly referred to as Mukwano teaches us the value of starting small and growing incrementally. He never believed in the “Big Bang Theory” – that with everything, it takes one blow and everything is big and an empire is created in one moment. He grew incrementally and that is an instruction to us. 

This teaches us to never despise the days of humble beginnings because those are the true foundations of progress. He chose the name Mukwano; friendship and he chose a symbol of holding hands. He sold friendship. His products defied class, tribe, region and party politics because all of us have used his products without thinking about whether it is from who or who.  

Mukwano means friendship and he has sold that friendship. He has taught us that even in business competition, you can still be friends. Even in political contests, he has taught us that you can still be friends. 

Therefore, friendship is what he leaves us with, friendship is what we should remember him by and friendship is what we should all embrace and conduct ourselves by. In this way, life will be a lot more different and we will all succeed if we treat each other as friends.

Honourable members, the motion that I now put the question to is: that Parliament, by a resolution, pays tribute to the late Amirali Karmali, commonly known as Mukwano, for his contribution to this nation. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you for this debate. Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister for moving this motion and thank you, hon. Ssemujju, for seconding the motion. I also thank you, Members, for this debate. I apologise to Members who were not able to debate. We have had a long debate on this matter and I am sure that even if you were to debate, it would still be in the same spirit.

Honourable members, I need to advise on what happens tomorrow. I am not sure of the status of the Institute of Parliamentary Studies Bill. The mover is here and I would like to request her to advise us how we can proceed with this Bill. 

Otherwise, the Member for Busiro County East said he is ready with the Law Revision Bill and so, it will be on the Order Paper tomorrow. I do not know which other matter will be ready on the Order Paper but we will have a Bill tomorrow. If the honourable member for Dokolo is ready, we will handle the Institute of Parliamentary Studies Bill, 2019. Member for Dokolo, would you be ready by tomorrow or not?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am ready now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to move your motion?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: The seconder has said he is not going to be around. I do not know whether it would be allowed that we can proceed without the seconder.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We can proceed without the seconder. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: That is fine. We will be ready with it tomorrow. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you be ready tomorrow?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Tomorrow we shall have the two Bills and Prime Minister’s Question Time. 

As we discussed earlier, we have been able to compile and submit to Prime Minister all issues that have been previously raised by Members but not responded to by the Prime Minister. He will use the first part of his engagement with the Parliament to deal with those outstanding questions before we get to the face to face. That is how we will handle tomorrow’s business. So, we have two Bills tomorrow and Prime Minister’s Question Time as the vital matters to be handled tomorrow.

Honourable members, we have tested how the Prime Minister’s Question Time works. When the Prime Minister is given prior notice of the questions, he prepares before he comes here. If you have a burning question, submit it to the Clerk’s Office on the morning of Monday so that we compile and forward them to the Prime Minister. 

This will not stop the face to face with the Prime Minister but there are those specific policy questions for which you need accurate answers and for the benefit of all us. Please, write the question and submit it to the Clerk’s Office, who will compile and forward them that same Monday afternoon so that when the Prime Minister comes out of Cabinet, he is ready to look through and respond to them by Thursday, when the time comes and once he finishes with those, then we can have the face to face.

If we proceed like this, we will be able to structure this thing and deal with concrete policy issues. Honourable members, in the one hour, you will be amazed how much area we will cover substantially not by responses straight from the Prime Minister that may not have the details that our people desire to listen to. I am just proposing - if it were possible and you see that there is a question that is very important that requires the Prime Minister to respond to with specifics, then you could bring that matter to the Clerk’s attention on Monday. Let us try it out on Thursday and see how it works. 

For now, we will deal with the questions that have previously been raised but when we run out of those for tomorrow, then we will do our face to face.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am just seeking guidance. On Prime Minister’s Question Time, I think Members should be given time to raise any matter that they feel they should present to the Prime Minister. Otherwise, the rule would have required that we give the Prime Minister prior notice because the whole essence of the democratic principle is to test the sharpness of the Prime Minister; to see if at any one time, he can stand to talk about any issues. 

We are not going to give the Prime Minister time to prepare. We can handle this by asking questions and addressing it to a specific minister or sector. I am not objecting to your idea but I am saying that we are departing from the basic principle where the Prime Minister’s Question Time is to test the sharpness of the Prime Minister. I beg to be guided.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, to the contrary, Prime Minister’s Question Time is not a debate on sharpness; it is not a test. Prime Minister’s Question Time arises from issues that are burning people in this country and they want factual answers to them that they can go with on policy issues. We cannot, therefore, come here and engage Prime Minister on a game of semantics and testing intelligence. That can hardly be the genesis of – I have attended Prime Minister’s Question Time in the House of Commons in Great Britain. The Prime Minister actually comes with a folder with questions of notice that have already been sent and he responds to them from his folder – “on this question, this is it, deal with this, this is how we are handling it.” The beneficiaries are not actual Members of Parliament but the people we represent.

When they run out of those questions and the Prime Minister has responded to all of them, then they begin the face to face, which is an exchange between the various Members and the Prime Minister; it is called an engagement. So, let us try and see because it worked very well last Thursday and we benefited a lot from the responses from questions that the ministers had failed to answer, the Prime Minister was able to deal with them. 

I am sure our people who had been concerned with those questions were delighted that they got an authoritative answer from their Prime Minister.

Honourable members, let us try it. If it works, we continue with it and if it does not work, we go back to the normal argument. House adjourned to tomorrow 2 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 6.19 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 18 July 2019 at 2.00.pm.) 
