Thursday, 18 July 2013 

Parliament met at 3.36 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting and do apologise for the delay. We had a lot of activities this morning but we have a reasonably compact agenda, which I think we shall be able to finish. But before we begin, I want you to join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Victoria Primary School Rwashamaire. They are represented by hon. Tashobya and hon. Kabasharira. They have come with their teachers. (Applause) 

We also have pupils and teachers of Namaswanta Primary School represented by hon. Benny Namugwanya and hon. Godfrey Lubega. They are up there. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers of Mt Elijah’s Junior Primary School represented by hon. Betty Nambooze and hon. Peace Kusasira. You are welcome. (Applause)

I will allow hon. John Mulimba, hon. Tashobya, hon. Nambooze and hon. Ssemujju two minutes each.

3.39
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. We did appropriate monies in this House for the financial year 2012/13. In the fourth quarter of the same financial year I have referred to, all Government departments and all local governments, only received the component of recurrent and did not receive development budgets and yet, Madam Speaker, you are aware that the Ministry of Finance gave indicative planning figures to local governments upon which they base to develop their work plans and scrutinise their budgets. 

I also know of the assessment criteria in terms of performance of local governments, one of which is how balanced budgets of those local governments are. As we speak, all development programmes in local governments have stalled and now the districts leadership have turned their guns against Members of Parliament. They are blackmailing us saying that we, the Members of Parliament, have redirected their monies meant for development programmes. I have encountered it in my constituency and I do not know about others but it is a very big concern. We would like Government to come to the Floor and explain if we are using a cash instrument –(Interruption)

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, hon. Mulimba. In line with the same, sometimes some of us move on foot and interact with the Police –(Interjections)– not walking to work – (Laughter) – but the Police have a record that for three months, some officers have not received money including those who guard our gates. So, we are really shocked and next to that, there are some new employees in a similar category. 

So, Madam Speaker, hon. Mulimba is raising a pertinent issue. At least for development programmes, we may wait for the budget but people’s salaries should be paid because they even have children who have not paid school fees. We were here and they said their power had been cut off. That is the information I wanted to give. Thank you.

MR MULIMBA: They issued a notice to CAOs instructing them that for those development projects, which were supposed to be covered in the last quarter of the previous financial year, when they get releases for this financial year, they should apply that money to cover up the gap. Now, by this expression –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, I think you are just asking for Government to take action but you are causing a debate. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I sincerely thank you for your indulgence. The information I want to give my honourable colleague is the fact that ever since the month of October, when the Auditor-General released the report on the financial impropriety in the Office of the Prime Minister, Government went ahead to begin a process of refunding money, which was said to have been stolen from the donors and it is for that reason that the development budget to the districts has not been forthcoming. This is the time when Government should come out and explain to us on what basis they went ahead to remove money from the Consolidated Fund to pay on behalf of these thieves who are known, who had already stolen this money in the light of everybody. Where did they get the authority from to remove money to compensate these development partners?

MR MULIMBA: Yes, I think the information has been very useful. Madam Speaker, I beg to rest my case.

3.44
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance that is affecting my constituency in Ntungamo District and I suppose affecting also many parts of the country, particularly those that are engaged in coffee growing. There is an outbreak of the coffee Black Twig Borers. These weevils attack the branches and stems of coffee trees and they cause wilting and immediate drying up of coffee trees. We have appealed to the district authorities, we have also appealed to the ministry and the advice we are getting is that the farmers should rather remove and cut off the branches that are affected. 

But, Madam Speaker, we are also informed that there is a scientific method of spraying and controlling or even eliminating this. I am aware that Government is emphasising coffee growing, we have invested so much money in this area and unless these Black Coffee Twig Borers are checked, we risk not only losing the plantations that we have but also losing the investments that we are putting into coffee growing. 

Madam Speaker, we would like to hear from the responsible minister as to what steps we are taking to address this matter and whether they are also considering spraying the coffee plantations in order to check this imminent danger to our national economy. Thank you. 

3.46
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance, which affects Moyo District and in particular, Dufare sub-county. It is an issue, which, if not handled soon, can result into conflict between Uganda and South Sudan. Of late, many elephants to the tune of 300 heads cross from South Sudan from the national reserve of Nimule and they cause destruction in Dufare sub-county. On my iPad, I have pictures of the destruction caused, especially to the cassava plantations, which they uproot. It has also caused insecurity to the people to the extent that nobody can stay out at night. And yet when I check the deployment by Uganda Wildlife Authority is too thin to scare away the elephants.

Madam Speaker, now my people have threatened to take the law into their hands by trapping the elephants and killing them. And if that happens, it will lead to a very serious conflict between Uganda and South Sudan. I have raised this issue in Parliament and even in the Committee of Tourism. I even wrote to the Minister of State for Tourism but I have not received any response. My request to Parliament and Government is to come down to Dufare sub-county and address that issue. I would also want to know Government’s plans to mitigate the insecurity faced by my people - (Hon. Awongo rose_) Okay, I will give you one minute.

THE SPEAKER: You mean you are distributing my time? (Laughter)

MR AWONGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you my colleague. The information I would like to give is that two months ago, an elephant caused a very big accident along Pakwach-Karuma Road, where eight people lost their lives. The Ministry of Tourism has not been able to take action. Unless Government takes action, these elephants will continue to cause a lot of problems. Thank you.

MS AURU: Madam Speaker, in conclusion, my request to Government is to tell us the plans they have in place to ensure that my people are secure from these elephants. And also to give food relief to people because they are no longer cultivating and famine is already being experienced. Even if they were to cultivate now, the harvests would not be immediate. My request to the minister is to come to the ground and talk to the people to avoid them taking the law into their hands.

3.48
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance and specifically touching the security of our country. Last week, the ADF is reported to have attacked DR Congo and since then, some ministers, especially hon. Hillary Onek, mentioned on 16th of this month that Government was ready to hold talks with the rebels and yet, they had not attacked Uganda. My point is: How does Government hurry to say that they are ready to hold talks with the ADF and yet, it has not attacked Uganda? Secondly, how does Government know that it is actually ADF operating in DR Congo? Thirdly, why hasn’t Government come out clearly to tell Ugandans what exactly is happening? Those are the issues, which I want the Minister of Defence to explain to Ugandans. Thank you.

3.49
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Last July, this country sent 140 police officers to Mogadishu, Somalia. Each of them is given $1,028 as salary per month. The person commanding them, Assistant Commissioner John Nuwagira – I spoke to a couple of these policemen last evening and they are complaining that through this commander, their salary is being deducted; $200 from each police officer and it is sent back to Uganda to an account and for a reason they do not know. At the end of this month, they would have made one year in Somalia. A simple calculation indicates that in total, they have deducted Shs 873 million from these officers. The complaint is that back home, they were supposed to continue receiving their salary, which they have not since May – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I will give you half a minute to conclude.

MR SSEMUJJU: Even the money they receive that they are supposed to send back home, this Government is deducting $200 from each of them. So, they are asking Parliament to intervene and save them from – I do not know whether it is a penalty or Pay As You Earn. But they need Parliament to help them recover the money the government has been deducting from them. Thank you. 

3.51
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance; it is also partly a procedural matter. On the 5th of July 2013, the Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority, hon. Frank Tumwebaze laid before this House two statutory instruments under Sections 13(3) and 82 of the Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) Act. In particular, one of the instruments sought to modify the Land Act in relation to KCCA and another one contained regulations for the election of councillors representing professional bodies in Kampala.

Members attempted to raise objections and clarification to the said instruments but the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, who was in the Chair then, ruled that the two instruments had been committed to the Committee on Legal Affairs and that anyone of us who had issues to raise about these statutory instruments should go to the Committee of Legal Affairs and get redress from there.

However, on 15 July 2013, Ms Jennifer Semakula Musisi, the Executive Director of KCCA, wrote to the Electoral Commission a letter, which I have here and I will lay it on Table, instructing them to hold the elections for the councillors representing the four professional bodies not later than 1 August 2013. In her letter to the Electoral Commission, she explained that the minister had executed his obligation when he laid the statutory instruments here before Parliament.

The Constitution allows for political parties to sponsor candidates during elections including those of KCCA. This was overlooked in the instrument and my political party, the Democratic Party, had already arranged for an appearance before the committee to submit on this matter.

Secondly, the law requires civil servants to resign 90 days before an election but up to now, two weeks to the decreed deadline of 1 August 2013, the public is not aware of the deadline of these elections.

There are also other clauses in the instrument that are contradictory and would need to be looked at. More so, Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: I think the question was simple. What you want to know is whether elections should be held before the instrument returns to this House, isn’t it? Conclude in half a minute.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can these elections of KCCA take place before this House is done with the instrument? Secondly, the Constitution provides that in doing its work under Article 62, the Electoral Commission is supposed to be an independent body, which should not be subjected to the directives of any person or authority. 

By this letter, which I want to lay on Table, the Executive Director is instructing the Electoral Commission to hold elections by 1 August 2013. I beg to lay this letter. It is referenced ED/KCCA/006/05 dated 15 July 2013 and signed by Mrs Jennifer SemakulaMusisi, the Executive Director. I beg to lay.

3.55
MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, I did lay on Table shells of bullets that were used to shoot at us when we were going for a public rally in Mityana. I wish to lay on Table a letter, which I wrote, as Secretary General of the Democratic Party, to the Inspector General of Police. Allow me to read this letter before I lay it on Table. It is dated 11 June 2013, addressed to the Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters, Kampala: 

“Dear Gen. Kayihura, 
RE: Activities of the Democratic Party.

I write to inform you that the Democratic Party will hold public rallies under the recently launched Democratic Party Revival Crusade as follows: 
-On Friday 21 June 2013, we shall be in Mityana County Headquarters at 12.00 noon to 6.30 p.m. 
-On Saturday 22 June 2013, we shall be in Mubende Town Council from 12.00 noon to 6.30 p.m. 
-On Sunday 23rd, we shall be in Rubaga Division, Ndeeba from 12.00 noon to 6.30 p.m.

The purpose of this letter is to notify you and request that the Police provide security. In all correspondences, please, address the undersigned. Signed, Mathias Nsubuga, Secretary General.”

Madam Speaker, I wish to lay this letter on Table to confirm what I said yesterday that the Police went ahead and not only stopped us from addressing the rally but also shot at us. I wish to lay this letter on Table.

3.57
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Late October last year, I brought a petition to Parliament regarding land issues in Teso, specifically the planned give away of Aguu wetland for sugarcane growing and some 300 acres of land from Kapelebyong for establishment of a farm and barracks and then some land in Bukedea for rice growing to an investor. 

That petition was forwarded to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, which has been considering the petition. They have been undertaking a lot of interactions with various stakeholders. The committee has, up to now, not come with its report but what amazes me is that in Amuria, one of the areas where the petition is talking about, the district council has proceeded to dispose of land before the committee comes up with its report thereby in my opinion, giving an interpretation of contempt of Parliament.

As we speak, there is a lot of chaos in Amuria. The district chairperson and the district speaker are literally being chased by angry residents over the land. May I get to know whether we could prevail- (Interruption)

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you, Dr Epetait, for giving way. Madam Speaker, regarding that issue of Kapelebyong, Aguu and Kamtulu, the Committee of Physical Infrastructure went on the ground and we are in the process of making a report, which will be tabled in Parliament very soon.

DR EPETAIT: I thank the former chairperson of the committee. Yes, the committee is about to table a report but my point of concern is that the district council has proceeded as if there is nothing being done to resolve the impasse. At the end of the day, the investigation of Parliament may be rendered futile if the district proceeds as if there is nothing going on to resolve that impasse. Can Parliament make a statement to see how to restore calm in Amuria –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Dr Francis Epetait. The information I would like to give to reinforce the urgency of the matter is that, just about two weeks ago, there was very much tension in Amuria that instead of the councillors sitting in the district council meeting - some of the councillors who are not agreeable to the decision actually stripped themselves naked –(Interjections)– Yes. So, if leaders can go to that extent, it means there is a serious problem.

The issues of that particular land in Teso are a time bomb. If we do not intervene soon, I can bet to this House, it is going to explode. So, I pray that that information becomes helpful as you make a way forward.

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, I want to thank my colleague for giving me the opportunity. To add on what he is saying, particularly in regard to the land at Aguu, which is my interest – I was born in that area. The tension in Teso regarding that land is about to trickle down to Ngora, yet this is one of the model districts in Teso; we would not want such chaos to spill over into it.

Now that there is a petition that was submitted to this House, let it be handled in an urgent manner to avoid causing chaos in Teso as regards land. I am saying this because as a Member of Parliament, I can tell you that from the time the Committee on Physical Infrastructure visited that place, the situation is calm. So, we would not want to be inconvenienced by what takes place in the other districts of Teso.

In that regard, I pray that Parliament handles this matter urgently so that they can come out with a conclusive report. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, as I explained, that petition was in three parts. I can tell the House that there is not much tension in Ngora and Bukedea, though we badly need that report. But the tension in Amuria requires some urgent attention because as I talk, there are some people who are vowing to die.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, to avoid causing a debate, just suggest what we can do.

DR EPETAIT: I think the responsible committee or maybe Parliament should make some pronouncements to restore calm in Amuria as we wait for the committee to come up with a report for us to take a decision.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, before I ask the minister in charge to say something on behalf of Government, I want to ask the committee to work expeditiously so that we – who is the chairperson of that committee? Is it you, hon. Biraaro?

MR BIRAARO: Madam Speaker, I wish to concede that hon. Dr Epetait rang me about three weeks ago asking me about the progress of the report. I recall telling him that we were working expeditiously. In Aguu, under some tree, we had a meeting with about 200 people up to late evening. I do not know how much we could have done beyond that. Anyway, we had to work through the night to have the report.

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House that the committee discovered a lot of anomalies and it is still filtering people’s views so to make a report. I am sure you are aware how congested the Order Paper usually gets – you know that there are reports that are already written but have not found their way through to it.

As soon as we get done with this report, we will hand it over to you to be discussed here. However, as of now, what the committee can do is to only investigate and bring a report to Parliament. So, when the locals fail to handle their people as we work out the report, what else can the committee do? Does the committee have the Police to, for example, deploy there? That is why other Government bodies and the local leaders have got a role to play in the wrangles surrounding the areas of Aguu, Amuru and Kamtulu land.

THE SPEAKER: As I said, the acting Government Chief Whip will tell us what Government is doing to calm down the situation. However, I need to see you complete your report for the House to debate it. 

In regard to what hon. Nambooze raised on the issue of the statutory instrument, we are going to check whether that particular instrument requires ratification by this House or it just becomes a law automatically once laid. We will establish that and let you know how to proceed.  Now, let me ask the responsible minister to say something.

4.10
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, a number of the issues raised by Members require reactions from the line ministries. In that regard, I would like to request that you permit the ministers who are here and whose ministries have been touched and must clarify, to come forward and provide the necessary explanations.

But before they come in, I would like to state that in as far as the land issues in Amuria and Bukedea are concerned, in order to ensure that law and order is maintained, as a clear and lasting solution is being sought, my ministry will get in touch with the leadership of the districts mentioned and the security officials in there for us to reign in on the situation, to maintain calm as we await a clear and lasting solution to be provided.

On the issue raised by hon. Nambooze on matters of elections, the Electoral Commission that is responsible for calling an election – under normal circumstances, this organisation is guided by the law. You have guided that you are going to take up the issue of the statutory instrument she talked about so that we can be guided on this matter. 

Yes, but I am also going to check with the Ministry of Justice and the Attorney-General’s Chamber, just to ensure they contact Electoral Commission on this matter so that the right thing is done. This is important because we are used to free, fair and regular elections and I am sure – (Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, this instrument was brought here, but Members objected to it. When that was done, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker ruled that the matter be referred to the committee. 

So, my procedural matter is whether an instrument that has been committed to a committee with clear instructions for that committee to make a report to the House, can now be taken to be a law and so that Electoral Commission can now proceed to use it?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nambooze that is why I said there are two types of instruments. There are those that automatically become law when they are laid but there are those that require ratification. I have, therefore, said that we shall examine this particular one to establish whether it is automatic or requires ratification. That will help resolve this matter.

4.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Maj. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue raised by hon. Tashobya had been raised early this week and I promised to bring a report on Tuesday. However, for the benefit of colleagues, the borer which has manifested itself in Uganda is containable. We have sent officers there and they are working on it to make sure that it is contained. On Tuesday, we shall read a statement indicating the scope and extent of this problem and how we are effectively planning to deal with it. 

Now, the issue raised by my honourable colleague on the problem of elephants, the Minister of Tourism is not here but since in the animal industry we work together, I would like to share with you the information on this problem. 

The area she is talking about is actually a historical and natural transit route for elephants going to South Sudan and other areas. By nature, after some time these animals go to intermarry. They cross - (Laughter) – yes, it is biological. Naturally, they try to avoid inbreeding and they go in search of new groups and sometimes, it is because of feeding. Hon. Epetait knows about this. 

What happened with the elephants is that we came here and degazetted this place and we have interrupted their natural way of living. Government has made several interventions: First, they dug trenches but the elephants became wiser and covered the trenches. So, Government again made different trenches putting soil on the side of the communities. These elephants are now trying to find a way of filling these trenches. They come and work the whole day and fill. 

We were discussing that problem this morning with the people from UWA and the government is doing three things: To encourage the communities to engage in apiary and red pepper because it is unfriendly and it keeps them away. However, the argument is, for how long can we sustain this? But we are trying to do something about it, honourable colleagues –(Interruption)

MR BIHANDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and my colleague, for giving way. We have tried the apiary and the red pepper on the boundaries of Queen Elizabeth National Park but they have also not worked. What we need to do is to try electric fences - do not shake your head hon. Minister because we have tried it in my village of Kiborara. We have a Baptist Mission and with assistance from the US, they brought in some wires. We have fenced about 20 acres and the elephants have never stepped in that garden since we did that. But apiary and red pepper are not going to work. That is one.

Two, that problem is not only on the South Sudan border; it is also on other borders whereby people are competing with elephants for land. These elephants are better Pan-Africanists than us because the national parks are shared – 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Bihande now you are making a very long submission about policy. 

MR BIHANDE: I am giving information, Madam Speaker; very useful information.

MAJ.(RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Honourable colleague, I want to thank you very much for that information but you only pre-empted what I was going to say because we have shared information. In Botswana, they did electric fencing and the elephants used their calves and their calves died in numbers and so, they put upgates. That garden you are talking about is very small; they can go around it. But if it was a total barrier, the elephants would still die in numbers but they would break that fence. 

The way forward, honourable colleague, is that we are trying to see how we can protect the community by coming up with a sustainable barrier for these elephants or maybe find a route for them so that they can go and come back.

4.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INVESTMENT (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, on the issue of development projects and local governments being affected, we wish to confirm that all the local governments are required to submit their workplans before funds are released to them. If there is any delay in the release of funds, it is usually because the districts or the local governments have not submitted their –(Interjections)– can I just submit then you give - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I do not know whether you are answering the right question. (Laughter)  

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Honourable minister, would you want to help us and give us which law you are making reference to, which requires local governments to submit proposals? Which law are you talking about?

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, this is the practice in finance that you should be able to account for the money that you have been given before more funds are released. And that is the standard principle that we follow in Finance. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, it is the work of Parliament to appropriate resources. Once Parliament has appropriated resources, Ministry of Finance has no option but to send these resources to the respective agencies for which money has been appropriated. 

Madam Speaker, you were in that Chair when we raised that same matter, that we sit here as Parliament, appropriate resources then it is up to Finance to decide where to send and where not to send resources. And what has been the effect of this is that the power of Parliament to appropriate has been hijacked by Ministry of Finance because this is the money, which is being targeted under supplementaries? Finance does not send money to these districts and the local governments. Like in the last financial year, districts did not receive money in the first and fourth quarters.

On the basis of this, isn’t it procedurally right that since this touches on the power of Parliament, we should constitute a committee to investigate the circumstances under which the Ministry of Finance is refusing to send the money, which seems that actually, they are doing away with our powers as Parliament because just receiving statements from the minister as he is saying, it is going to go on as – because even the other time when we raised it, this is the same thing the Minister of Finance said that they were going to release money. We came to another quarter and no money was released.

Madam Speaker, the problem is so serious that I would propose that a committee be established because now, we are even receiving claims from our constituents, the police and the teachers. Now they are asking for money from us as Members of Parliament yet Parliament has already appropriated money.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it may not be necessary to set up a special committee on that. Can we instruct the Committee on Budget whose work it is to follow up our budgets and so on, to give us a report? You know we are busy on the budget, so, if we create too many committees, I do not think we will be able to work. Can we instruct our budget committee to handle?

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to report that yesterday, we discussed this matter extensively in Cabinet and clear instructions have been given to Ministry of Finance to make sure that the releases are made. This is not only in regard to the development budget but also about salaries as raised by the Member.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, as you know, Ministry of Finance releases money on a quarterly basis.

WADRI: Madam Speaker, in light of the statement made by the Minister of Finance, that releases of money to districts are pegged to accountability, we know that in this country, we have 112 districts and would it be procedurally correct for us to leave that statement of the minister on the Hansard if it was a coincidence that all the 112 districts did not submit accountability for the two quarters? That is the first quarter and the last quarter. Can he, please, retract his word so that it does not remain on Hansard.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, as my senior colleague said, this matter was extensively discussed in Cabinet and issues emanating from it have been discussed and resolutions and decisions have been made. That is what is going to take place as of yesterday’s instruction.

However, you all know that on matters of salary, it is the first call on the consolidated budget.

MR KASOLO: I need to be clarified by the hon. Minister of Finance because he is talking about the resolutions they made in their Cabinet. I think it should be prudent if you share with us the resolutions you made in Cabinet. Why don’t you tell us the resolutions that you made?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let the matter be given to our Budget Committee. What he has said that districts did not account should also be investigated by our committee so that we know whether all of us are deficient. One hundred districts cannot fail to account! So, let our Budget Committee handle that expeditiously and give us a report.
4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, hon. Ssemujju raised the issue of Police deployment in Mogadishu. It is true our Police are deployed in Mogadishu and I did confirm this before the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.

This deployment was done under the auspices of the African Union where the Government of Uganda and AU signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) detailing the nature of the deployment of the Police to Somalia. Now, this MoU includes their terms of deployment, how they are catered for and so forth.

It is true it includes some payments of upkeep allowances to them while their salaries are paid to their accounts in Uganda –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I wish to seek the indulgence of the Minister of Internal Affairs. As far as I know, this Parliament approved the deployment of the UPDF only and never at any one time did this Parliament sit here or anywhere else to approve the deployment of the Uganda Police Force in Somalia.

The procedural question I would like to raise is that, even as we dwell on this money being deducted from the Police force now operating in Mogadishu, whether it was right, to begin with, to deploy the Police. I think unless this question is answered appropriately this shows disrespect for this Parliament and that Government is operating without due regard to the law and I think it is necessary that something be done by the honourable House, Madam Speaker.
THE SPEAKER: Which part of the Constitution are you referring to that requires a resolution of this House for the Police to be deployed?

MR AMURIAT: Chapter 12 of the Constitution exhaustively deals with defence and national security and under Article 208, the UPDF and their functions are stated there under. Also under the same chapter beginning specifically from Article 214 of the Constitution of Uganda where Parliament is given the responsibility to regulate the Uganda Police Force - it is really almost a reflection of Article 2010 where we are assigned a responsibility as this august House to regulate UPDF.

In regulating the UPDF, we sat here remember –

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, we are talking about the Uganda Police Force; I am asking you where it provides that we needed a resolution for the UPF. UPDF, we did that one I know but I am talking about the Uganda Police Force.

MR AMURIAT: Article 214, I can read verbatim: “Parliament to regulate the Uganda Police Force. Parliament shall make laws-
    a) providing for the organisation and administration of the Uganda Police Force;
    b) ensuring that members of the Uganda Police Force are recruited from every district of Uganda;
    c) regulating generally the Uganda Police Force.”
I think that issues of deployment – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know because if you look at Article 2010, deployment of troops is specific under the UPDF, but it is silent on the Police.

MR BABA: Madam Speaker, I promised my statement by saying that the Uganda Police Force was deployed under the auspices of African Union. The Republic of Uganda is part of the African Union and under the AU Security Committee Uganda was requested to contribute Police to the African Union. Under that obligation, we had to honour that and that is why the Police are deployed in Somalia in consonance with our membership to the African Union.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have asked where, in this Constitution, there is a requirement that they get a resolution of this House? For the UPDF, it is clear and explicit and on the Police, it is silent - Yes, on the Police, it is silent. Please, conclude the statement.

MR BABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. So, I was saying that we signed a MoU with the African Union outlining the terms of deployment and these people are paid allowances and it is true some deductions are made. Now, if there are any police officers who are complaining about these deductions, the Police have avenues - the Police Authority for Commissioned Officers and the Police Council for Non-Commissioned Officers for their grievances. However, this issue having arisen, I will take it up with the Police Authority and the Police Council so that their grievances are sorted out. But whatever is being done is through a MoU and under an agreement of which this country is signatory to. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Alaso, what is it that you wanted?

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I appreciate your direction that the Constitution is silent and I would like, therefore, like to be helped by Government or by you, Madam Speaker. How do we then get Government to account because this is also a varied account? When the Constitution keeps quiet - maybe it is permitted or not, I have no clue. But then as people’s representatives, how do we get Government to account first for that very important decision to take sons and daughters and deploy them in a war-torn area outside Uganda and then to account for all their welfare because my fear is for the minister to hide under that explanation, which we have just been given -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is this now a debate? Why don’t you bring a specific motion so that we deal with it on merit? Bring a motion formally and we put it on the Order Paper, we debate the matter but we are not going to take a decision just from this. For me, that is the simplest way.  

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, I wanted to give information to my colleague and I thank you for giving way. 

THE SPEAKER: And we are happy to see you back. (Applause)

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.I have two issues and one is that, there is an unanswered question in the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and this question was asked when the Police appeared and we were asking them about the Police going. They said that they went and that the law is silent and, therefore, it allows.  (Laughter)

Two, they said that even Prisons is there and when Prisons came, we asked them and they denied being there. They asked us who said that they were there. We said that, “Police said that you were in Somalia.” So, Madam Speaker, this requires you to guide on the first question on whether when the law is silent, it automatically allows.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I do acknowledge that we need to protect our citizens who are on duty there. I think it is better if you really bring a motion, we debate this matter and then we get agreements.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We certainly will bring a motion to that effect but in the meantime, salary is a right. So, let us get out of these things of deployment, silent in the Constitution and whatever. Why is the salary being deducted? Even before we bring the motion, these police officers are suffering, their children are out of school and the minister, I suppose is aware about this deduction. Why is it being deducted? That is a very serious question and it must be answered by people who are in authority because a few months ago, I did tell the House that even in the Army, there is a forced deduction of the little money the soldiers earn. There is a SACCO somewhere and they do not know who is taking their money. I think we should –(Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There are two pieces of information I would like to give: One is on the question of deduction from the soldiers in order to contribute to the SACCO. I think a group of soldiers had meetings, according to the secret information that we have, that they were told that they were going to start a SACCO and those who were there simply used their attendance sheet to automatically begin deducting money from the salaries of all the other soldiers in order to form a SACCO. I think the minister is here and he would also clarify on that.

Two, last year, we were appropriating money to different departments of Government and ministries. We did give Shs 260 billion and I complained about where this money was going and they said it was going to the Somalia mission. The Minister of Defence later laboured to defend why the money should go but there were no indications that out of that money, there would be deductions, which deductions may come back to supplement the budget of this country.

Lastly, there is one other issue of whether we should deploy or not. I would think that the role of the Police is internal; to keep law and order. The role of the UPDF is to defend the country and that is why the Constitution is silent about whether they should be deployed out. That is my understanding.  I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: You are not saying anything different. We have said that the law is silent and it is not provided for under the Police - that is why I have said bring a motion and we debate the matter and agree on the parameters. Otherwise, we are all speculating. We need to finish but now, we have moved away from the issues of the Police. Where is the $200 of the police officers?

MR BABA: Which $200 dollars, Madam Speaker? These people are paid allowances while they are out there. They need to live and buy various things and there are deductions for administrative costs and it is all stipulated in the MoU and so everything is legally done. (Interjections) Yes. But for their salaries, they are regular salaries and these are paid into their accounts in Uganda. Their salaries are paid here unless somebody has information to the contrary. All police salaries are paid on their accounts here.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Dr Kiyonga, there was an issue about the ADF in the Kasese area. Hon. Baba, this MoU you are talking about, can you bring it and lay it on Table so that we can examine the terms?

MR BABA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. Even on Tuesday next week, I will bring it.

THE SPEAKER: Okay Tuesday –

MR BABA: Not now, as I do not have it but on Tuesday, I will bring it.

4.45
THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been briefed by hon. Migereko that my brother, hon. Nzoghu, has raised a question about ADF. One is whether the ADF is there and two is whether the Government is ready to hold negotiations with them. 

Year in year out, in our policy statements, we have always informed Parliament that there are rebels of the ADF in the Congo that have been recruiting both in Congo and in Uganda and their intention is to invade our country and to that end, we have preventive deployments along the western border just in case ADF should try to enter. We should be ready to defend our population.

Also, Madam Speaker, as you are aware, Uganda is the Chair of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and in that capacity, we are chairing meetings to try and help resolve the conflict in Eastern Congo. The negative forces we are addressing in Congo include the ADF among others in that place. The existence of ADF is a reality and the ADF is in Congo and this is known to all of us. 

“Are we ready to negotiate with the ADF?” I have not asked my brother to whom the statement was attributed but in principle, the NRM Government is always ready to resolve any conflict through peaceful means, including dialogue. So, if the ADF think they have a conflict with us, that they would want to resolve through peaceful means, we are ready to listen and resolve the conflict that way. 

4.48
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Many of you here know very well that I was party to the writing of the 1995 Constitution, which was promulgated on the 8th day of October 1995 and that is why we prefer to refer to it as the 1995 Constitution. 

I have been following debates around whether or not the military can serve in the Cabinet. It is a very interesting debate and it is a challenge to us as legislators. I have been shocked to hear, through the media - in fact, if you tuned in to any radio station or television station now, they are all talking about how Parliament has finally agreed that a military personnel be appointed to serve in the Cabinet. 

Before we clap to congratulate Gen. Aronda, I think we should be mindful of the spirit behind the 1995 Constitution. I am concerned about the spirit. I am not a lawyer – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, I think you are pre-empting the report of the Appointments Committee.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker that is why I am standing as an elder in the House.  (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Even elders have to obey rules. 

MRS OGWAL: When an elder hears that there is a wild animal coming, they have to alert the family. So, I rise to – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, do not pre-empt the report of the committee. It will come here and you will be given the reasons and the rationale for whatever decision was taken. Let us go to the Order Paper. 

Honourable members, let us go to item three of the Order Paper. That item is not on the agenda; that is not how we are going to operate. You are not going to pre-empt the report of the Appointments Committee, which will come to this House. We shall bring it when we are ready. Honourable members, we are not going to smuggle items onto the Order Paper. Can you take your seats? Let us go to item four. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you for the opportunity. As you are aware, under Rule 158 of our rules, it says the chairperson of the Appointments Committee shall lay a report to the House on any appointment approved by the committee and the report shall not be subject to debate. The reason we are doing this is that as soon as we left the committee, our colleagues from the NRM side were the first people to jubilate and declare the results and this is contrary to the rules and because it is contrary to the rules, this is a procedural issue we are raising because this thing has been taking place. So, -(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. With due respect to the Leader of the Opposition, you had guided very well using your discretion, using the powers given to you by this Parliament through the Rules of Procedure and the Constitution of Uganda. Is the Leader of the Opposition in order to stand up and challenge your guidance by bringing a matter over which you have guided ably and very well? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to appeal to all of you not to smuggle work onto the Order Paper. Secondly, in the meeting before today, we decided as the Appointments Committee that we shall bring our report here. But when I was going to the dressing room, I saw Members in the corridor addressing – and these were not NRM Members. So I think everybody has done it; so let us leave it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I can tell you that we have not done it. And we had taken the ruling in the committee – and this is very unfair because like hon. Cecilia Ogwal said, this is a constitutional issue; the Constitution, which we made after the war and which made us go to the bush in 1980. (Interjection) Yes, some of you are enjoying here but you do not know what we went through. And here, you are throwing the same Constitution through the window. 

Madam Speaker, we have never put the report of the Appointments Committee to the House and secondly our colleagues in the NRM are jubilating because they have won and yet these things were secret. In the circumstances, we who wanted a further interpretation on this matter, and believed that this issue needed more time, and the fact that nobody from across wants to listen to the voice of reason – (Interjection) – Okay, inform me.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Nandala for giving way. I believe in honesty as a virtue. I was not in the Appointments Committee but I saw Members from hon. Mafabi’s side addressing - (Interjection) - I knew it from your colleague. I want to assure you that tonight – and I want to be mature enough, Madam Speaker, that the NTV Tonight will show hon. Mathias Mpuuga, talking about where things have gone wrong. And that was the first person for me to hear from. Now, what are you talking about? (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I thank Dr Bitekyerezo for that information. And on this issue, because you are aware that you could say hon. Mpuuga was found on the way but I got hon. David Ochwa very excited, telling the press how they had beaten the Opposition on this. So in the circumstances, we in the Opposition believe in the Constitution and in our rules. We want to thank one Member of Parliament from NRM who said we need further interpretation. 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, without going into details, we deliberated at length – over several hours – and realised that there were a number of lacunas in the Constitution and we also agreed that there are areas that need to be interpreted. I do not want to go into other details but there are lacunas in the Constitution. And for those who went to the press, we shall watch the news tonight – whoever will be on radio or television should go to the disciplinary committee. I think I am the only one who has not talked to the press. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, since this has been mentioned, we in the Opposition are not going to be part of this afternoon’s proceedings. And we are also going to address the press about what took place because our colleagues have already done so. And this Constitution which we believe in, we are not willing to be party to breaking it. And in that regard, we in the Opposition are moving out of the Chamber. So you can debate whatever you want but we are also going to address the press on this issue of constitutional matters. Thank you.

(Whereupon the Opposition walked out_)

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear a clarification from hon. Anite. 

MS ANITE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not in any way trying to challenge your ruling; I wish to get a clarification from you because you have ruled that those who have addressed the media should appear before the disciplinary committee. However, I wish to find out from you whether you are only referring to those Members who belong to the Appointments Committee and talked to the media or any Member of Parliament. This is because as we were walking into the Chamber this afternoon, the media people were asking any Member their feeling about the approval of Gen. Aronda and we could not avoid them, as political leaders, we had to respond. So I just want to find out from you if your ruling is restricted to only committee members or all of us.

THE SPEAKER: The Appointments Committee is a closed committee; so the committee Members who spoke to the press are the ones affected. (Applause)

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, may I seek clarification because I am one of those who spoke to the press. That one is on record and I am ready to face the disciplinary committee. That said, our rules, mainly Rule 158 – we are the ones who have been offending that rule because the power that we have to sit on the Appointments Committee is delegated power. And to that end whatever we discuss there, and particularly for the issue of Gen. Aronda, controversial as it was – 

THE SPEAKER: Aren’t you now disclosing what we discussed?

MR OTADA: No, Madam Speaker, I am not. These are issues that should be reported back to the House and I am saying that Rule 158 commands us, as the Appointments Committee, to report back to colleagues in the House. (Interjection) Hon. Tim Lwanga, please! We can do better than this. 
So I am saying that as long as we do not operationalise this and keep offending Rule 158, by not informing the country what transpired in the Appointments Committee, we are going to have many of us reporting in an uncoordinated manner. That is my submission.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Otada, you are part of the decision we have already made to come and report during this session; so do not act as though you were just bringing up the matter. We discussed as a committee and took a position. And also the people who have been offending are very many. Let us move on to the next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING 

THE NATIONAL POPULATION COUNCIL BILL, 2011

5.02
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Population Council Bill, 2011” be read the second time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, I think we were debating. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, Madam Speaker, the committee report was presented to the House and the debate ensued that day. And a decision was taken that on the next sitting we would go to the committee stage.

THE SPEAKER: Is it? Okay, honourable members, I put the question that the Bill be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: By the way, honourable members, I forgot to inform you that one of the former Members of Parliament and former Minister of Transport, Mr YosamMugenyi – he was a minister in 1981-1985 – died about an hour ago.

In the public gallery, we have pupils and teachers of Elgonia Nursery and Primary School represented by hon. Timbigamba and hon. David Muhumuza. Please, stand up, you are welcome. (Applause)

We also have teachers and pupils of Kawuku Boarding Primary School represented by hon. Sekitoleko and hon. Kusasira. They are here. (Applause)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL POPULATION COUNCIL BILL, 2011

5.06

Clause 1 agreed to.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are there amendments on Clause 2? We normally do it at the end.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, Clause 2, on interpretation, is amended as follows -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, I think we normally handle the interpretation at the end, in case there are changes, which may come in.

MR LUGOLOOBI: There is an obvious change here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, what I am saying is that normally, we handle interpretation last in case we have amended other definitions. So, let us go to Clause 3.

Clause 3 agreed to.

Clause 4

MR LUGOLOOBI: In Clause 4, composition of the Council is amended as follows: Delete Clause 4 and replace it with the following: “The Population Board. 4(1) There is established a Population Board in this Act referred to as the Board. 

4(2) The Board is the governing body of the Council consisting of - (a) the chairperson; (b) the vice-chairperson; (c) the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry responsible for Finance; (d) one representative from the following: (i) the Uganda National Bureau of Statistics; (ii) the National Planning Authority; (iii) the Ministry responsible for Gender; (iv) the Ministry responsible for Health; (v) the Ministry responsible for Education; (vi) the Ministry responsible for Internal Affairs; (vii) the Ministry responsible for Local Governments; and (viii) three representatives from civil society organisations, one of whom shall be a woman.

4(3) The chairperson and vice- chairperson shall be appointed by the minister on such terms and conditions as may be determined by the minister.

4(4) The minister shall, in appointing the persons under sub section (3) of this section, have regard to the knowledge of the persons and their ability to contribute to the work of the Council.

4(5) The director general appointed under Section 2 shall act as the Secretary to the Board and shall arrange the business for and cause to be recorded and kept, the minutes of the meetings of the Board.”

The justification is; (1) There is need to involve the relevant authorities that would help guide the implementation of the strategies laid down in the National Population Policy.

(2) The chairperson of the Council must be a technical person, knowledgeable in population matters to help move the national population agenda.

(3) There is need to establish a clearly defined governing body for the Council headed by persons with technical competence in the respective field.

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson and I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the amendments. I agree that we move from the permanent secretary to technical people regarding the composition. I also want to propose that we insert - I did not follow the numbering but I want to insert, in the composition of the Board, a representative from the National Information Technology Authority (NITA (U)) which by mandate under the Act, which we passed in Parliament, is mandated to collect, store and transfer data to relevant institutions for planning and budgeting. Since the Population Council is going to deal with data collection and NITA (U) has the mandate to collect and disseminate data, I would like a representative from there.

On the issue of gender, I do not know the numbering but he is suggesting one woman. My proposal is that from the entire composition, we should have a third comprising of women. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairman, what do you say about that?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Whereas that may appear constitutional, the challenge perhaps would be that we are looking for people who are quite knowledgeable - (Interruption)

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I strongly rise on a point of order. Is it in order for the chairman, who is presenting a very contentious Bill regarding population, to make that assertion when we are well aware that there are many women at Makerere University and several other institutions with PhDs in Population Studies? We note that the Board is going to be comprised of mainly men and he says it is because women are not knowledgeable. Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairman, unless you can substantiate that women are not educated enough to be on this Board, you have to withdraw it.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, I erred in my expression but what I wanted to say is that in some of these institutions, you may have people deployed there and all of them are men. So, if you have a provision to say that one third of the membership is going to be women, you may run into a situation where an organisation like National Planning Authority may not have a female expert on population issues – (Interruptions)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chair. I just want to share with the chairperson of the committee information to the effect that our role here is to make a provision for the one third. It is not our mandate to scout out how many women are knowledgeable in what or how many men will occupy this; I think if we do that we would be speculating, which is very dangerous- (Interjection)- I will yield to information from a former employee of the Population Secretariat. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I think this shouldnot be an issue of debate because previously we agreed that in any establishment of this nature, one third should be women. The issue is that more or less, we had already agreed on this. So, I agree with hon. Oboth that we should go on and do that.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chair, I just want to give additional information. I agree with hon. Bahati that the issue of including women is a concluded matter. However, in Makerere University there is a department of population studies and I was one time a lecturer in that department and I know that there are very many women who have graduated not only at master’s level but also with PhDs. There are even professors in population studies who are women. So, that shouldnot be a matter to take our time. It is agreed that we should give women their quota, and there are very many women who can sit on this board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I now put the question that clause 4 be amended as proposed. Are there further amendments on the same clause?

MS BABADIRI: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I appreciate the representation you have agreed on in regard to the composition of the board. However, I would like to say that among those three, there should be a person with disability and knowledgeable in population studies.

The justification is that quite often whenever people talk about population it is hard to find them including people with disabilities. Most people think that as long as someone is able to earn a living, they are able-bodied. Also, during census, the number of people with disabilities is usually underestimated.It is on the basis of this that I ask the House to include a person with disability knowledgeable in population studies to be among those three. Thank you very much.

MR MBAHIMBA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would like to seek some clarification on the placement of people with disability and women. Are we looking at the numerical strength of these people? It is important to takenote of this because at one time we might have everybody with disability placed somewhere and others will be left out. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable member, how many disabled people are there? They are so few. Really, they cannot overrun everybody else.

MR MBAHIMBA: That is exactly the point.Because they are very few, they might all get engaged yet all Ugandans need to be catered for. 

MR ASAMO: Madam Chair, I rise on a point of order. I donot know whether the person holding the Floor is in order to say that we are very few. I want to inform him that we are 10 percent of the population. So, when you say we are very few, it shows you donot have facts about our numbers. It is because of that lack of facts that you are bringing it out that way.

Also, you need to know that issues of disability are not about numbers but about needs. Thank you so much.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. My concern relates to (2) (d) (viii), about the three representatives from the civil society organisations. Madam Speaker, the way civil society organisations have been captured here is too ambiguous.From which civil society organisations are we going to pick these three? Unless we qualify this by saying that, “the persons from civil society organisationsshall be knowledgeable on population issues…” I do not understand how useful these civil society organisations are going to be.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, are you rejecting that proposal?

MS KABAKUMBA: Yes.

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you so much, Madam Chair. I think this position must have been arrived at after an extensive involvement of stakeholders. It is also important to note that civil society organisations play a very big role. To exclude them would be an oversight on the part of this House.

However, in the event that they are choosing one representative from each ministry, how did they get to three? Why don’t we say, “one representative from the civil society organisations” so that the interests of civil society organisations are also catered for?

Three would be dangerous because civil society organisations are not organised as unions, that they can elect one to sit on this board. We cannot do away with civil society organisations because most of them deal with population issues, but I am of the opinion that we amend –(Interruptions)

MS BOONA: Thank you, Madam Chair. To say that civil society organisations are disorganised is unfair.They operate under an umbrella organisation called the NGO Forum. So, usually whenever they have to send a representative,it will be done through that umbrella. Thank you.

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you so much. You actually did not say something different from what I was saying. I said if we are choosing one representative from each of the ministries, why don’t we also get one representative from the civil society organisations and not three?

MR LOKII: Thank you so much, colleague, for giving way. Not all civil society organisations have integrated population issues on their agenda. So, maybe the NGO Forum can single out those particular NGOs that have population issues on their agenda to represent the civil society organisations on this board. Thank you.

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Chair, I therefore, would like to move that we delete (viii) and substitute it with the following: “One representative of the civil society organisations who shall be knowledgeable in population issues.”

MR SEMPIJJA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I still have a problem with the use of the word “board”. Unless I am advised otherwise, I think we passed clause 3, which talks about the establishment of a council. We then moved on to the composition of the council but instead of using the word “council” we are bringing in the word “board”. I think that is misplaced. Later on, if we use it, then we have to change everything in the Bill even- 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Can I provide some information? What we are trying to do in clause 3 and in the amended clause 4 is to create a distinction between a council and a board. The council is a body corporate whereas the board is the governing board of the council. So, we wanted to make that distinction very specific. That is what we are trying to do.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chair, that is causing us a lot of problems because you are now creating two bodies, which is not the purpose of the Bill. Part 2 is headed, “National Population Council” and there is nowhere the board is mentioned. We do not have anything else apart from the council. After the council, we are going to have a secretariat to serve the council. So, we should remove “board” and go back to “council” for consistency.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairman, can you explain why you are moving away from the council, which is the main reason for enacting his law, and then creating a board?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, as I just explained, if you read clause 3(1) it says, “There is established theNational Population Council”, and in clause 3(2) it says that the council is a body corporate. So, that is the entity. 

Now, we proposed an amendment in clause 4.In the original clause 4, they talk about “a council comprising of the following membership” as if this composition is the one that defines the council. So, what we are trying to say is that we should create a board, which is the governing body of the council, and we shall have a secretariat with staff that will be in charge of the day-to-day operations of the council. That is going to come in some subsequent clauses.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ssempijja, are you satisfied?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Certainly, I am not satisfied.We want to help ourselves to sort out this issue because we do not have two bodies. When you create a board then you have to also create a council. You must have a council first, a board and then a secretariat. You then have composition of the board, composition of the council, and the rest. I think you wanted to bring in a board but it does not work in this regard; it can be a board but it cannot be a council and board. You cannot do it that way.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chairperson, thank you very much. Currently, we have the Population Secretariat, which is composed of civil servants. The intention of this legislation was to create a structure above this team of civil servants. In the Bill,the council was proposed as the body, which has the political clout that can spearhead population issues, andthen in the wisdom of the committee they changed it to a board. 

It would be wrong to have a board, a council and a secretariat. If we are using the name “board”, then we should merge the board and council into one organ and also have a secretariat, which has civil servants who provide secretariat functions. Having a board, a council and a secretariat will be creating too many structures. So, there should be either a political board or council- if I can call it political- and then we define it and under it we have a secretariat, which has the civil servants. So, the chairperson and the minister should clarify exactly what they are trying to propose to us. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Chairperson, in addition to what hon. Baryomunsi has said, when you look at the provisions in 3,4,5,6, they are consistent in mentioning the establishment of a council.

Also, normally, boards are comprised of fewnumbers like seven or ninebut when you go beyond 11 and 13, you are talking about a council. So, by changing from “council” to “board”, you are making a major change which will distort the other provisions. You will have to define the board and terms of reference, and we are going to majorly affect the provisions and the intention of the Bill. So, we have to critically look at this, Madam Chair.

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Madam Chair, I think the chairperson should go back to the origin of the Bill, especially the object. This Bill is providing for one structure and I think the amendment in clause 4 is trying to run away from the proposals of the Bill. 

When you go to clause 11, you can see the provision for a director-general. The director-general is going to be in charge of the secretariat and will have staff that will support the running of the affairs of the council. 
If we omit your proposal to amend “council” to “board” and we continue with the provisions as they are in the Bill,and the proposal of the committee to remove the permanent secretaries to make the council a technical council and not an administrative council, then we will be providing for what the Bill is purposely drafted to provide for. 

The Bill establishes the council, which will have a secretariat headed by a director-general. When you bring in a board, like hon. Ruth Nankabirwa has said you are creating another structural body for which you will have to define responsibilities, offices and all that. The way the Bill is drafted, it provides for one structure, which is the council, with a director-general who will have an administrative body with staff. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What does the chairman say? Are you still insisting on keeping the board?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, in the circumstances, we have to concede and the amendment then should read as follows: 
“Composition of the Council 
The National Population Council shall be composed of the following…” and then the list that I read should follow. 

However, during the course of our discussion, there were some new proposals relating to the membership and one of them was on NITA-Uganda. I propose that that could come under (2) (d) (ix), and then one representative of the civil society organisations. Where we did not seem to strike a compromise was on the issue of people with disabilities.I did not get the consensus of the meeting on that one.

THE SPEAKER: Honourablemembers, you know there is a tendency to forget that they are there;so I think we should provide for them.

MR LUGOLOOBI: For us we have no objection on the people with disabilities.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chair, I really want to put in more words to what you said, about forgetting the people with disabilities. I was a member of the population policy drafting committee, and the spirit of the policy was to bring everybody on board, including the minority groups - the youth, women and the people with disabilities.These are people who should compose the council because they have issues that should always be captured.

MR BIGIRWA: Madam Chairperson,I am always concerned about disability issues but the biggest challenge I always have is the abuse. I would propose that we safeguard the appointment of one member with disability perhaps by looking at the umbrella organisations,like NUDIP, to nominate. I say this because these are people whom we always see around from this board to the other board. There are many disabled people in Buhaguzi butI do not see them appearing here.In northern and eastern Uganda, there are many.Consistently, there is that tendency for us to always create room for those who have eaten yesterday, today and tomorrow.

We agree with the disability problem but what safeguards should we put in place to ensure that the people we put there are those who are disabled and fit for those positions? I would suggest that since there is an umbrella organisation for disabled people, they should be the ones to help us appoint or choose that disabled person; otherwise, it will always be thekavuyo of appointments.

THE SPEAKER: Are you proposing that we reflect NUDIP in the proposals?

MR BIGIRWA: Yes, Madam Chair.One disabled member should be appointed with the guidance of NUDIP.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chair, I agreeto the representative of the people with disabilities. However, my problem is with the proposal to include a representative from NITA-U. When I read the functions of the Population Secretariat, I do not see anything to indicate that this council has anything related to the functions of NITA-U.Although I am a member, together with hon. Nalubega, of the ICT committee, I beg to disagree with youhere on this occasion.

There is a problem of putting a representative who will not attend most of time because what they are discussing is not in his area of interest. I think we should leave out the representative of NITA-U as proposed by hon. Nalubega.

MS NALUBEGA: Madam Chairperson, I can justify why I proposed that. 

MR KASOLO: Thank you so much, Madam Chair.Ido not buythe idea of including a member from PWDs. Let me beef up my point.Much as we have representatives of different interest groups, more especially the PWDs, the youth and the army, if we consider one interest group, then other issues of religion will come in.Now that we have said that one third of the council will be women, why can’t we say that among the women, these other interest groups are covered?

THE SPEAKER: Honourablemember, do you know why there are no interpreters for the disabled in the courts? Do you know why there are no special beds for the disabled in the hospitals?It is because nobody is speaking for them. This is a very serious matter. These are people who understand their own problems and they can bring them to the council.

MSRUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Chair, just to remind ourselves that we are all candidates for disability. So as we legislate, let us put that in mind.We are composing a council and not a board; if it was a board, we would be restrictive but a council must embrace all people to answer the question of population, which we are trying to solve.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chair, as mentioned in the presentation of our report, we benchmarked with Ghana on the issues of a national population council.What we discovered was that one of the problems that they experienced was a problem of a very wide board and how to maintain that board.

In Ghana, it is the National Population Council which is the board. In Uganda, you have decided to maintain a council. So, whereas you may want so many people represented on this council, there is the issue of the budget that we need to address ourselves to. That was the challenge that we saw in Ghana, that we may need to be mindful of as we propose more names on the list.

MS BABADIRI: I thank you, Madam Speaker.We are not asking for an additional number; we are saying out of the three persons, one of them must be a person with disability.People,remember disability is permanent and it has its peculiar issues. You have observed that even during census, they did not bring out our right number because we were not there to advise them. 

Please, we should not take time on the issue of disability because we know that all of us have potential. Let us not waste our time. Let us consider the person with disability because any time you can be a person with disability and you will need that provision. Thank you.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, we need to move. 

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Madam Chair, please. I think that if we had a debate, we could have sorted out a number of issues and not congested the committee stage. 

Madam Chair, I want to justify to the members as to why we are passing this Bill. This Bill is called the National Population Council Bill and issues of population are statistical data issues. We are including the Uganda Registration Services Bureau on this council because we are looking at the registration of births, deaths, and generally having knowledge about our population. 

We are also, in the object of the Bill, looking at defining the functions of the Population Secretariat. We know that currently we have a population secretariat, but what does it do? The function we are looking at involves a census; without a databank you cannot have a Population Secretariat and you cannot carry out a census. So, for my colleague, hon. Kabajo, to say that the role of NITA-U is irrelevant here, when you know that you are going to collect data, you are going to register births and death, you are going to register migration and immigration in the country, I think you are mistakento say that there is no role here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, wouldn’t you be satisfied with the National Bureau of Statistics doing that job?

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Madam Chair, I am satisfied and I am not removing their membership. I am only suggesting NITA-U because under the NITA-U Act, 2010, NITA-U is the body – I wish the minister was here – mandated to store the national data; it is in charge of the national databank.Without the permission of NITA-U, nobody can interact with the databank. Now, if we want to know how many people have died and you want to interact with the databank, who will give us that authority or accurate data without the National Information Technology Authority-Uganda? 

I also want to agree with hon. Baba Diri that we need to include people with disability because they are unique characters when it comes to that area, and sometimes we need people who know and are relevant to the situation. So, I would like to agree and support hon. Baba Diri on the composition. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, what do you have to say about NITA-U?

MR LOGOLOOBI: Well, we had already conceded in the beginning on NITA-Uganda and on one representative from the civil society organisations. The only remaining group was the people with disabilities.We now agree that we should have the people with disabilities since the numbers are not increasing anyway. So, the three will actually replace the previous proposal that we have made, which I think is in tandem.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. While the chairperson says he has conceded, I think we can revisit some of these issues. I think that when you look at population issues, you are basically looking at sexual and reproductive health, gender, statistics, etc. Uganda Bureau of Statistics, I think, is adequate in terms of handling the monitoring, evaluation, reporting and statistics as far as population issues are concerned. The NITA-U deals with information technology; yes, they might have a databank but UBOS can just send the information there. 

I donot think what hon. Nalubega is rising is strong justification for them to sit on the council. Uganda Bureau of Statistics can play that role of data management, statistics and information and can just work with NITA-U and other agencies of Government to handle the storage and management of data and archives.

Madam Chair, I also want to comment on the issue of civil society.In the population programme, there is a lot of involvement of civil society,and civil society can be categorised or divided into different aspects. There are NGOs like the Family Planning Association of Uganda called Reproductive Health Uganda and the others. You also have the faith based institutions that play a very critical role when it comes to issues of sexuality and population.There are also the traditional and cultural institutions. 

I think the framers of this Bill were trying to accommodate those different aspects of civil society so that you have religious institutions, cultural institutions and the traditional NGOs sitting there.Also when you look at the composition, it is Government heavy - you have heavy representation from Government ministries.So, even if we took three so that they accommodate those different backgrounds in civil society, it will also be very important. 

If you have the church sitting here, then you have less resistance from the church on issues of family planning, condoms and so forth. This is the way it was done in the HIV/AIDS campaign, when a retired Bishop was made the chairperson of the Uganda Aids Commission;it helped with messages of condoms and other methods of AIDS control. I just wantto submit, Madam Chair.

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Madam Chair, for allowing me to speak ahead of hon. Oboth because I know he is going to support my position on NITA-U. I would like to support what hon. Nalubega has just described about the necessity to maintain NITA-U on the membership.Population information is dynamic and its dynamism requires updates, reviews and so on in relation to those who keep it, the national data bank. They are not just putting statistics there but all information about every aspect of the population in this country including crime, death, immigration into and outside of this country is maintained.So, if they are maintained on the council, they are extremely beneficial. 

Why are we bringing non-governmental agencies on board? Why are you bringing a religious organisation on board?It is because we would like to have as much representation as possible. Therefore, the same reasons that Dr Baryomunsi is using are the same reasons we can use to maintain NITA-U on the board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Wouldn’t we be better off having the Uganda Registration Services Bureau that registers births, deaths, marriages and the like? The Uganda Registration Services Bureau is a registry of births, deaths and marriages.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chair, I thought that UBOS has a national statistical system that is operational to register births and deaths where they happen;however, the Uganda Registration Services Bureau would wait for you to go to them to register your births but they may not necessarily look for you. The Uganda Bureau of Statistics would set up a system that would capture this information from the source wherever a birth occurs and once they have a system, they capture. I think that is where UBOS becomes very important.

However, I will bend to the view of getting NITA-U on board just to ensure that the information so collated by UBOS is adequately captured in the national database. They need to be on board with everybody. That is what I thought.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what are your final proposals? 

MR LOGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, I want to first correct hon. Chris Baryomunsi before I give our final proposal. In the original Bill, the proposal was for one representative from an NGO; it was the committee that proposed three. The framers actually had proposed one. I am proposing that we adopt the following: one representative of the CSOs, one representative of the people with disabilities and one representative from NITA-Uganda.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, I want to propose that you formulate what you want properly. We should stand this over because there are many ideas and they are still coming in. Let us stand this over and go to clause 5 so that you can work out what you really want in the composition. 

MR LUGOLOOBI. Madam Chairperson, before clause 5, we had noted in the report that the tenure of the council had not been considered in the original Bill. So, we propose that we should introduce a new clause on the tenure of the council which should read as follows, and it should come immediately after clause 4:

“Tenure of the Council 
(1). A member of the Council shall hold office for five years and is eligible for reappointment for only one term. 
(2). A member of the Council may, at any time, resign his or her office in writing addressed to the minister. 
(3). A member of the Council may be removed from office by the minister -
a) for inability to perform the functions required of him or her arising from infirmity of body or mind;
b) formisbehaviour or misconduct;
c) for conflict of interest;
d) for incompetence;
e) if a member is convicted of an offence involving abuse of office, fraud or moral turpitude; or 
f) if the member is absent without prior permission of the chairperson or without reasonable cause, to the satisfaction of the minister, for more than four consecutive meetings of the Council or is absent from Uganda for more than 12 consecutive months;

(4) Where a member of the Council resigns, dies or is removed from office, he or she ceases to be a member of the institution or body which he or she represents on the Council. The chairperson shall notify the minister of the vacancy and the minister shall appoint another person to hold the office for the unexpired portion of the member’s term of office.” 
The justification is that there is need for a change mechanism to encourage the constant flow of new ideas in the system. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, what will you do with the exofficio members? Will you also remove them? The bulk of these are exofficio members and they are there by virtue of office. So, how will you limit their term when they are there by virtue of their office? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, they are sent by their respective offices. If someone resigns from that office, they are immediately replaced.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but you are saying that they should serve only five years. Suppose I am the civil servant who is in charge of that sector and I have been assigned that responsibility, what will you do with me? Hon. Lugoloobi, you are speaking from down there and I do not even know what you are saying. (Laughter) You have got to go on record.

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Chairperson, I think the amendment he read in sub clause (4) should cure that. If a member ceases to be part of that institution, he or she automatically ceases to be a member of the council and the chairperson notifies the minister to appoint another person from that organisation who serves for the remaining unexpired portion of the member’s term. So, that person coming in will not serve five years but will only serve the remaining term and maybe can be reappointed. I think that is the import of sub clause (4).

THE CHAIRPERSON: My worry is that a member of the board shall hold office for five years and is eligible for reappointment for only one term. This is okay with civilian people but my problem is the exofficio members because these are there by virtue of office. Are you also limiting their being there to just two terms? 

MR LOKII: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am worried because the population council will be there forever and if it is going to be there for a longtime, the composition and representation of the relevant ministries will be there. So, I do not understand how the question of term limits comes in. 

The issue of term limits seems to have been influenced by the proposal of the board. If this is what is going to confuse the whole Bill, I want to pray that my chairman stands over this so that we get on with the other parts of the Bill as he gets time to rethink and refine what he wants us to do. 

MR KASULE SSSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I thank you. I would like to respond to your question about what shall happen to the institutional representatives on the council.

We have said we have a representative of Ministry of Finance or a representative of a particular institution, and representatives are bound to be changed. So, if somebody is on the council for more than 10 years and is required to at least attain one more term due to competence, maybe after the 10 years that representative can be changed to another representative.We have not mentioned that it should be the PS specifically; we have just said it should be a representative, so that representative can be changed. That is my submission. 

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. There are two categories of council members –(Interjections)– oh, I thought I heard my name and that is why I stood up.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please, proceed.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think on the council, it is very clear that there are two categories of people, a representative of the line ministry and the other people outside. Instead of leaving this for the chairperson, let us help him. Let us say that the exofficio members can remain there but the term is only limited to those who are not from Government. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is what I was asking the minister.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I actually have a contrary view to the term limit proposal. I know it seeks for an answer from us. What is the rationale of putting a term limit on this council? Most of the people here probably are representing institutions; right? They have institutional memory. 

The government practice - I believe the minister will say this -is that they nominate or second a member to be there. Would it be our role, as Parliament, to limit each ministry that this one will be - actually I have a problem with the word - only one term? We have institutions like the Public Service Commission, which do not have term limits. They just say, “eligible for another…”

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Chair. Much as hon. Oboth is looking at a situation of institutional memory and so forth, we are living in a dynamic world and that is why Parliament is now deliberating on the amendments. We feel that in order for all people to be actors, if a person has served for five years and then given another five years, he would leave space for others. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, what is the purpose of this population council? I think we should address the question of what it is supposed to do. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Chair. On the composition of the council, like you rightly put it - if I can give an example; somebody is a Permanent Secretary in a ministry and he qualifies – (Interjections) -This is part 4, composition of the council - Director-General of the Population Secretariat; if he or she continues to be a director-general beyond the 10 years, because you said that the term should be five years and they are eligible for one term, but that person can hold office for 15 years and the Bill dictates that they must be the Director-General of thePopulation Secretariat by office, what happens? 

The exofficio members, like the chairperson said, are there by virtue of their office. You will be there for 20 years. You chose that office because of its relevance, not as an individual but for the relevance of the office. I agree with my colleague who said that this provision of term limits is influenced by the fact that the committee was moving towards the formation of a board. We must accept that we are likely to face more problems as we move because the formation of a board is now the foundation of the provisions and the proposed amendments.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, mine might not be specifically on this but on the issue of drafting a piece of legislation of this nature. When we debated the Anti-Money Laundering Bill, the drafting was very good; we had a board and we also created a technical committee to include all these bodies. 

If we have representation from these departments to be part of the governing council and then they are the governing council, it is probably not good drafting. If we could have seven members of the board and then we have a working committee, like we did in the Anti-Money Laundering Bill - we had a board and then a working committee which included allthese other organisations like the Police and others. Otherwise, this representation downgrades the importance of the council.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what are you proposing?

MR BAHATI: I was proposing that because we are holding on this, we can re-draft the whole clause and then come up with a fine one.

MRS MUTYABULE: Thank you, Madam Chair. I am wondering why we are dwelling a lot on this population council because when we go to clause 5, it talks about the functions of the council. These are different from those of the National Population Council. So why don’t we concentrate on this clause 5 rather than looking at clause 4? I see clause 4 is almost irrelevant. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, can we take time to redraft something acceptable? Let us stand over the entire clause 4, including the amendments and the issue of tenure. Let us now go to clause 5. (Interjection) No, the board was a new proposal; it was not part of the old.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chair, I thought that we had gone back to the council and that position had been adopted. What the member was proposing seems to be taking us back because we had actually agreed on the idea of the council. We only stood over the composition of the council.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now you had introduced the issue of the tenure, which members would want to look at carefully in view of the different categories of membership.Some are there by virtue of their office while others are coming from other organisations. You may have to rearrange it so that they move in sync. So let us go to clause 5.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, before clause 5, we are proposing to introduce another clause on the remuneration of the members of the council because that had not been provided for. I think let me present it before we can stand it over. We are proposing to insert a new clause that provides for remuneration of board members as follows – sorry, members of the council - as follows – (Interruption)

MRS ONGOM: Thank you, Madam Chair. You will realise that we stood over the membership in clause 4 and the chairperson introduced a new clause of the tenure of the board, which board originally was not included here. Now he is again introducing the remuneration of the board members. I am now confused and seek your guidance; is it the remuneration of the board members or members of the council? Thank you.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chair, if the member was listening, during my presentation I did not use the word “board” when reading the amendments.This is because there was a consequential amendment and I used the word “council”. Whereas we had written “board” here because it was the original proposal, when we decided on “council” that is what I exactly used. With your permission, Madam Chair, may I continue on the proposed clause on remuneration of council members?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay.

MR LUGOLOOBI: We propose to insert a new clause that provides for the remuneration of the council members as follows: “The members of the council shall be paid such remuneration or allowance as may be determined by the Minister.” Justification: To provide for remuneration of council membersnot provided for in the Bill. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, you have heard the proposal. 

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Madam Chair, I do not want to differ much from the committee chairperson.Considering the precedence and the fact that the Ministry of Finance has given standing orders on how to pay public officers, civil servants and other people that serve Government, I would like to propose that we take what the chairperson is proposing but also add,“in consultation with the Minister of Finance”. There is a line minister, but we are talking about the Minister of Finance.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Who is the line minister here? Isn’t it the Minister of Finance?

MS NALUBEGA: It is okay. I concede.
	
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5

MR LUGOLOOBI: Clause 5 is on functions of the council. We are proposing to delete the current clause 5(1) and replace it with the following: “(1) The Council shall have the following functions: 
(a) 	To promote the goals and objectives of the National Population Policy. 
(b) To formulate policies to give strategic direction on the implementation of the objectives of the National Population Policy. 
(c) 	To advise the government on population programmes, activities and population policies necessary for better and effective population management. 
(d) 	To advise on population policies, or changes to existing policies, as it considers necessary for better and effective population management. 
(e) 	To recommend and promote comprehensive population programmes for integration into the National Development Plans. 
(f) 	To determine targets for population programme performance. 
(g) To advise on suitable methods forgenerating internal and external resources to support the implementation of population policies. 
(h) 	To promote collaboration and strategic partnership for population and development with government agencies, civil society organisations, private sector, cultural and religious institutions at various levels. (i) To co-ordinate and monitor population programmes in the country. 
(j) 	To promote research and studies on population issues. 
(k) To build capacity at central and local government levels for the implementation of population programmes. 
(l) 	To publish and disseminate the annual population report. 
(m)	To appoint staff of the Council. 
(n) 	To perform any other functions related to the above functions.”

The justification is that the council should have the overall directive and oversight mandate on matters pertaining to the National Population Policy.

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Madam Chairperson, paragraph (m) says, “to appoint staff of the Council”. We have a director-general and I thought the council would appoint the director-general who can then appoint the staff. I am looking at a situation where the staff are answerable to the entire council and yet there is a director-general who is supposed to be the one in charge of administration of the secretariat, and the staff of the secretariat should be reporting to the director-general as opposed to reporting to the council where the director-general also reports. I am getting a bit confused on that one.

Looking at the other authorities that we have in place, the manner of staff recruitment and reporting is quite different from what we are proposing here. How do the staff report to the council when they have a secretariat headed by the director who is supposed to be in charge of recruitment? I think we need to borrow from other practices on this one.

MR LOKII: Madam Chairperson, I think the question of (m) is not anything to debate about.If the council is going to oversee the functions of the secretariat, it is important that the director-general gets clearance from the council on whom he wants to recruit.Without that, the director-general will play around with a structure that is not yet defined. So, every establishment within the secretariat will require approval by the council and I think that is why this is necessary. That is the information I wantto give.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, I support hon. Nalubega. I think the wording should be,“appoint staff of the secretariat” because the secretariat is the technical arm. It should not be “appoint staff of the council”. It is like you are saying council members will appoint themselves. The technical staff are in the secretariat, and apart from the senior positions like those of director, the lower level positions are normally appointed by –(Interruption)

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I think the mind of the committee is that they should appoint the staff of the secretariat. The word is “secretariat” not “council”. After that, we can debate.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that satisfactory, honourable?

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Madam Chairperson, I was trying to look at the checks and balances in the council and at the secretariat, and I was also borrowing from previous practice. If we have a secretariat, it is going to be run by technical people.If we give the mandate to the minister to appoint the director-general, I donot think the council will go ahead to nominate staff of the secretariat. In practice, in this country I have not seen it anywhere. I would think that the director-general would be in charge of the staff and recruit them.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think the council is the overall owner of these people just like here, our staff here are employees of the Commission but they are not appointed by the Clerk; they are appointed by the Commission. So, I think in the same vein, the council is the owner.

MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: Madam Chairperson, I want to thank you. I would like to disagree with hon. Nalubega in regard to the staff. The reason why the council is there is to oversee the policy and the decisions of the whole Population Secretariat. The staff are there to implement the policies and decisions that are taken by the council. Therefore, the council is totally responsible for staffing in the secretariat, and in this case it should be the council to recruit the staff who will man the secretariat. 

It cannot be the single role of an executive director. The director can only head the secretariat and oversee the implementation of the policies of the council. I think that would be smart. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think the staff  are employees of the council.

MR MBAHIMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to agree with hon. Nalubega. Lookat a situation where a whole council recruits a sweeper.Iwould also like to borrowfrom other experiences where the director-general and other senior officers can be recruited by the council, but for those at officer level and lower, the mandate is given to those at senior level to recruit them.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chair, ordinarily the responsibility of appointing should be with the council.However, as far as these lower cadres are concerned, the council can give the mandate to management to recruit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let me just give an example of our Parliamentary Commission. Here we ask the Clerk to Parliament to advertise on our behalf. We then set up panelliststo interviewthe people to be recruited, but ultimately, the appointment letters are written by the Clerk. So, I think there is no problem. They still remain employees of the Commission. Okay, let us hear from a former personnel officer.

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I was a personnel officer of Mbarara District Local Government Council from 1999 to 2001. The council is the overall governing body. It sets policies to be implemented by the secretariat.So, whether the director-general will be empowered to appoint temporary staff or not, that still remains the responsibility of the council.

THE CHAIRPERSON: And they remain employees of the council; not so?

MR KYAMADIDI: Yes, and they are employees of the council. There is no question about that.

MR MBAHIMBA: Thank you, Madam Chair. Yes, I totally agree with you that recruitment be done by the council. However, there should be a minute of the council given to the senior officers of that department to recruit junior staff.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, but those are details. For instance, while I donot sign appointment letters for the employees here, I am the chairperson of the Parliamentary Commission and they remain employees of the Commission.

MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: Madam Chair, I think on this issue, we can borrow a leaf from any other authorities that are operating in Uganda. We could also borrow a leaf from the different boards set up and operating in Uganda. I am giving the example of a board because it is like a council. 

There cannot be a situation where a board or a council is set up and some other person is recruited to recruit more staff. All the decisions taken by that council are implemented by the head of the secretariat, the executive director or whatever the title will be. This Bill cannot be any different.Therefore, I would like to move that we adopt the practices that have been in place before.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended –

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chair, there was a proposal by hon. Kasule to replace the word “council” with “secretariat”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members; are you going to have staff of the council and staff of the secretariat?

MR LUGOLOBI: No, Madam Chair. I was actually going to say that “secretariat” is not the correct one; it should be the council.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, I just want to seek some clarification from you as a lawyer on whether we should use the phrase “appoint staff” or “recruit staff”. I do not know whether you can give me some guidance.

THE CHAIRPERSON: With appointment, you go through a process – adverts, recruitment. Actually, recruitment is part of that process.

MR KYAMADIDI: Yes; appointment is the final decision taken through the recruitment process.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR LUGOLOBI: Madam Chair, we dropped the proposal that we had made on clause 7.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 7 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chair, clause 9 is about continuance in existence of the Population Secretariat.This is a matter about which we had a lengthy discussion and we eventually proposed an amendment. Maybe I should read clause 9 (1) so that members clearly appreciate the problem.

Clause 9 (1) reads,“The Population Secretariat in existence immediately before the commencement of this Act is continued inexistence as the Secretariat of the Council…”The challenge we had here is that the current Population Secretariat is a creation of the Cabinet; it is not created by an Act of Parliament. That is the reason why we are proposing the deletion of this entire provision and we replace it with the following: 
“The National Population Secretariat 
(1) 	There is established a National Population Secretariat in this Act referred to as the Secretariat, which shall be the implementing organ of the Council.
(2) 	The Secretariat is composed of staff appointed by the Council on terms and conditions as the Council may determine for the efficient performance of the functions of the Council.
(3) 	The Secretariat is headed by the Director-General.”

The justification is that the Population Secretariat in existence has a completely different setup. Secondly, the Secretariat is composed of staff of the Council.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Although you say it is not a legal entity, what do you do with the people who are there? What will their status be? Do they move into the new body? You cannot just pretend that they are not there.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chair. In my view, clause 9 provides for a transitionperiod. It is a transitional clause. We are not looking at the nature of the existing Secretariat, but we cannot deny a fact. It raises a legal issue ifyou come and abolishthe current secretariat without saying it and you do not provide for a transition.You are not going to begin from scratch.

I strongly believe in clause 9 as it appears in the Bill. I have no problem with it because it is a transitional clause, which takes care of the previous secretariat, whether it was established by Cabinet or not.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, The National Population Policy was developed by the Population Secretariat. This Bill that we are debating is actually the baby of the National Population Secretariat. We cannot say that it never existed in the law. I do not think, as a person who worked there for six years, that I would like the staff of the Secretariat, once this Act is signed, just to disappear like that.So, I agree that we need to have a transitional clause that recognises that these people are there and prepares for a new creation of the council.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what do you propose?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Before I do that, I want to correct the impression that the population council was there. It has never been there, and the Secretariat was not created by the population council. It was created by Cabinet after a policy. We got the policy through a population policy drafting committee put in place by the Minister of Health. 

However, I wantto say, Madam Chairperson, that we should go by what hon. Oboth has said.Under clauses 26 and 27 we have transitional provisions, which cater very well for assets, liabilities and even staff of the current Population Secretariat. So, I think we could be doing a disservice to the current Secretariat which now stores whatever we need in this country on population issues. Clause 9 should remain as it is. 

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I was also of the view that clause 9 should remain as it is, but when the honourable member previously holding the Floor referred to clause 27, I looked at it and clause 27(1)(a) says, “(1) On the commencement of this Act-(a) all persons who were employed in the Population Secretariat immediately before the commencement of this Act shall continue in the employment of the Council.” So, I realised that clause 9 and clause 27 were like duplications because whatever is covered under clause 9 is already provided for under clause 27 – (Interjections)-That is exactly what it is saying. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is a difference in name because under clause 9, it is establishing the National Population Council Secretariat. The amendment is introducing the National Population Secretariat without the word “council”.

MR BAHATI: They are saying that the Population Secretariat which is there should continue as the secretariat of the new council. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chair, maybe some of us should declare our interests. I used to work with the United Nations Population Fund while the hon. Bahati was with the Population Secretariat. So, we are also fairly knowledgeable about the history of these institutions. 

Madam Chairperson, we came up with a Population Policy in 1995, which created some of these institutions, including the Population Secretariat as well as population offices in all the districts of Uganda. Every district now has a District Population Officer.  I think the intentions of this legislation should not disruptwhat is going on. I, therefore, want to agree with my colleague that as we pass this law, we should save the current Population Secretariat so that the staff continue. 

The transitional provisions, clauses 26 and 27, seem okay because they say that the employees will just continue and then the assets will be transferred to the Council. So, I would go with the original drafting in the Bill but maybe accommodate No.3, which says the Secretariat is headed by the Director-General. We could add that. 

Madam Chairperson, I am saying we maintain the original drafting in the Bill but we could borrow the new suggestion by the committee in clause 9(3) to provide for the headship of the secretariat - the Secretariat is headed by the Director-General.However, we maintain the original drafting in order not to cause unnecessary disruptions. When the council is replaced, it can propose restructuring, it can look at the staff there and then it performs its functions but we should not dissolve the current secretariat. 

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have been listening to hon. Baryomunsi’s arguments about the need to have the law flow, and I thought he was going to make it flow until he created some hindrances. I thought that for good draftsmanship, the flow should be to the effect that we establish the secretariat first and then how to cater for those institutions in existence is provided for in the transitional provisions. 

In this case, I thought the chairman had made a very good point, that we actually modify, with his proposal, and we establish a population secretariat as is and then the guarantee of the continuity of the existing secretariat is in the transition. I thought that would be much smoother, other than bringing in stories of those who are there must remain there. We cannot do story telling in the law. 

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. It is unfortunate that we are handling this and we know, for sure, that the Population Secretariat already existed.If read clause 27 (1) (c), it is telling us that,“there shall be no break or interruption in the employment of those persons because of this Act.” This Act should not cause any break. We should not change people who are already performing. It should just continue. So, bringing this other clause will interrupt this one. Why doesn’t it stay as it was in the Act? Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think the one we really need to address is the issue of the director-general.The present proposal is for supervision by the council but now there is the secretariat to be headed by the director-general. I think that is the one which needs to be addressed. 

MR KASULE SSSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, on the issue of director-general, I was proposing that we call him executive director. Like in the other Bill we have just considered, the word “Director-General” seems to come with cost implications, and we know how many Generals we have here. (Laughter) So, I think that we should call this person an executive director, just like in any other organisations we have created. So, I propose that we say “Executive Director” in consonance with other organisations.

Secondly, on the issue of the existing members of the Secretariat, I propose that we create a secretariat because we have had many challenges. At the moment, we do not know whether they are employed on permanent and pensionable terms. The new organisation may want to give people contracts and you may have to grapple with people who do not measure up to the expectations of the new council and yet you are dragging them to permanent and pensionable contracts.

We are solving that in the Auditor-General’s office by paying a lot of money.We are going to pay billions because we are grappling with people who were taken over and yet they cannot match the speed of the new Auditor-General. That is at the back of our minds and it is for Parliament to decide.

I,therefore, propose that we create the council and then, as you said, a transitional clause will be there. However, there should be a limit as to how far the transition can go. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So we just create the secretariat and say nothing about the staff?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: We create the secretariat but in the transitional clause you may say that they are taken on but on new terms, because the council shall have new terms.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, on new terms; you are creating new contracts from Parliament here.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: This is because the existing employees are Government employees and they might be on permanent and pensionable terms. Once you create a new council, which is recruiting people on contract, then there might have a lot of administrative issues that you may not solve.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So you do not want us to talk about the existing employees?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, I was advising that after creating the council, in the transitional clause, which somebody has mentioned, we may qualify that transition to say that everybody is taken on but on new terms. This would help the new management to be in control of the workers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is what I am asking.Do we only talk about the secretariat and leave the issues of the staffing to the transitional provision?

MR LOKII: Madam Chair, we should not create a break.Since it is in our interest to take care of the staff of the previous Population Secretariat, the proposal that the chairman has made does not change the meaning of what we exactly want.

We need to establish a secretariat and also mention the fact that it shall have staff that are appointed, and then create a reference to the transitional clause 27 which mentions where the staff of the previous population secretariat would go.I think that would reconcile all these other things because it is in our interest. I think it is about the wording without changing the meaning of what we want to do.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what do you say about the change of the title fromdirector-general to executive director?

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, I think for consistency, in Government we have established authorities; as an example, we have Civil Aviation Authority and we have a managing director and not a director-general.If you go to other authorities, it is executive director.

I think it is Parliament to make a decision to have the consistency.On one hand you cannot have a director-general and then on the other hand you have an executive director and in another institution you have a managing director.I do not have a problem with changing from director-general provided the responsibilities and functions remain the same.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chair, first of all, there is a procedural issue. I think we have agreed that clause 9 would establish the population secretariat and then issues of the transition shall be discussed when we reach that clause.When it comes to the issue of the executive director, to my understanding we have an executive director when have a board. When we were discussing the UCC Bill, for example, which is now an Act, we had a board and the executive director was a member of that board. That is when we have an executive director.

Now we have a council.I want to ask: for other councils that have been established, is that person normally referred to as a director? What will the titles of the other members of the council be; will they be directors also?

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. We have exceptions and usually there are reasons. If you went to URA, you will find that the head is not called the executive director but commissioner-general.The Population Secretariat should be headed by a director-general like you have theDirector-General of Health Services. We must distinguish between an authority and this council we are creating.

I want to tell you, members, that some of these titles carry some meaning. A director-general has something to do with the power that goes with what has to be done.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, hon. Kyamadidi, for giving way. I think the nomenclature, director-general, is usually used when you have departments headed by directors. Like you have the Uganda Aids Commission, the head of the secretariat is the director-general and different departments are headed by directors.In URA, the departments are headed by commissioners and that is why the head is the Commissioner-General.So, there is nothing strange with even having a director-general for this council as long as the other departments will be headed by directors.

MR OBOTH: I agree with hon. Baryomunsi on the explanation he gave. However, Madam Chair, we were still on clause 9; for some good reason, hon. Simon Mulongo, being a strategic student, fought for his case with quite a good proposal. I thought that we could first handle that - the establishment - which was an oversight in this whole Bill.So, we have an establishment and then the continuation as we had proposed in the Bill should be under that clause.I would pray that if that is sorted out then we can move on; but director-general or commissioner-general, these are English words.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What are you saying now? Originally, you had said let the status quo remain; now, where are you?

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair,I am still for the status quo remaining in view of retaining the continuity. However, under clause 9, before we say continuance in existence of the Population Secretariat, there should be an established national population council. So, this would come as a subsequent section referring to the one above.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So we should have a new clause 9 establishing the National Population Secretariat and then clause 10 dealing with continuance?

MR OBOTH: Much obliged.

MS AMODING: Madam Speaker,I just want to seek clarification on this issue of director-general. Some members are saying it has to do with English andIagree, but the challenge we have with this population secretariat is the fact that in the Bill here we do not have clarity on the types of departments which it will have. I, therefore, think that it might be very important for us to understand which type of departments this secretariat will have.

We are constrained by the Bill now because we only see some functions. However, if we gave this sometime, so that the chairperson can help us understand, together with the minister, whether this secretariat is going to create different functions and directorates, then we could use that to reach that decision. I think thatthe issue of a title is not a very difficult thing, but because we might have different departments, we might want to maintain the name director-general. I would like to propose that we stand over this issue and get guidance on this so that we can make a decision on either director-general or executive director, because we shall have probably different departments which are very important.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think that let us first deal with the establishment. Do you agree that we establish a secretariat?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill be amended by the introduction for the provision of the establishment of the secretariat exactly as proposed by the chair. 

(Question out and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: We shall then create a new clause 10 on continuance.Is that okay? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So I put the question that the present clause 9 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question out and agreed to)

Clause 9, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, it will be renumbered to be 10. We will have to deal with the issue of the staffing and the director-general. 

MS NAMARA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. The existing secretariat already has different directorates. So, after the creation of the secretariat, then section 9 should come out to talk about these different directorates because they already exist. If you are going to take up the existing ones, then we should consider them under here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But we cannot create them by law. Supposing we give them three and they want seven and they want to change next year? I do not think that we should go into those details. 

MR BAGOOLE: Thank you very much. My argument is on the issue of the director-general. “Director-general”refers to somebody who is going to head a very big organisation. So, the issue here should be how big the council is going to be. Do we have a number of directorates with some other small directors around? 

To differ a bit from that, I was of the view that unless this House confirms that the director-general will be a Musoga because among all the Generals we have in Uganda, we do not have any who is a Musoga -(Laughter)

MRS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I would like to propose that since this is a secretariat, instead of having a director-general let us have a secretary-general.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, why don’t we give ourselves time to think about the proper nomenclature, whether it is executivedirector, director-general, CEO.Let us stop at 9 (1). I am proposing that we stop at 9(1), which is now 10(1), while we cogitate over the nomenclature.

MR LOGOLOOBI: Madam Chair, in the proposed new 10, which is actually the current 9 (1), I think we should stop at “in existence as theSecretariat of theCouncil”,and we delete the rest –“to be known as the National Population Council Secretariat, subject to the provisions of this Act.”This is because we have already handled and established it in 9.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So you want us to delete everything after “Council”?  

MR LOGOLOOBI: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay, members? We have already established up there. So I put the question that clause 10 (1) (b) is amended as proposed by the chairperson

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is still sub clause (2) which we shall deal with. So, can I ask for the minster to move for the House to resume as the Muslims need to break their fast now.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, The Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Population Council Bill, 2011” and has passed clause 1, clause 3, clause 4, clause 5 as amended, clause 9 as amended and clause 10. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: We stood over some -clause 2, clause 4 and clause 5.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, the Committee of the whole House stood over clauses 2, 4 and 5. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to move that the House adopts the report of the Committee of the whole House. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MRS ONGOM: Madam Speaker, I want a recommittal on clause 6.

THE SPEAKER: When we go for the third reading you can bring it. Honourable members, I want to thank you for the work done. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 7.04 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 23 July 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)
