

Wednesday, 20 July 2016

Parliament met at 2.05 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. You notice that we have lots of matters to do with issues of urgent public importance. This is mainly because substantially, on the Order Paper, we do not have a lot of business. However, starting tomorrow when the Business Committee sits and business of the House is determined, those matters will be fewer because the Order Paper will be more loaded with other business.

Honourable members, those of you who have been coming to the Speaker’s Office to raise matters of urgent public importance, get prepared especially those that do not fall within the exceptions. You are going to start using more motions, more parliamentary questions and more petitions to process issues that have been outstanding for a long time and have not been attended to. Otherwise, very urgent matters of public importance will still qualify to be raised under this particular procedure.

I have three or four Members who came and said they want to raise matters, if we can do that before 3 o’clock because after that it will be Prime Minister’s Question Time. Let me end and allow those members to raise their issues and I will start with the Member for Workers.

2.07
 MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

I rise on a matter of national importance, which requires urgent attention. There is an issue of safety of workers in this country. I would like to put it to the House because my constituency cuts across all other constituencies represented by members here.

A number of workers are dying because of negligence; the safety precautions at work places are not adhered to. I will not hesitate to name some of the companies that are very negligent and a number of people have already died in there. These companies are involved in steel milling and the examples are Tembo Iganga and Tembo Lugazi Steel milling companies.

Last June, a number of people got accidents and a one Juma died. Others are still lying in the hospital at Kiruddu in Makindye. Last week, another person died at Kakira due to electrification. Workers have complained to us as their representatives, saying there is abuse of their rights. These companies employ cheap labour, which is not skilled and deploy them in technical work like running machines.

Mr Speaker, another issue which has come out is fatigue. These workers are made to operate the machines for more than 10 hours. This is not allowed for someone working in an industry and/or running a machine.

Therefore, I call upon members to work with me so that we convince the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to put a strong team to inspect these companies. However, we need to request that the Minister of Labour provides us with a detailed report on these matters because a number of people are lying in hospitals, some of them not compensated because they are employed as casual labourers; they are not catered for. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have taken note of the issues raised by the honourable member. We are going to get in touch with Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS)to move in on those specific issues that she has raised especially the issue of Tembo in Iganga.

Secondly, we will require the Minister of Gender Labour and Social Development, working with the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to come to the House and make a statement. Otherwise, the beginning point is that UNBS should check on those industries that have been mentioned so that the rights of Ugandans working there can be protected.

2.11
MS SARAH BABIRYE KITYO (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): I rise to talk about the number of youth that are dying in the waters. The fishing business is good but it is very expensive to the young people. As they go to fish, they use illegal fishing nets because they cannot afford legal fishing nets.

Therefore, I beg the Government and this honourable House to support me and my colleagues because we intend to move a motion so that we reduce - just like we do not pay taxes on other agricultural inputs - taxes on fishing nets because our young people are dying as a result of illegal fishing. 

That is all I want to raise and I beg that this House considers it and we do something about it. Thank you very much.

2.14
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, let me first apologise for coming in after your arrival in the House. We were in Cabinet, but I requested hon. Bahati to stand in for me.

I just want to inform hon. Sarah Babirye,that fishing gears and fish nets were included on the list of agricultural equipment. The issue of children dying in the waters will require sensitisation of the fishing communities. Amongst the fishing communities, fishing is the only activity. There is a high rate of school dropouts because when these young people go in the waters, they get the fish, sell it and get money. This really needs concerted effort with the local governments managing landing sites to encourage parents to take these children to school and maintain them in the school. 

However, if she has other issues, like she has indicated, we will wait for her proposal and at that time we will offer further clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you are ready with that motion, please notify the Speaker’s Office for it to find space on the Order Paper so as to be presented to the House for a discussion on it before finding a solution to those young people’s business. 

2.16
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on an urgent matter of national concern. Yesterday, one of our national stadiums was closed down by Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) due to tax arrears amounting to Shs 448,000,000. The closure affected the Bika bya Buganda Football Tournament, which was on-going as well as football training of our youth, who play for six clubs and have been practising in that stadium. 

This is not the first time they are closing the stadium over the same issue. It was done in 2015 and it is being done today. Worse still, it is being done after the minister in charge of sports announced a new board to manage the stadium. This board has people who have been managing the stadium for the last five years under the same circumstances, to the point that URA now demands Shs 448,000,000 in arrears.

Why is it of a national concern? Next week, this stadium is going to be used by the national team, the Uganda Cranes, for training as they prepare for the last game in their group for the African Cup of Nations Qualifiers. Therefore, if not handled urgently, we might lose out. The public might also not understand us, as members of Parliament, if we do not add our voice to the matter by tasking the minister in charge of sports to handle this issue and give us a report on how far he has gone towards securing the reopening of this stadium. 

This stadium faces many challenges due to mismanagement hence the arrears of Shs 448,000,000. I rise to let this House know that this matter is urgent and affects the sports fraternity. I thank you. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is not a new matter. In the last Parliament, the same issue surfaced on this Floor. I remember either a special committee was set up or the matter was sent to the relevant committee to investigate issues relating to Nakivubo Stadium; it has been an on-going concern. 

The information I would like to give this Parliament and the presenter of this issue is that there has been a chronic disease with Nakivubo Stadium. This matter has been a concern in this House. However, I am not so certain whether that committee produced a report and whether Parliament debated that issue. Otherwise, the issue you are raising is not new. It has been on-going and I think this Parliament has overtime failed to pronounce itself on this issue. I beg to move. 

2.21
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Allan Ssewanyana for having raised this important matter. I also thank the hon. Muwanga Kivumbi for the information he has given the House.

Mr Speaker, this matter concerns two sectors - I think Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) is involved. You know we now have a substantive Minister for KCCA. I am not calling upon her to come and give an explanation now -(Interjection) - I beg for your protection against hon. Theodore Ssekikubo. Therefore, it cuts across sections in Government. 

The information that hon. Muwanga Kivumbi has given is very pertinent. If the Ninth Parliament handled a similar matter, I think it is in order - now that committees of Parliament have been constituted - to give chance to the relevant committee to handle this matter by summoning all the stakeholders. That committee will report to this House for debate and hopefully we will find a way forward. That is my humble request. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, the point raised by hon. Allan Ssewanyana is that Nakivubo Stadium was closed yesterday yet there is going to be training next week for the national team to prepare for their competition. What is going to be done? This is urgent because by the time the committee sits and the minister prepares a statement, the training period will have lapsed.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I beg your pardon. In the meantime, I will ask the Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority to come and tell us what immediate way forward she can offer us. She could probably negotiate with the Executive Director of KCCA so that we do not suffer. Hon. Betty Kamya, please - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let her do it.

2.23
THE MINISTER FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Betty Kamya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank hon. Allan Ssewanyana and hon. Muwanga Kivumbi for raising this important matter. I also would like to thank the Government Chief Whip for giving a preamble before my communication. 

It is true that Nakivubo Stadium was closed. To my knowledge, it is because they have defaulted on their taxes. Therefore, it is the duty of the tax collectors to take action as they did. It is also the duty of the people interested in the activities of the stadium, like the sports fraternity, to raise this matter.

Mr Speaker, I undertake the responsibility of looking into the matter and coming up with a good position because we are all interested in sports and we want to support it. However, that does not mean that we should also not support the tax collectors. Anyway, tomorrow I shall come up with a good position for everybody. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is there a matter from Pian County? 

2.25
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Regarding the loan of about $ 85 million, which was passed by this House in November 2014, this loan was meant to take high voltage electricity to Katikekile sub-county in Moroto. This high voltage of 132 KV was meant to facilitate the construction of a cement factory in Moroto.

Mr Speaker, it is now two years down the road and we are not seeing that loan being operationalised. The investors who are interested in constructing that cement factory, I am told, have given notice to withdraw from that investment.

Many times, the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development comes to this House and presents a number of loans for this Parliament to pass. It is two years down the road since this money was borrowed. We signed the contract and interest is accruing. This country is paying a lot of money in interest on the loan.

Mr Speaker, this is not the only loan that has not been implemented. If I may recall, there are a number of loans, right from the Eighth Parliament, that have not been operationalised. This House is aware that in the budget we approved recently, we are paying Shs 6.4 trillion in interest, to people we have borrowed money from. We have borrowed the money but we are not using it.

To the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the relevant ministry; Ministry of Energy and Minerals, let us know why these loans are not being operationalised, particularly, the one that was meant to take electricity to Moroto –(Interruption)

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give to the honourable colleague and honourable members is that as the Committee on Government Assurance we are going to dig up all the loans that we have taken so far so that we get to know how they have been utilised and where the challenges are, because that is part of Government assurance.

When Government brings its request for loans, they indicate what these loans are meant to do. The information I am giving is that, that is one of the assignments we are going to begin with to ensure that there is value for money and accountability.

MR REMEGIO ACHIA: Thank you, colleague, for that information. Mr Speaker, this is very critical. If you follow it from the beginning, you notice that our total budget is about Shs 26 trillion. Why should we borrow money that we do not use? Who is this person that is responsible for not implementing such loans? What is the problem? Why should the loans be brought to this House for us to approve, when there are factors that constrain the loan to be implemented? Why should we continue bleeding; spending by paying interest? Interest accrues on this loan every year. Why should we continue paying Shs 6.4 trillion, of which I am told that Shs 2.1 trillion is as a result of loans that have not been implemented? Mr, Speaker, Shs 2.1 trillion is a lot of money that this country can use for other vital activities.

Therefore, will the minister bring to the Floor of Parliament the details about this loan, so that this House can take appropriate action?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the issue raised by the Member for Kawempe, on Government Assurance Committee tracking loans, I think there is another mechanism for tracking the performance of loans. We will ask the minister to elaborate on this, because those documents are within Parliament. If you can extract them and bring them forward for us to see how our loans are performing, that would be helpful. 

2.30
THE MINSTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, hon. Remigio Achia for raising that issue. In fact, it was raised at the end of the Ninth Parliament and we promised to give the status of the projects that are being financed by the different loans.

However, I would like to inform the House that at the end of every quarter, we give the performance of a loan portfolio. I would like to inform this House that it is true we are still within the limits that we set ourselves. We are still within the debt strategy that we agreed as Parliament.

However, I agree with hon. Remigio Achia that the performance of our loans is really poor. We have had bad habits by different implementers, of shooting first and then target after they have shot, which has - you know that you want money but the reason why you want it, you determine afterwards. We have corrected this and we are insisting, as a Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development, – because, Mr Speaker, we have had a number of issues, which we would like Parliament to assist us on. One – (Interruption)

MS ABABIKU:  Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. You have just made a statement that the implementing agent first asks for the money and later comes to justify, put their targets, which affect the level of utilisation of this money - if I got you right.

However, what I know is as Parliament, we have been approving this money in this House. Does it mean that we are often deceived by you, ministers from finance, with the justification you always give? This is important to come out because we normally approve these loans after you have given justification to members of Parliament. I need that clarification. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, my sister Jessica. Yes, there are some loan portfolios that we have identified that were not well thought out. That is what I meant. They look for money when the project is not actually well thought out and when they start implementing it, they experience problems.

The other point I also would like to make is that – (Interjections) - can I first finish then I give you the opportunity? Let me first make my point –(Interjections)– is it friendly? (Laughter)

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I hope you are not insinuating that I am normally not friendly. Anyway, since you rose to clarify on a friendly issue as raised by the hon. Remigio Achia, this remains friendly within the confines of your response.

Mr Speaker, I get worried when the honourable minister starts blaming his entity on the Floor of this House. Like the hon. Jessica Ababiku has put it, when loan requests are brought to Parliament, there is normally a lot of pressure and justification for them. In that regard, I would like to seek clarification from you on the proportion of those loans that are sought without a clear need; the ones you gamble around with to conform to what the money should be used for.

I am also aware that there is a loan that was approved by this House for the upgrading of Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi and Pallisa-Kamonkoli roads and I believe that those roads are really a necessity, but to date, everything has gone mute. Would you, therefore, clarify whether that is one of the loans that was gambled and we see what we can do? Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg the House to allow me to give this information first because when you interrupt my submission, my statement may be misinterpreted. Anyway, the point I was trying to make is that we have gone to the bottom of the issue of loans that are not performing. It is important to note that one of the contributing factors is that some few loans were not well thought out. And I think I have a duty to tell the truth to people’s representatives in this House. But we are going to solve that and the different sectoral committees can help us - (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you for being honest. When can you come before this Parliament to give us the list of those loans that were not well thought out; the loans for which we borrowed money, when we shouldn’t have borrowed, for Parliament to take action including maybe rescinding such loans? (Applause)

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much. I do not know why my brother has abandoned me to go the other side, he should have -(Laughter)– Anyway, we are going to come up with a report about the performance of loans and the reasons why we think some loans are not performing and what we are doing to correct that situation.

Mr Speaker, any time we are ready, we shall ask for space to come and give the House the performance of loans indicating why we think they are not performing and what we are doing to correct that.

On the particular issue that was raised by the hon. Remigio Achia on the extension of this power, I would like to say that in a meeting that I attended with the Minister of Energy – and that minister will come and explain further – there was an issue to do with facilitating this cement factory in Karamoja.

I am told that the power line that was developed was of a low voltage and the Ministry of Energy is moving very fast to increase the voltage to be able to facilitate this factory. We are very sorry for the delay but we are doing our best, as Government, to make sure that we correct this. Thank you.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Speaker, to follow up on the minister’s statement, the first line that was constructed to Moroto and which was under rural electrification, was of $10 million and of 33KV. After that, Government said 33Kv could not run a factory. That is how they came up with that loan of $85 million to increase the voltage to Moroto. That is why we borrowed that money in 2014 and that is what I have been asking why since 2014 – anyway, we shall wait for that statement.

However, a follow up on that request that I am making is: What is the size of the fiscal risk or the amount of money that we are paying in interest when we fail to implement such loans? How much money are we giving out due to failure to utilise monies borrowed? What is the impact of that on our budget and Uganda’s economy? That is my second question. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you should put that in your statement that you are going to bring so that we do not start discussing it when it is not substantially before us. Thank you. That will be it for urgent matters.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE INTERVENTIONS TO CONTAIN THE FOOD SHORTAGE IN TESO REGION

2.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, while it is true that the food situation in Teso is dire, and the ministry was ready with a paper specific to the Teso area, I would like to draw the attention of this House to the fact that the different district disaster management committees have told us that the matter is bigger than what is in Teso.

It is against that background that I have come to request you, Mr Speaker, to allow my ministry to compile a comprehensive report that does not only speak about Teso - (Interjection) - but speaks also about Karamoja, Teso, Acholi, Kasese, West Nile and all those areas that have been affected by extreme weather conditions.

I strongly suggest that given the report that I saw before I came to this House, we should be ready by Tuesday. Mr Speaker, I would like to request in the same vein, that you use your good office to direct my colleagues from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to also come here and explain to the country the state of crop failure in Uganda. This is so because what is happening is that there is a problem - and my part is to address the consequences of crop failure and I address them by providing emergency food relief to the affected communities. 

However, the country needs to know what has happened to food production, particularly in the first year and what the responsible ministry intends to do because my ministry will only be specific to relief because that is my mandate. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what have you done from the time you got this information last week in respect to Teso?

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, as for Teso, we have mobilised some resources from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and economic Development. It, however, took long but some resources have started trickling into the department and we are going to start addressing Teso and Karamoja concurrently.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us leave this matter here because it is more than we can discuss now.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS ON:

TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 2012 AND JUNE 2013

2.44
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Unfortunately, I do not see the papers to lay. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, what happened? Where are the papers?

MR RWAKAJARA: Mr Speaker, they are bringing them. Please give me few minutes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. In that case, can I ask the honourable member who had a matter to raise to do so now?

2.45
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Mr Speaker, I rise to present a very pertinent issue currently affecting this country. 

While this country is aware of the food crisis arising out of prolonged drought, which emanates from climate changes, I am surprised that where my people have resettled between Amuria, Napak and Abim, yesterday and today, my colleague the Member of Parliament for Abim, accompanied by soldiers and the police invaded the gardens of my people and were ploughing down crops using a tractor.

People were yelling for their dear crops - even when there is famine - but Government representatives from the military and police watched as crops were being ploughed down yet as a nation, we are crying for food to be delivered to our people. 

Previously, there was going to be a catastrophe with bloodshed but we worked very hard -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is why it is important for you to consult with the Speaker before these matters come on the Floor so that we discuss the parameters without going beyond what this House can take at a particular time.

This House’s discussions are televised live so, it is better when we try to make it proper for the wider community to listen to what we are saying. In that regard, I will pause this discussion for now. We will only deal with the matter that you raised about food security issues because when you start talking about another Member of Parliament - there are rules that govern this. 

That is why it is important that you come to the Speaker and we agree on the parameters of what you are going to raise under urgent matters but the way you are moving does not give the House dignity. 

MR OCHEN: Mr Speaker, most obliged for your guidance, although I have about nine members in jail arrested by the RDC Otuke with the army and the police. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will see how to deal with that matter tomorrow, hon. Ochen. I am in charge of keeping the dignity of the House. Honourable members, we will pause at 3 o’clock. Has the document for laying arrived? 

2.48
MAJ.GEN PECOS KUTEESA: (UPDF Representative): Mr Speaker, this is my maiden speech and I beg your indulgence for a few minutes. I beg everybody here, in whatever group he belongs to, to set us a parameter. We have got five years from now, after which we will see what we will have achieved. 

In our method of work we identify a problem; come up with possible solutions and we divide the path. It is called mission command. Can we identify the potential and what should be done in these five years? 

Life is just a race now, it is our time to run to hand over the button to the next. Why should we, when talking of national issues, bring out small grievances? Why should the UPDF be cited in any discrepancy to gain sympathy from the public? The UPDF took time to build its image; please do not tarnish it. We are members of the UPDF – I would like you to understand the word “UPDF.” (Laughter)

The letter “P” stands for “people” and who are the people? As an individual, the people I stood for are my father, mother, wife and children and immediate neighbours who happen to be Ugandans by birth; so, I belong to this group. There is no way you can detach the UPDF from what is going on in public. A reflection of your soldiers is your reflection, whether you are in the Opposition or in Government. Please, do not damage our name. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, General. That was his maiden speech and that is why I am not going to allow anybody to raise any matter. (Laughter) However, General, we have a mission command; our mission command for this Parliament is always issued by the Prime Minister and we have just received one long list. Our mission command is implemented annually through sessions of Parliament.

In each session, we have three meetings and in each meeting, we have several sittings. This is the first meeting of the first session of the Parliament and the Prime Minister has just issued the mission command. Tomorrow, the Business Committee of the House will sit to determine the strategic and tactical implementation programme for that command. (Laughter)

The Business Committee will break down which business should come first and which should follow and up to the end of the first session of this Parliament, which is one year of Parliament and then we move to the next. Therefore, it is implemented annually; the overall long-term thing is there but it is implemented annually.

It is almost time for the Prime Minister’s Question Time and if he is ready, we should be able to start. I am giving us an additional five minutes to proceed and if the Government Chief Whip could stop engaging the Prime Minister when the Speaker is trying to attract his attention - Honourable Prime Minister, if you are ready, we could start five minutes early so that we can have additional time. 

Honourable members, rule 34 allows us ,every Wednesday at 3 o’clock, to engage directly with the Prime Minister and ask questions on policy issues; things that we need improved and things that they may know and we may not know, so that we can expose them to the general population and see how this country’s management can be improved. We always think that the Prime Minister has the information and that is why we pose these questions to him. 

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is the time to ask these questions. I congratulate people from the left hand side of the House, who have on this occasion indicated specifically who will raise what question to the Prime Minister and in what area. Congratulations! That is how we should do it.

We shall have the honourable member for Kilak County North, the honourable member for Soroti Municipality and the honourable member for Busongora North. The first one will ask a question on finance, the second on environment and the third will be on health but we will try and inter-change. I am hoping that by the next Prime Minister’s Question Time, we will have this kind of stratification so that we are organised in our operations.  

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I heard you clearly congratulate the left side on how we shall move on the Prime Minister’s Question Time. It appears the left side has both the Opposition and the Independent Members and it would be quite complex in what would happen to the Independents, if we follow what you have just read to us. 

Mr Speaker, I pray that we are considered separately as Independent Members since we are not part of that list.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was just appreciating the attempt made by this side. I have not said that those who have not put their names here will not speak. (Laughter) Have I done that? I couldn’t have meant that by any shred of interpretation. All I was saying is that if it could be done this way, it would even facilitate the Prime Minister in terms of dealing with issues that would arise. That is why I am congratulating the persons who submitted these names as well as the areas of questions. 

It is now Prime Minister’s Question Time and I will start with the honourable member for Kilak North.

2.56
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Mr Speaker, my question originates from section 19(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 which states, “The minister shall publish a post-election economic and fiscal update not later than four months after the polling day of a general election”. Section 19(2) states: “The economic and fiscal updates shall-

    a) detail all the election-related spending including the expenses of the Electoral Commission for the cost of the general election and any other expenses of a vote related to the election;

    b) be accompanied by a statement signed by the Secretary to the Treasury stating that the economic and fiscal updates include-
    i) all policy decisions with economic and fiscal implications that Government made before the day of which the contents of the economic and fiscal updates were finalised; and
    ii) all the other circumstances with economic and fiscal implications which the ministry was aware of on the day on which the contents of the economic and fiscal updates were finalised.” 

I request the minister to lay it on the Table. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt hon. Prime Minister, it is a command of the law that after an election, certain documents should be laid. Where are those documents? I think that is the question.

2.58
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to salute you for helping and guiding this House to properly use the Prime Minister’s Question Time so that all of us can benefit. Secondly, I would like to compliment the side on your left for showing a good degree of organisation in order to make sure that we use this time well. (Applause) These are welcomed as progressive measures that will benefit the House and the country.

With regard to the question raised by the honourable member for Kilak County North, I am assured by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the required information is ready and should be laid on the Table, tomorrow. I thank you.

3.00
MR ROBERT SSEKITOLEKO (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, H.E the President in his inaugural speech to the Cabinet put forward a number of strategic directives that would see Uganda rise to a middle-income country by 2020. Among the many directives, the President said he would want Government to revive the Uganda Airlines. Indeed, this tallies with the second National Development Plan which made provisions, suggesting that Uganda should have a national carrier.

Hon. Prime Minister, would you like to give us a synopsis of your intended implementation plan so that all the stakeholders can be able to follow? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I would like to salute the questioner because it is true that Government has decided, as announced by the President, to revive or set up a national airline in order to meet the economic and other strategic demands that the country, which is land-locked, is facing. Already, the responsible Government agencies have been tasked with the responsibility of evolving and bringing about concrete plans to re-establish the airline. 

With regard to involvement of many stakeholders, I do expect the responsible Government agencies to make extensive consultations on the matter. When the plans are ready, this House will get a report on concrete progress. What is factual is that work is already going on under the directive of H.E President Museveni on the re-establishment of Uganda Airlines.

3.03
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is about debts owed to the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA).

The Auditor-General in the year ending June 2015 said that the National Environment Management Authority was owed up to Shs 9.2 billion. Key among the debtors to the National Environment Management Authority are Government entities and agencies. Among others, the Ministry of Works and Transport owes NEMA Shs 1.2 billion; the Uganda National Roads Authority, Shs 900 million; the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, Shs 3.3 billion; the National Social Security Fund, Shs 500 million; the Civil Aviation Authority, Shs 520 million; and Kampala Capital City Authority, Shs 73 million. The Auditor-General said that failure by the debtors to pay this money to NEMA would result in failure by the authority to implement its planned activities. 

The question to the Prime Minister is, what steps has Government taken to ensure that Government entities clear the debts owed to NEMA? If nothing has been done yet, when does the Prime Minister hope that the Government will be able to arrange for payment of this money to NEMA so that it can execute its planned activities? Thank you. (Applause)

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question raises a very important matter of indebtedness to not only NEMA but other service providers by Government ministries, agencies and departments.

Government is fully aware of this problem and in order to deal with it decisively, the Secretary to the Treasury and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, have issued  instructions to accounting officers to ensure that when money is released for the current quarter, prioritisation should be made on paying arrears. From the information you have given, this sounds to be part of the arrears that will be cleared by the release of this quarter.

3.06
MS OLIVER KATWESIGYE (Independent, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Rt hon. Prime minister, the people of Buhweju are mainly tea growers, thanks to Government for the continued supply of seedlings. However, I do not know whether the same Government is aware that in Buhweju, there is only one factory which does not consume all the tea leaves harvested per day. 

His Excellency the President, promised another factory in 2013 and I have been following up the matter. He even wrote to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to take up the matter. However, up to now, there is no sign of construction of another factory in Buhweju. Rt hon. Prime Minister, what do you have to say about the matter?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the question raised is significant. It is true that the people of Buhweju have been producing a lot of tea and only few years ago, Government spent money to establish that factory. However, it is also true that the current production is overwhelming the factory. Yes, Government has decided to expand the capacity of tea production and manufacturing.

As to the specific details, the minister responsible for finance, planning and economic development should come and give specific details on how far this matter has gone. However, Government is fully aware and it has already decided to expand the factory capability and facilities.

3.08
MR STEPHEN KISA (NRM, Luuka County South, Luuka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime minister, under your office, Government has been and is still undertaking special and social adjustment post-war programmes for various regions in the country including northern, Luweero, Karamoja, Teso and many others.  

Mr Speaker, Busoga region is one of the areas that is suffering from the devastating effects of the Alice Lakwena Holy Spirit Movement rebellion since 1987. The people of Busoga lost their lives and property specifically in the districts of Luuka, Jinja, Mayuge, Namutumba and many others in the region. As a consequence, this war is one of the underlying causes of persistent poverty in the Busoga region –(Laughter)

May I know from the Prime Minister why Government has not considered Busoga for similar special affirmative action programmes and also compensated the people of Busoga for the last 28 years since Lakwena was defeated in 1988? Why the delay? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the question of war and problems in Busoga has been given a lot of attention in this House, especially in the Ninth Parliament. It was resolved by Government and Parliament that Busoga should get special attention.

In fact, the Office of the Prime Minister is already working on a programme to ensure that the people that were affected by conflicts mainly spearheaded by Lakwena in Busoga region are given support. The details of the programme will be made available to this House as soon as they are ready. However, we are in advanced stages of working out a programme to uplift the situation in Busoga. I thank you.

3.12
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue I am raising is about emergency drugs in health facilities. There is lack of medicine in most Government facilities and this has been a challenge resulting in the death of many Ugandans as reported on 4 July 2016 in the New Vision.

Mr Speaker, there is a 20-year old woman, who died of a snake bite  due to lack of anti-venom in the two health centres of Alido Health Centre III and Aduku Health Centre IV. My question to the Prime Minister is, does Government carry out monitoring to find out if there is availability of such emergency drugs in health facilities in the rural areas?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, yes, Government does carry out regular monitoring to assess the availability and stocking of various drugs in hospitals and health centres. It is, however, true that some of the drugs like anti-venom and others are fairly expensive and, therefore, sometimes, their supply is not as routinely available as we would want because of the resources involved. Nevertheless, monitoring continues and every effort is made to ensure that stocks of drugs are available to meet the requirements of the wananchi.

3.15
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, in the Eighth Parliament, a select committee was identified to move across the country to establish the facts and challenges faced by communities whose livelihoods depend on livestock - the pastoral communities. I was a member of that committee. We did our work very well after moving to the many districts but from 2007 to date, I have never heard anything more about that. I do not know whether this reality has been abandoned or we still have hope.

My question to the Prime Minister is: What is the current position of Government in this regard? Do we still think this policy is important because we had already got the findings and challenges? 

I believe if this policy is developed, it will yield a lot of opportunities for this community where most of the people live below the poverty line. For instance, the rate of income generation will increase among the people. It will also be able to promote opportunities which can help them promote livestock product exports. What does Government say about this policy? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we will need to get the specific report that was published and presented so that we can give more specific information on the matter. At the moment, I do not have any specific information but we will get the report and see how far Government has gone in implementing it.

3.17
MR DENIS HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, my question to the Prime Minister is on the sports sub-sector and football in particular.

Mr Prime Minister, aware that Uganda last qualified and played in the African Cup of Nations in 1978 and cognisant of the fact that we are left with exactly 54 days to the last match of our group that will be played on 3 September 2016 at Namboole between our national team, the Uganda Cranes, and the national team of Comoros, may I, therefore, know from you, just like our country earmarked over Shs 1 billion towards the campaign for the African Union Commission Chair, how much we have earmarked as a nation in support of the preparation and campaign of our national team, the Uganda Cranes, come 3 September 2016 at Namboole? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I can see there is high mobilisation already to cheer the Ugandan team. (Laughter) Perhaps, that is the biggest investment and asset our team has; national and parliamentary support.

With regard to resources, you may be aware that Government has been very generous in making money available to support the Uganda Cranes in this tournament, especially the African Nations Cup competition. All of us are really looking to September and the Government will do all that is possible to support the Ugandan team to ensure success. Thank you. (Laughter)

3.20
MR VINCENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Mr Speaker, I would like to address this question to the Prime Minister.  You are aware that the people living in the Mount Elgon zone or Bugisu Region, for decades, derived their livelihood from cultivating and getting food crops from across the Mount Elgon National Park. After the boundaries were readjusted, these people were asked to move away from Mount Elgon National Park. 

However, in the recent meeting you had with the leaders of Bugisu Sub-region, you promised that you were going to reorganise, with your technical experts the boundary between the national park and the community so that the people living within the vicinity can live amicably.

We would like to know, Mr Prime Minister, how far you have gone in implementing this commitment. Thank you

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, hon. Woboya, is absolutely right. The policy of Government is to ensure that the wananchi near the national park and the national park authority live in harmony. It is true that Government agreed with the wananchi in the area that there should be reopening of the boundaries so that the wananchi who are affected know where they are and where their crops are growing.

That exercise of reopening the boundaries is going on with the support of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. When that is done, it will be an important step in ensuring that the wananchi know their limits and are able to live in harmony with the national park authority. Therefore, we are on course and we fully support the harmonious existence of the wananchi and the national parks.

3.23
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Towards the end of the Ninth Parliament, we amended the Public Finance Management Act which opens the door for Islamic banking. May I know when these banks will be operational?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Islamic banking has been approved by Cabinet and Parliament is happy with it. The Bank of Uganda, to the best of my knowledge, has supported and approved it too. What is remaining will be the operators to effectively put it in practice so that the wananchi can benefit from Islamic banking.

3.24
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, the Ninth Parliament passed a motion for the creation of new constituencies, districts and municipalities. As I talk, we have members representing those constituencies, which were created and there are on-going activities for electing those representatives at district level. May I know when the Government will come with the roadmap for election of the representatives of the new municipalities created? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my understanding is that the election roadmap is in place. At least I know that primaries for the National Resistance Movement (NRM) candidates are already in full swing. In fact, some were held last week and others yesterday. Therefore, the roadmap should be in place. If it is not, we will cause it to be in place almost immediately but I expect that it is in place.

3.26
MR ODRIA ALIONI (Independent, Aringa County South, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. At least today I managed to catch your eye. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, during the State of the Nation Address, our President mentioned that we need to achieve middle-income status by 2020.  That means we have four years to achieve it. His Excellency mentioned that we lose a lot of money to China and India. To achieve the middle-income status, he mentioned key points like industrialisation, agricultural mechanisation, among others.

However, if we look at China today, I would say it is the most industrialised country in this world as well as India. China achieved this in the last 15 years from early 90s-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, draw to the question. This is question time.

MR ALIONI: Okay, Mr Speaker. My question is, if you take China as an example, it invested much in imparting scientific skills in the Chinese mostly in the US and the UK in the early 90s. What strategies does Uganda have in these four years to impart the right skills to achieve industrialisation and attain the 2020 middle-income status?

On agriculture, currently, if you go to the countryside, we are distributing hoes to households instead of tractors at least to sub counties. Do you think that by distributing hoes, we shall be able to achieve mechanised agriculture by 2020? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my brother from Yumbe has raised two issues: industrialisation and transformation through agriculture. Those are important agricultural instruments that literary have made Uganda what it is today because they have been our main stay in terms of implements of agriculture. It is true that with modernisation, Government is deliberately encouraging tractors but, we know that tractors will not reach everywhere like in Yumbe and other places in the country within a short time. Therefore, it is a process. As we increase tractors, hoes will gradually decrease. The two are complementary and the country needs both tractors and hoes. 

On the question of industrialisation, I share the comments made about the People’s Republic of China. Uganda is already making good progress. You have already heard the announcement by Government that it is going to put up 22 industrial parks in order to ensure that manufacturing capability is enhanced and investors do not have to invest too much money looking for land in order to start their personal industries. 

These industries will require manpower; but you have heard that Government has already announced that they will focus on training technical manpower and in addition retrain graduates who stay for a long time without getting jobs in their respective disciplines so that they can be reskilled and made employable in some of these new facilities in the 22 industrial parks. In a nutshell, Uganda is on course to become a mid-income status country by the year 2020 and all of us should play our role to make sure that we reach that target.

3.32
MS REHEMA WATONGOLA (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, first and foremost, I would like to thank His Excellency the President for availing us funds for working on the Kamuli-Jinja Road. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the Parliament for approving those funds.

Mr Speaker, a section from Kiroba to Kamuli which is about seven kilometres, has no humps. It is on record that we lost the Chairman LCV sometime back because of not having humps on that road. Today the contractor is no longer on the road. May I know from the Prime Minister, whether that road is complete or not? Between March and June, we have lost about 15 people and we have not gotten any explanation from the Government about that section. Otherwise, we would like to appreciate Government for the funds allocated to Kamuli- Jinja Road. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the concern of hon. Watongola about the accidents taking place – we are all aware of the serious road carnage that the country is facing. There are some notorious areas like Masaka Road where we are losing many people. Government is doing whatever it can to repair and construct roads to make them safe.

However, let me also take this opportunity to appeal to us, the drivers and other road users to ensure that we follow the law, watch out against speed and protest against drivers especially of public vehicles, who drive when drunk. I believe that public action and community mobilisation against bad driving, over speeding and drunk-driving will play a positive role in cutting down the accident rates. 

At the same time, the Ministry of Works and Transport will do all that is possible to put in place the necessary safeguards on our roads and provide adequate road furniture so that the motorists can be able to see where they are going. Nevertheless, let us all engage ourselves in sensitising people about safety on our roads.

3.36
COL. (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): I thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is about the business conducted by foreign companies in Uganda.

Information available is that foreign companies employ 65 per cent of foreign nationals. It also indicates that foreign companies repatriate 100 per cent the interest.

My question is whether we have any legal framework, as a Government, that allows Government to audit foreign companies in order to control or regulate them so that they can employ Ugandans, control profit repatriation and reinvestment in the country. I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the question raised by Col. Mwesigye is important. Fortunately, the ministry responsible for immigration has the necessary legal framework and tools, and the same Ministry of Internal Affairs has the enforcement arm to ensure that the law is followed so that there is no need to import people into our country when we have the skills locally.

We need to be sure that the Ministry of Internal Affairs enforces the requisite immigration laws so that this country only allows in foreigners who provide skills that we do not have in our country.

In regard to repatriation of profits, the finance ministry and the laws of Uganda clearly provide for repatriation of money. I think that, those are sound laws and should be followed. If there is any lacuna, then Col. Mwesigye should bring it to either the finance ministry, immigration department or the Prime Minster for specific attention.

3.38
MR JACKLET ATUHAIRE (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): I thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is about maternal health and maternity leave. I would like to thank the Speaker, Rt hon. Rebecca Kadaga, for the state of the art baby nursery that she has spearheaded. I am thinking of those who do not have such facilities and are public servants with little children. Many mothers give birth by caesarean section and it is quite unfortunate to see these mothers leave their little ones, some as young as one month, to come back to work.

It is my humble prayer that maternity leave be increased and we should not also forget the fathers whose paternity leave should also be increased. I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: The importance of maternity leave is appreciated by all of us and by the way, there is one element of paternity leave that needs to be highlighted because that mutual support is necessary and the baby benefits from both the mother and father.

Government does not employ very many people and so actually, most mothers are employed by the private sector. However, the call you are making of more considerate treatment of mothers by a longer maternity period is very good. It is not only good for the mother but even more important for the baby who is growing and, therefore, important for the country that will benefit from that baby.

3.41
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is related to the Standard Gauge Railway project implementation. We in Lugazi Municipality have been seriously affected; we have about eight schools, including Kawolo Hospital that are going to be demolished with the implementation of this project.

It appears that the implementation is in a higher gear compared to the compensation programme. What is the Government programme so far in regard to compensation? I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: The Standard Gauge Railway is a project that all of us are looking forward to because it is going to connect the East African Region with the rest of the world at high speed.

In the process of this, a number of institutions, shops and houses will be affected. The implementation unit is already in high gear to ensure that proper and adequate compensation is made to the people affected and to the institutions that will be affected. We also want to ensure that the institutions that we have are properly catered for or placed in other areas that will clear the way for the railway.

3.43
MR ANGEL MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani County East, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am aware that at sub county level, health centre IIIs exist to save not less than 20,000 people and health centre IVs do also exist at county or sub district level to save not less than 100,000 people.

As I talk, Adjumani holds not less than 160,000 South Sudanese refugees who are sharing the same facilities that remain constant. May I ask the Prime Minister to confirm to this august House that we in Adjumani we receive the same health services just like in the other districts despite the increased numbers?

May I also request you to put aside our health policy in relation to what I have spoken about, the health centre IIIs and IVs and to elevate our health centre IIIs to the status of a health centre IV in order to serve our people and also decongest Adjumani Hospital?

The doctors in Adjumani Hospital are in trouble. They struggle for space as they move from one bed to another to check on patients because the beds and floors are all filled up. I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Rt hon. Speaker, I would, first of all, want to salute the people of Uganda in general and the people of Adjumani in particular for being able to host many of our fellow Africans, mainly from South Sudan and even DRC, in the camps. I am also happy that the people have lived harmoniously with these visitors or refugees.

With regard to the facilities, it is true they have been sharing facilities like schools and health facilities. However, it is also true that the UN offices responsible for refugees make resources available to help the refugees. Therefore, the refugees have been sharing what Uganda Government provides for her people and Ugandans in Adjumani have also been benefiting from some of the facilities provided by the UN to the refugees. That sharing, that harmonious living, should be supported and promoted by the political leaders including, my honourable brother who raised the question.

3.47
MR CUTHBERT ABIGABA (NRM, Kibaale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker and members. I have a question for the Prime Minister, which is about implementation of a constitutional provision.

Article 4(a) of our Constitution requires the state to promote awareness of the Constitution by translating it into Ugandan languages and disseminating it as widely as possible. It is now over 20 years since this Constitution was promulgated and a bigger size of our population has continued to live under ignorance of the law. During the campaigns and even after, people in my constituency kept lamenting that we seek their votes to come and make laws but at the same time, they remain ignorant of the various legislations we make.

I would like the Prime Minister to enlighten the House and the nation at large on what steps have been taken or what roadmap is in place towards the realisation of this constitutional mandate. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Rt hon. Speaker, I agree with the Member that the wanainchi should be conversant with the Constitution and that the Constitution’s provisions should be made available in their languages and also simplified. I have seen some simplified versions but I do not remember seeing versions in local languages. 

The minister responsible for constitutional affairs should come and tell this august House what measures they have put in place to ensure that Article 4 of the Constitution is implemented.
 
3.50
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuuku): Thank you very much, Rt hon. Speaker. I would like to thank the Rt hon. Prime Minister very much for the effort he is putting in to explain all these issues. 

The biggest thing I keep hearing about is policies. We have great policies as a country. We have education policies, health policies, food security policies; we have industrial parks, agricultural parks and aquaculture policies. All these policies are very beautifully written. However, my problem is, when will these policies ever be implemented?

I have been reading about the food policy for this country over the years, but today we are talking about food shortage in Teso and all those areas. I am looking forward to hearing what the Minister for Disaster Preparedness will tell us because while we have very good policies, we keep fire fighting in most of these instances.

The other thing is that many times we say we cannot implement our policies because we do not have money. Over the years, we have confidently said that our income as a nation has risen since 1986. I do not know how much we raise today, but we have borrowed so much money, which we are not using, to implement the things we want to implement.

My question is what are we doing to make Uganda different? We are looking at the year 2020, hoping we will get to the next level of middle income status by that time. I wish we could see it happen but as long as things are running the way they are, I do not think it will happen.

I was reading about the UNRA probe report in today’s papers. Apparently, the report is being blocked by the courts. Does that mean we are covering up for people who have eaten our money? Once we do that, whatever we want to do as a nation will remains a dream. I would like to see policies implemented. I am from the Opposition but it is my constitutional mandate to see Uganda become a better country.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, on the question of whether we are covering up for people who have eaten our money, the answer is no. Nevertheless, we respect the separation of powers; Parliament has its own jurisdiction; the Executive has its authority, so let the courts of law of Uganda also enjoy their own latitude. I have confidence in them and I know they will be able to do the right thing for the country.

With regard to being very good at policies and falling short on implementation, I agree with hon. Gonahasa. There have been areas where our performance has been definitely inadequate. That is why in this kisanja, we are calling on everybody to pull up their socks and do whatever they can to ensure that they move at a much faster rate during implementation. We want to fill the gaps. 

The Government has been making a deliberate effort to find out why there have been problems of implementation and where the roadblocks are. Government is already in the process of clearing those roadblocks and I am very confident that we are going to see speedier, faster and better delivery of services to the wanainchi of Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Right honourable, what is “kisanja”, because the official language here is English? (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Rt hon. Speaker, kisanja – and I heard everybody laughing because they are enjoying the rejoinder by the Speaker - means “term”. In this case, our term of office is five years.

3.54
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Today Uganda is experiencing a lot of public fundraising by patients who wish to be treated abroad. Last Sunday, I saw on Bukedde Television 50 patients fundraising to go abroad for heart treatment. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, where is the health sector? Where is the Minister of Health? I have also heard about patients, who were already admitted to Mulago Hospital for eye operations, crying for help. I have also heard, from the media, that private clinics are now hiring specialists to treat their patients. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, could you tell the House what measures the Government is putting in place to safeguard the public against those who take advantage of public fundraising through conning people? Two, how is the Government helping Ugandans access specialists here to treat patients? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the question of healthcare in the country is very pertinent. It is true that some of our patients have now been going abroad for specialist treatment. Fortunately, because of the capacity the country is building both in the private and public sector, these numbers will soon come down. 

Within the last year or so, Kiruddu Hospital in Makindye Division and Kawempe Hospital have been opened. Mulago Hospital today is mostly closed because of extensive rehabilitation and modernisation. However, two new hospitals specialising in very many areas will soon be constructed. One is going to be constructed at Lubowa and it will be a specialised hospital supported by some teams from Europe, particularly Italy. Another hospital, whose foundation stone was laid recently by President Museveni and the Aga Khan, is going to be built at Nakawa. It will be a university teaching hospital. 

Therefore, whereas there are clear challenges on facilities, it is true that the private sector and Government are putting up new and modern facilities. They are also developing human capacity in terms of specialists both within and outside the country. In my view, it is a problem that is going to be under control.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, by the operation of our rules, this should have been the time to end this – after one hour. Honourable members, I am going to seek the - and when the Speaker is speaking, usually Members remain –(Laughter)- I was going to seek the indulgence of the Rt hon. Prime Minister so that he gives us more time; otherwise, according to the rules, the Prime Minister’s Question Time is up. 

The Government front bench has been letting us down. Since yesterday, we have not got the statements that we should have discussed.  Even today, the honourable minister did not present the only statement that we should have had. Therefore, Rt hon. Prime Minister, you owe this House a lot of time. I am going to ask you for an additional one hour so that we can at least engage with more members, as we try and zero down on the issues. If you have the time, you could give us one more hour and we rise at 5 O’clock - that will be a lot of time - and then I will give the Leader of the Opposition time to give a response. I have a long list and that is why I am asking for more time. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: I rise on a point of procedure, Mr Speaker - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But now you are using up the time we have negotiated for.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I intend to be quick, Mr Speaker. The essence of these questions is that once they are raised, the entire country stands to benefit from the responses by the Prime Minister. However, as you realise, there is no room for one to ask elucidatory questions; for example, if you want the Prime Minister to clarify on something, there is no rule for that in our rules. 

Mr Speaker, I have listened to the questions from the beginning. I listened to the question on Uganda Airlines but I did not get a specific answer to when we shall have Uganda Airlines. Another question was concerning foreigners; 65 per cent of them are involved in our local companies. I also did not get any specific answer to that. There was a question raised by hon. Gonahasa concerning when we shall achieve middle income status; we did not get the answers. There was also a question about the standard gauge railway for which the Member said nine schools including Kawolo Hospital are going to be demolished; he did not get an answer to it. 

Mr Speaker, how best can we benefit from this question time so that once questions are asked, we can get answers. Apparently, it looks like a public relations stunt and Members comfortably sit down thinking that they have been heard. How are we going to get the answers once they are asked, so that we all benefit from this question time, Mr Speaker?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would be repeating myself if I attempted to answer that question because that is what I said last Wednesday. It is exactly the same question and I said what I was about to give as an answer, so I will not respond. What I said last time was that the rules committee needs to look at this again to see how we can improve on making this time more useful. However, for now, that is what the rules say and that is how we are going to proceed. 

4.03
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Mr Speaker, my question to the Prime Minister is from objective (vii) of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, and it reads, “The State shall make reasonable provision for the welfare and maintenance of the aged.” 

Mr Speaker, I know that Government made a provision to give Shs 25,000 per month to the elderly. Today in the canteen, I had a meal of Shs 14,000. I would like to know from the Prime Minister whether this Shs 25,000 is capable of sustaining a person for a month. Number two- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One question. 

MR MBAJU: It is related, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One question, please. Let us share the time. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the essence of paying the Shs 25,000 is not necessarily to sustain somebody for one month; it is merely an effort by Government to augment the efforts of the elderly to sustain themselves. 

Although the money is relatively little, many elderly people have found this money useful. In fact, there is more demand in areas where the programme has not reached to ensure that this Shs 25,000 gets there. Therefore, let us get the country covered with this Shs 25,000. The amount could be augmented as resources in the country improve.

4.06
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka County South, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My question relates to Local Council (LC) courts. 

We have what we call the Local Council Judicial Powers Statute, which creates LC courts, and we know that a local council committee is made up of nine people. The Government policy has been that the chairperson of the committee gets paid Shs 10,000 and it is only the chairperson who is paid; all the other people on the committee are not paid. Ultimately, what happens is that these courts end up being constituted by only the chairperson and the other members do not participate. Therefore, what would have been conflict resolution at the lower level is not done. Instead, it breeds corruption and creates backlog because most cases end up in court when ordinarily, they could have been addressed at that level. 

My question is as we move towards electing new LCs at the lower level, is there provision to have members of the committees paid so that they are empowered and encouraged to do their work? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the point is well taken. However, I think that it is something to be more thoroughly examined because if you think of paying the eight people, the cost will definitely be substantial. However, as I was coming up to answer hon. Kafuuzi’s question, I whispered to the honourable Minister of Local Government, Col Butime, and I am sure that he will come to this House to throw some light and give more information on the issue about payment of LC leaders with regard to the judicial courts. 

4.08
MR JULIUS ACHON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a Member of Parliament and at the same time an active athlete. First of all, I would like to thank my colleagues as this is my first time to speak in this House; I am so excited and delighted. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let me guide you. This is specifically for questions. Please, do not go into a speech. (Laughter)

MR ACHON: Yes, Mr Speaker. Today I am here to sound the voice of the sports fraternity. I would like to add on to what hon. Hamson Obua said. As you know, sports personalities in the country do a great job but are not given help. I am one of those sportsmen. When I won a gold medal in 1994, I was not honoured. Had I not got a scholarship to the United States, I would be dead. 

David Kamoga won a gold medal in 1996. In 1997, we won another gold medal and Dorcus Inzikuru also won a gold medal. This year, sports personalities are going for the Rio Olympics. I would like to find out if there is a way in which Government could come up and start giving these sportsmen bonuses.

The President initially came up with a good idea of giving bonuses from the time Kiprotich won a gold medal, but they have since stopped. Why have they stopped doing this? Some of these athletes are dying because of poverty. I, therefore, request your office to work on this. When these sportsmen win a medal for Uganda, they should be considered. I would like to thank you so much and I hope that my prayer will be considered so that something is given to them for their retirement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member has just won, this last week, a silver medal from Australia. (Applause)

MR ACHON: That was on Sunday and I was awarded $50,000. (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: I think we should definitely congratulate our brother, hon. Achon, for that victory and the silver medal. It is true that the House is lucky to have such a distinguished athlete, a record holder, who has been awarded internationally and who is also an advocate for sports. I am sure that the House and the country at large will immensely benefit from your experience. 

I have also had an opportunity to go to Otuke and be hosted by hon. Achon at a big health centre that he has put up for the wanainchi in Otuke. I think that service is deeply appreciated.

It is true that the honours committee considers meritorious Ugandans for award of medals and I have no doubt in my mind that hon. Achon falls easily in this category of Ugandans. I think that the committee responsible will be considering cases similar to that of hon. Achon. In my view, your words are not wasted but they have helped the responsible committee to take note of that information and follow it up with appropriate consideration and possibly, another medal.

4.13
MR JOSEPH KASOZI (NRM, Bukoto County Mid-West, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There were recent press reports attributed to the Executive Director of UNRA in which she was unequivocal in saying that she will not construct any more roads because UNRA does not have money. She also added that only roads that are donor funded would be constructed. 

Mr Speaker, we have just been through an election and the Government promised to construct a number of roads in many of our constituencies. I read the policy statement of the Ministry of Works and Transport and a number of roads have been listed, some of which already have identified contractors while others are at the design level. In view of this statement by the Executive Director of UNRA, is the Government renegading on its contractual obligation and the social contract that it made with the people of Uganda by pulling out? 

We have just read the budget that was passed by the Ninth Parliament and more funds were given to the Ministry of Works and Transport, specifically UNRA. Why now is the person in charge saying that they do not have the money? Have you withdrawn the money? I would like to seek clarification.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the manifesto of the National Resistance Movement (NRM) and what it promised will be implemented in accordance with those promises. 

Secondly, the budget as presented by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will be implemented. If there is to be any change, this august House will be adequately informed by the responsible minister, say the Minister of Works and Transport. The roads will be done as promised and as listed in the budget. If there is any change, it will come to the House. There is no cause for alarm; the NRM and Government are not retracting from the pledges they made to the citizens.

4.16
MR ATKINS GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In 2010, when Bududa was confronted with a challenge of landslides, Government - and I want to thank Government - graciously deployed two earthmovers, each at a cost of Shs 1 million. This means that every day, Shs 2 million was spent on these earthmovers to retrieve landslide victims.

Mr Speaker, the other day I was trying to do some research and it occurred to me that Government is still spending Shs 2 million on the two machines and yet the reason for the deployment of these machines in Bududa was to retrieve the bodies of the landslide victims. I believe in submitting using facts arising from analysis. This means that every year, 365 days, multiplied by Shs 2 million per day, will result into Government spending Shs 730 million. It is now six years of spending this money on these earthmovers, which translates into Shs 4,380,000,000. 

Mr Speaker, I request that the Rt hon. Prime Minister helps us with the processing and payment schedule of this money. I am interested in knowing the source of the money and the people that run the account at the approval of Government machinery. Why should Government spend Shs 2 million daily and continue to do so even after the purpose for which they were deployed no longer exists? I am meant to understand that these machines are no longer working and are grounded in a subcounty in Bududa. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this point was raised before. We have put machinery in place to resolve this matter. I will ask the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, hon. Musa Ecweru, to make a statement in this House on the final position regarding this embarrassing matter.

4.20
MR RICHARD OKOTH OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, your office is implementing the third phase of a post-conflict reconstruction programme known as the Peace, Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP) for Northern Uganda. This programme covers seven sub-regions, which include Bunyoro, West Nile, Acholi, Lango, Teso, Karamoja and Bukedi. Of these sub-regions, Bunyoro has a minister handling their affairs; West Nile, Acholi and Lango have a minister under northern Uganda handling the affairs in that area; Teso has a minister handling Teso affairs and the same applies to Karamoja. However, when it comes to Bukedi, they are marginalised. 

My question to the Prime Minister is where do the people of Bukedi present their problems so that they can also be handled under this reconstruction programme? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I would like to assure my honourable colleague that there is no discrimination against the people of Bukedi. There is a programme for northern Uganda reconstruction and it covers all those areas. It is also true that there is the necessary technical staff that cater for all those areas, including Bukedi. After all, this is a programme to reinforce existing Government programmes. 

There are already many existing programmes and the CAOs and other administrators in the Bukedi districts also oversee this very programme. Therefore, there is really no problem. However, if there is any specific gap that the honourable member feels has been created because of lack of a minister for Bukedi, he can draw it to the attention of the Office of the Prime Minister to take the necessary measures to deal with that problem - not the appointment of a minister for Bukedi but practical problems facing the population.

4.23
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is more than a week since I raised a matter of urgent importance pertaining to emergency relocation in Bududa and the levels of vulnerability that people are living in, in the high-risk hills. I have seen a number of Order Papers reflecting ministerial statements on interventions sourced from matters of urgent public importance, including today’s Order Paper which features a statement on containing food shortages in Teso region. Incidentally, issues of emergency relocation fall under the docket of this same minister.

Rt hon. Prime Minister, you pledged total commitment to have this matter expeditiously handled. May I know from you why there is selective attention to matters of urgent public importance, especially this one of Bududa, which touches human life?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules prohibit making statements that suggest that there is improper motive on the part of another Member. You need to observe that.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is definitely no favouritism or discrimination against the wanainchi in Bududa. On the contrary, special attention has actually been paid by Government to the situation in Bududa. Government is, even today, carrying out a major programme of resettling people from Bududa areas that are threatened by possible landslides to safer areas in Kiryandongo. Therefore, there is no discrimination. On the contrary, the Bududa population may be taking a lion’s share in the resettlement programme.

4.26
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much, Rt hon. Prime Minister and the Government of the Republic of Uganda for re-demarcating the border between Congo and Arua, specifically at a place called Vurra customs point. There was chaos, lawlessness, upheaval and death at that place. The Government re-demarcated that place and now there is peace and tranquillity in that area.

Rt hon. Prime Minister, we in Moyo will not get tired of reminding the Government to re-demarcate the border between Sudan and Uganda at Kajo Keji and Moyo so that we also have peace in our place. When will the Government do that? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this is quite an old problem. We are aware that there have been rather nasty skirmishes along the border. I will ask the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, in the course of this coming week, to give a roadmap on the demarcation process, which will sort out this matter once and for all.

4.28
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the Rt hon. Prime Minister, who is also the Leader of Government Business, to assure the House when we shall have a post-electoral report on the economic and fiscal update according to the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, that question was already asked at the beginning.

MS OGWAL: Yes, but can the Rt hon. Prime Minister let us know whether the election has negatively impacted on the economy or not? I know the question was asked but I specifically would like to know how the election has impacted on our economy.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, the elections and its aftermath have helped to settle the country and to stabilise the economic processes and development in the country.

4.30
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on the issue of the standard gauge railway. Compensation for the people affected along the standard gauge railway has started in my constituency and I would like to thank the Government for that. Unfortunately, my people have received lots of money that most of them have not touched before and this has caused a lot of problems. The men have run away from their homes. (Laughter)

As we wait for many other areas that are going to receive this money, I would like to find out from the Rt hon. Prime Minister what plans the Government has to sensitise people, who have never touched money, on financial discipline, to avoid a bigger problem that will arise. If the men finish the money at the trading centres, they are going to return home and start selling the land that is left since they will have gotten used to nice and sweet things. I beg to find out from the Prime Minister.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is good to know that the standard gauge railway project has already started meeting its obligations with the wanainchi. It is of course of concern that this may be leading to the breaking up of families and the straining of relations. However, I would like to thank the honourable member for bringing this to our attention because there are many other areas where payment has not yet been done. Therefore, this is an opportunity for us, as representatives of the people, to sensitise the population and alert them that money is coming but it can be your enemy; make sure that you use it profitably with your family. Do not run away with the money to the urban areas. 

Honourable member, thank you so much for that information. All of us should take a piece of that information to help stabilise our respective communities and families so that they can wait and benefit from the standard gauge railway and its services.

4.33
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (NRM, Bugangaizi East County, Kakumiro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Government has neglected its mouthpiece - the national broadcaster, Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC). As we speak, UBC stations upcountry have been off air for a month. It is said that this is because UBC has not cleared electricity bills amounting to over Shs 3 billion. 

The Government has been giving a grant of just Shs 1 billion every financial year to UBC. They have 10 radio stations, two TV stations and employ over 500 workers. Sometimes, Government feels ashamed to use UBC during some major functions and resorts to other private stations. 

Rt hon. Prime Minister, what is the Government’s intervention in as far as strengthening the national broadcaster, UBC, is concerned? This is because UBC is your mouthpiece but you are neglecting it.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government is not neglecting UBC. Nevertheless, the honourable member from Bugangaizi is right to say that we should put in more focus, attention and resources so that UBC can rightly compete with others. 

I think His Excellency the President’s decision to galvanise the information sector under one ministry is part of the process of reorganisation of the sector, including reorganisation and strengthening of UBC. The point is well taken that UBC should indeed be a real national broadcaster, should reach every part of the country and should never be switched off because of failure to pay electricity bills. 

4.35
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand on a point of concern about the status of cancer in Uganda. 

Two months ago, a girl called Carol appeared in the newspapers. She is just one of hundreds and thousands of cancer sufferers in Uganda. Some women and men are out there rotting with cancer. For us, the women, we are prone to cervical and breast cancers. However, I am very concerned about the status of the cancer machine in Mulago Hospital. Even in our regional referral hospitals, we do not have scanning machines or anything to protect us against cancer. I am very worried. 

It would be prudent for us, as Members of Parliament, when we get such problems, to be treated in our country by our own doctors. What strategy is Government coming up with to make sure that a cancer machine is brought to Uganda and even the referral hospitals get such equipment? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member has raised a very important subject which has, again, been a matter for the country to discuss. Cancer is definitely becoming a much more dominant and devastating problem than ever before. As we control infectious diseases, the non-infectious diseases are increasing. Of course, cancer has a component of infection because some of the cancers are related to viruses and other organisms. Nevertheless, the point is well taken.

About a month ago, Mulago had a foundation laid – I laid that foundation on behalf of H.E. the President – for a new radiotherapy facility, which will increase the capacity of treatment of cancer patients many times over. In the meantime, we are getting some support from some of our neighbouring countries to ensure that our patients get proper treatment. With these two modern hospitals I have talked about coming to support Mulago, that is, the university teaching hospital at Nakawa by Aga Khan and the specialist hospital at Lubowa, we shall see more facilities for cancer treatment coming up. 

We have also decided that all regional referral hospitals should become cancer treatment centres. At the moment, we are in the process of raising the requisite manpower and facilities to ensure that this is actualised.

4.39
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, for the last three months, pensioners have not received their money. When are they going to receive their money?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I thought that the issue of pensioners had already been straightened. I am going to ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come and explain. If there is anybody whose money should be paid, it is definitely pensioners to be paid first.

4.40
MR ROBERT NTENDE (Independent, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand on a point of concern for the people of Bunya County South. 

Bunya South constituency has a forest called Busoga South Forest Reserve. Around October last year, H.E. the President delegated the Prime Minister to go and see to it that the 48 villages that the President promised the people of Bunya County South are clearly demarcated, surveyed and handed over to the people. Actually, around 500 hectares were gazetted for the people around Bukaleba. 

I would like to know from the Prime Minister, since the President mandated him to do this job how far has he has gone with the duty of ensuring that the people of Bunya County South settle amicably in that place? This is a place where we have thousands of people but no health facilities, roads or water. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I confirm what the honourable member said, that H.E. the President directed the Prime Minister to handle this matter. I actually went there accompanied by the then Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, hon. Daudi Migereko, and a number of technical officers. 

The decision has been confirmed and the wanainchi are going to stay in the areas that you have described. The survey was delayed because of cash flow. We expect that money released in this quarter will be available to complete the survey so that the wanainchi can live in peace and in secure boundaries without being threatened by the forestry authorities. Therefore, the matter is being handled by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. Survey money should be coming in this quarter so that the surveyors can carry out their job.

4.43
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. About five years ago, Government committed itself to giving a bicycle to every chairperson LCI. No sooner had that commitment been made than some people dipped their fingers into the money and most of the money was stolen. 

However, Government continued with its commitment and somehow gave a few bicycles to some districts. To date, most parts of the country have not received these bicycles for chairpersons LCI. May I know from the Rt hon. Prime Minister when this commitment will be fulfilled?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this is obviously a very sad story. Money was released for buying bicycles for LC leaders and somebody had the courage to steal this money. Fortunately, the culprits are in court. 

The Minister of Local Government was asked to mobilise resources and I want to believe that this money is in the budget. However, it is such an important matter of public importance that the Minister of Local Government, Ndugu Tom Butime, will be asked to come and brief this House on this issue so that you, in turn, can share the information with the wanainchi and the LC leaders. 

Nevertheless, this was such a nasty occurence and actually an eye-opener on how officers embezzle public funds. Fortunately, it shows that Government has capacity as the people concerned were arrested and dealt with.

4.45
MR HERBERT KINOBERE (Independent, Kibuku County, Kibuku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Rt hon. Prime Minister is who is responsible for allocating funds and carrying out assessments in primary schools? 

I ask this question because last weekend, I was in my constituency and I was approached by a headmaster from one of the schools. He informed me that they received funds of about Shs 170 million to construct classroom blocks. However, this school has more classroom blocks than pupils. When they sat down with officers from the Ministry of Education and Sports, they were informed that if they were not willingly to take up construction of more classroom blocks, they would withdraw the money from the account of the school.

Mr Speaker, this school has no staff quarters. The teachers come from as far as 13 kilometres to teach. The management requested officers from the Ministry of Education and Sports to have the money diverted, with their approval, to the construction of the staff quarters. However, the officers told them that if that is what they would like to do, the money would be withdrawn and taken away. Now the money is on the school account but this morning, they called and told me that they are worried because the money may be taken any time.

My concern is who is responsible for assessing the needs of schools? Recently, I was watching TV and I saw some schools where pupils still study under trees. This means that there is no clear assessment. The money is just allocated maybe for purposes of contractors getting money or stealing money. This is a very good school which has very nice buildings. Therefore, I am wondering why the Ministry of Education and Sports cannot accept that this money be reallocated so that we can have the first staff quarters for this school. Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government money is distributed under various Votes and under specific programmes. If money has been allocated for building classrooms at a local level, I cannot see a decision just being taken that they have enough classrooms and therefore, they can use this money for another purpose.

However, I would expect the district education office, which is responsible for supervising primary schools, to give authentic information, deal with that situation and take an appropriate decision to guide the school. Again, if there is a problem, then contacts can be made with Ministry of Education and Sports, which has the overall responsibility to ensure that the education sector in the country is on course.

It appears to me, therefore, that this matter can be easily streamlined with the assistance of the Minister of Education and Sports or the technocrats responsible. This is not a complicated matter. My advice is that if you give a call to the Minister of Education and Sports or to the technocrats, this is a matter that can be easily sorted out.

4.50
MR GORDON ARINDA (NRM, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. The matter I am raising concerns the first quarter release to the local governments. Rt hon. Prime Minister, most of the local governments, including Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, have not received money for the first quarter. 

We have information from the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to the effect that every 14th day of July, the funds would be on their accounts. The local governments have made all the required submissions, including budget framework papers or budgets, procurement plans and quarterly release requests. However, up to now, they have not received the first quarter releases and this impacts heavily on implementation of Government programmes at the local levels. May I, therefore, know what is going on, Rt hon. Prime Minister?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, money for all departments for the first quarter should have already been released. I know ministries have received their money. However, this is a matter I will straight away take up with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to ensure that money for the first quarter, where it has not been released, is immediately released.

4.52
MR OSCAR OMONY (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Over the weekend, I was in Kitgum and we had a meeting with the youth council. The youth of northern Uganda raised the issue of hepatitis B. Hepatitis B is taking down the young people of northern Uganda. They were crying to me that they are paying Shs 30,000 for vaccination and yet they cannot afford this. Rt hon. Prime Minister, how can you intervene to save the lives of these young people of northern Uganda? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the issue of hepatitis B has been extensively discussed in this House; it was even discussed about a week ago. Where there is scarcity, people tend to take advantage. It is true that hepatitis B vaccines are fairly expensive and, therefore, they are not yet easily affordable. I think that is why some people may be playing monkey tricks and taking advantage of the population. 

I will alert hon. Jane Aceng, the Minister of Health, who is acquainted with this very problem. I will give her the information that you have provided so that she can intervene.

4.53
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Mr Speaker, 10 years ago, the Prime Minister presided over a very important process in Juba; the Juba peace talks. There were a number of fundamental arguments made at the time and the Government came up with a draft transitional justice policy. How far have we gone with this policy? It is long overdue and implementation should have started.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as you very well know, it is true that in 2006, a number of us from the central Government, mainly from northern Uganda, and religious and political leaders, with support from the Government of South Sudan, engaged Joseph Kony and the Lord’s Resistance Army. This took us a number of years. However, eventually, we reached agreements with the Lord’s Resistance Army. 

Joseph Kony told us in Ri-Kwangba, when we met him, that he was ready to sign the agreement. Mr Speaker, we went to Ri-Kwangba with church leaders, political leaders and President Chissano as a special envoy of the UN Secretary General. We waited for three days for Joseph Kony to come and sign the agreement. He never appeared and up to now, he has not appeared. We are still waiting for him to sign the agreement. (Laughter)

President Museveni was supposed to sign the agreement. When his time for signing the agreement came, he flew to Juba and met the leadership of South Sudan - President Salva Kiir Mayardit and Vice-President Riek Machar. However, President Museveni could not sign the agreement without Kony signing. 

Let me tell you one or two major things about those discussions. First of all, it was amazing when we signed the cessation of hostilities agreement in August 2006. The Lord’s Resistance Army combatants, who were scattered in different areas of northern Uganda, were able to respond to the cessation of hostilities agreement. They assembled at UPDF barracks, churches, LC leaders’ and community leaders’ residences. They were welcomed, given food and shown routes to walk to Owiny Ki-Bul in South Sudan on the eastern part of the Nile and Ri-Kwangba on the western part of the Nile. We, therefore, regard that as a major point because Kony’s elements were cleaned out of northern Uganda and the wanainchi have lived in peace since then. (Applause) I must quickly add that this came about because Uganda People’s Defence Forces defeated the Lords Resistance Army and after that defeat, it became easier to carry out various negotiations.

Secondly, I would like to pay tribute to the people of Uganda for the amazing solidarity that was forged. People forgot their political parties and religions. People of different persuasions were united in going to Juba or Ri-Kwangba to talk with Kony in order to have peace in northern Uganda and, therefore, in the country. That solidarity, in my view, must be saluted. 

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, it was extremely touching that the young Government of South Sudan, which had just gotten into power - before its independence, of course - was able to make its leadership available to Uganda in order to try and reach an agreement with the Lord’s Resistance Army. President Salva Kiir gave us a lot of time and his Vice-President, Riek Machar, was the one chairing the talks that we had.

I am glad that my brother has raised this very important point. This has enabled some of us to pay tribute to the people and Government of South Sudan, who hosted the talks; the wanainchi in Uganda; the political and religious leaderships; the Government of Uganda, who supported the talks; and finally but critically important, the men and women of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces who sacrificed a lot in order to defeat the Lord’s Resistance Army. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, as I was walking to my seat, Ndugu Musa Ecweru, the commander of the Arrow Boys, asked, “How about the civilian forces?” It is true that the wanainchi organised as Arrow Boys, Amuka, LDUs and others did extremely commendable work and supported the UPDF. That combined effort brought victory against the Lord’s Resistance Army. (Applause)

5.01
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda County North, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you and the Government for the written report I have been reading about helping Ugandan traders and businessmen who are suffering. However, I would like to ask, what is the criterion you are using to choose these big business people whom you are helping nationally?  I ask this so that even other big traders from places beyond Kampala can come in and benefit. 

Of course, we would also like to know the timeline, especially for traders who had business with the Government of South Sudan. How far has the process of ensuring that they are helped gone? I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that Government is committed to supporting the business sector including those under stress now. However, we will do so in accordance with the laws of Uganda and without discriminating against those who may be in rural areas.

It is a general policy; the detailed mechanisms have not been articulated. However, it is in the interest of all of us to stand side by side with our business community to ensure that they do not go under but on the contrary, they pick up. If they go under, it means loss of jobs, opportunities and development.

My colleague, hon. Tayebwa, is a very well-known business person who has a lot of information, especially about trading with our brothers in South Sudan. We will deeply value your input in this process. (Laughter)

5.04
MS VERONICA BABIRYE (Independent, Woman Representative, Buyende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question I have for the Prime Minister is about the integration of East Africa. Rt hon. Prime Minister, Uganda has been part of the integration process for some time now, but little has been realised. What is Uganda’s strategic interest in the integration of East Africa?

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The question is a very important one but I do not share the pessimism expressed by my sister, suggesting that not much has been achieved. 

Actually, the East African integration has been undergoing some curves in its growth and development. In earnest, when it was moving very well, you remember Mwalimu Julius Nyerere declared that he was ready to delay the independence of Tanganyika so that Kenya and Uganda could come along and East Africa gets independence together. That was a very revolutionary and pro-unity statement. 

After that, there was a tag of war as to who would be who. There was fighting for positions and then, that speed went down. Eventually, it was revived and the East African Community was moving very fast. However, we had to again deal with the collapse of the community because of Idi Amin who could not be accepted by the rest of East Africa. 

Our President and the neighbouring presidents sat again and revived the effort and since that time, we have been on a steady course. A lot of progress has been made. An East African government is in place and East African institutions have been strengthened.  Integration of various economic projects has been undertaken in earnest. The standard gauge railway we are talking about is part of the fruits of this process of integration. We are getting closer politically. I am glad that next to me on the front bench is the Rt hon. Kirunda Kivenjinja, the Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for East African Affairs. 

In a nutshell, the benefits include a common market; increased trade in the region; free movement of the people of East Africa; all you need is your identification card to be able to go anywhere in East Africa. East Africa has expanded; it is no longer the three countries. Now we have Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania as well as Burundi, Rwanda and South Sudan that has also joined. 

Therefore, in conclusion, Mr Speaker, the people of East Africa have scored tangible progress in the march to have deeper economic and political integration in East Africa. We are now looking forward to more steps, which will eventually end up in the East African federation. Thank you. 

5.08
MR PETER SIMON SEMATIMBA (NRM, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to ask a question to the Rt hon. Prime Minister regarding road safety and the carnage that Uganda is suffering right now. This is especially after 24 people lost their lives on Masaka Road. 

I decided to use my machinery at Super FM, our social media and our research team, to find out something very simple, and that is, how many of the people in Uganda driving vehicles today have the standard proficiency to operate a vehicle safely - how many of them know how to drive properly; how many of them know the road signs; and how many of them have actually got a driver’s licence after proving proficiency.

We were shocked to find out that over 80 per cent of the people that we questioned did not have proper driving licences from the Government organs that give them out. In fact, many of them have not been tested and do not know what the road signs are and what the rules of driving are.  

Therefore, my question is Rt hon. Prime Minister, bearing in mind that we do have the organs that are supposed to ensure that everyone on the road is trained and tested to know what to do on the road, what can you do to make sure that the organs in charge of this swing into action? What can you do to ensure that they start enforcing and making sure that everyone on the road today in Uganda has a proper driving licence and the driving licence was acquired after they were tested and proved to have the minimum standard proficiencies of operating these vehicles? By the way, it is even worse for boda boda riders, according to our research. Over 90 per cent of them do not even have a licence. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as we said, the human wastage through road carnage has been a terrible thing. The statistical information that my brother is giving, subject of course to verification, is very disturbing. Cabinet has considered this matter and set up a team to ensure that the responsible Government agencies do their work, including examining some of the areas that have been talked about. Therefore, I share the concern that has been expressed. 

Government is committed to following up this matter, especially verifying that people have been tested and do not just have “magendo” driving permits. Mr Speaker, magendo may be –(Laughter)- fake driving permits. It is a major issue of concern. I am one of those who believe that many of these accidents are caused by people who have inadequate driving experience and who may not even have licences. Government is taking steps to crack down on that and ensure that our roads are safer and are used by people qualified to drive.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for extending the time. The rules allow the Leader of the Opposition to make some rejoinder. After that, we shall conclude and see how to end today’s business.  

5.12
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will start with the poor public transport management they are talking about. Poor management of public transport increases accidents and loss of lives, cost of production and doing business, and constrains mobility and accessibility to markets, among others. This is attributed to the absence of a coherent public policy and multi-sectoral transport regulatory authority. My question to you, Rt hon. Prime Minister, is when will Uganda have a public transport policy and multi-sectoral regulatory authority, which was envisaged in the National Transport Master Plan, 2009? 

Secondly, there are trumped-up charges of 10 people in Kasese from the July 5 2014 attacks and the violence during the aftermath of the 2016 general elections. Why has the Government consistently and reluctantly detained these innocent Ugandans?

Finally, Rt hon. Prime Minister, a number of roads have been closed in the Central Business District (CBD) without clear and elaborate explanation to the would-be users. Why has the Government allowed illegal closure of these critical roads in the CBD, which has consequently culminated into unnecessary traffic jam that comes with loss of time, business and productivity? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the point about improved management of transport is well taken. The minister responsible for transport has already presented a paper to Cabinet and Cabinet has considered the establishment of a transport authority to take charge of these matters. Those works are in progress. We have also considered the establishment of a Kampala metropolitan transport authority to ensure that there is harmonisation of transport plans, not only in the capital city but also in all the neighbouring areas of the metropolis.

On the issue of trumped-up charges and the arrest of people in Kasese, we should let the courts of law decide on whether to dismiss any charges that are found to be false or sentence those with a case.

I do not have information on the illegal closure of roads in the CBD. However, I am going to follow up this matter with the Member that raised it, and other persons concerned, to ensure that this matter is addressed accordingly.

Mr Speaker, as I resume my seat I thought that I should mention that in December 2004, my brother, now the Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, and I went to Kitgum and then Palabek to meet the first group of Kony’s people. That was 12 years ago. As the Speaker may recall, it was a testing moment because we reached a stage where we were told that vehicles would no longer be used to move further and yet we were in a bush that had been cleared by burning but still difficult to walk through. 

We ended up at the top of a small hill. Kony’s people were guarded by his soldiers who were about 50 metres behind us while the UPDF that was guarding us were also some 50 metres away. The two teams met and that meeting was a good meeting. However, we agreed that we should meet again. We waited for Kony’s group for another two or three days and as usual, they were delinquent. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to very sincerely thank you for the personal role you played and continue to play in making sure Uganda is peaceful. (Applause) I salute you for setting a very good example to be emulated by all of us. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt hon. Prime Minister, for allowing us to extend this time. I think that it has given the members an opportunity to interact even more. We should find a way of making the Prime Minister’s Question Time work better.

I think today, in my assessment, has been better than what we have been doing in the past because the discussions have been very intense and the responses have been fairly better than the ones we have been getting in the past. I think there has been a big improvement. (Applause) The Prime Minister has now realised that this is for our mutual benefit because when members leave the House with questions in their minds, those questions will always come back and they spend time doing the same thing over and over again. Therefore, today, we have done fairly well. I can only say that we can only do better than we have done and that is the way to go. 

Honourable members, I thank you very much for today. The House will resume at the normal time tomorrow. This sitting is, therefore, adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock. Thank you.

(The House rose at 5.21 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 21 July 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 

