

Wednesday, 11 July 2018

Parliament met at 3.08 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Rt Hon Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, the Leader of the Opposition, members of the Cabinet, Members of Parliament. I welcome you to this sitting and thank you for the work you have been doing during the recess. I trust that you have had time to interact with your constituents on the issues discussed both in the State of the Nation Address as well as the Budget Speech.

I also take this opportunity to congratulate the people of Uganda for exercising their right to elect leaders of their choice at the lowest level, which is very important for our security, communication and engagement. There was a lot of scepticism about the lining up method. However, I would like to congratulate the Electoral Commission for really doing such a wonderful job. Most of the country has got their leaders.

Honourable members, during the recess, I attended the Uganda-Canadian Diaspora Business Expo and Convention in Toronto. I bring greetings from our sisters and brothers there. There is a lot that we can learn and borrow especially on aspects of improving our service delivery and investment climate. 

I am happy to note that the Uganda Diaspora in Canada is doing a great job of marketing Uganda. There is a company owned by Ugandans called Gumax International, which now has six restaurants in the United States of America selling Ugandan food. That week, they were opening one restaurant in Canada. They are proposing to increase the supply of organic food from Uganda by engaging in farming but also engaging contract farmers from here to supply them, which I think is good for us to make a better chain.

I also went to China at the invitation of one of the citizens of China, who has been working in this country. When he returned to his country, he established the Uganda Culture Park in Hunan Province, where there are replicas of animals and birds of Uganda in a forest. It is so attractive that to go there, you need to book early - you cannot just walk in - because of the high demand.

What I found most interesting is that the young people who designed the animals are Ugandans from here on Entebbe Road. They are the ones who sculpture these things which you see on Entebbe Road. They now have animals there. That is what is there in China. We are now exporting our brains. The young people are doing it there and they are all graduates of art and design. It was very exciting.

Honourable members, I would like to inform you that on 25 July 2018, we expect the Prime Minister of India, Rt Hon. Narendra Modi. He will be addressing this House on that day in the morning but the time will be communicated to you. Please, be available on 25 July 2018.

On a different note, in the last fortnight there has been uproar in the community over the imposition of certain taxes under the recently passed Excise Duty Act. I have received a number of petitions. First, I received one from the mobile money operators in a petition signed by 226 of them in Kampala. They claim that they have been run out of business because of the level of taxation. They are complaining and they say it is actually three per cent and not one per cent. They are paying one per cent for receiving money and one per cent for sending money. They are also paying one per cent on withdrawal of money. They say that there is actually a decline in mobile money business since this started. They already pay tax on airtime so they do not see why we should continue to tax them. They are complaining about multiple taxation.

I also received another petition from the Makerere University Students’ Guild who claim that the tax on social media has made it more costly for them to do their research. I understand the lecturers now use WhatsApp to send notes and they also send their research through the same system. They say it is now expensive for them to even do research and send their work. Therefore, they would like us to address that one. They have told me that teachers no longer use email; they are now on WhatsApp. They also informed me that online marketers, who have been working from their homes, are also now finding it harder to do their marketing because of these taxes. 

If this is true, honourable members, it is a breach of Article 40 of the Constitution on the economic rights of the population. I think we need to examine that. It also touches on the Access to Information Act and we should also examine that. 

I have heard that there might be a review. Therefore, I would like to ask Government to listen more to the stakeholders so that we can take a decision after the feedback from the population. What this means is that we need to improve on stakeholder consultation. (Applause) 

In January, I had instructed the Clerk to create an application where the public, upon publication of a Bill, can speak to us online and say, for example, “I have read the Bill which you are proposing and this is my view on it”. Even if they do not come here, their views can be collected and the committee looks at them and then takes advice before we debate. I am going to insist that the Clerk starts this system during this first meeting. I think that in the new arrangement, where each meeting has particular work like Bills, reports and budgets, this consultation should be possible so that we are in line with the people.

I have also received from the Secretary to the Treasury the list of accounting officers, which should be uploaded for the Members to study for purposes of our work. I hope that the whips are also working expeditiously to complete the composition of the committees so that the new committees of the third session can start.

Honourable members, on the security of Members of Parliament, the President has written to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, making proposals for additional security for Members. He has given a letter to each of you; you will find the letter in your pigeonholes. You can study it and know what to do. 

Honourable members, I again welcome you to this new meeting. There were a few matters of national importance. Can I invite hon. Okoth Othieno - two minutes, please.

3.18
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding forced circumcision of children from West Budama North in Busolwe Hospital. 

Madam Speaker, in my culture, circumcision is not practiced. Those who circumcise are either Muslims or they do it voluntarily. However, whenever the parents take their children to Busolwe Hospital, the management, in collaboration with some Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs), forces them to have their children circumcised. Those who refuse to have their children circumcised are denied medical services. This is tantamount to imposing an alien culture on my people.

I need the Ministry of Health to clarify on these issues:  
    1. Why is the Ministry of Health imposing an alien culture of compulsory circumcision on the people of West Budama North?

    2. Why are the rights of the people of West Budama North to access medical services in Busolwe Hospital being violated because they did not allow their children to be circumcised?

THE SPEAKER: I thought you would ask them to find out whether it is true. You are speaking as if it is the ministry that directed this. Can we ask the Minister of Health to come and give us feedback on the issue of forced circumcision in Busolwe Hospital?

3.21
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Madam Speaker, I rise on an issue of national importance regarding the health of the people of Masindi District. The district has been hit by hepatitis B. The district borders the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and the northern region where most of the people were vaccinated. However, in Masindi people were not vaccinated against hepatitis B.

Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the Government to give us a plan on when they are going to immunise the people of Masindi District against hepatitis B. If we do not handle this issue with urgency, we are likely going to get into a situation where this disease will spread rampantly and we shall fail to handle it.

Secondly, for the last two weekends, I moved around Masindi District to consult with my people. I noticed that in all the consultative meetings I held, people were raising dental issues. I would like to find out from the Ministry of Health whether they have taken keen interest in finding out the cause. If not, can they find out the cause and be able to put in place mechanisms to remedy this disease? Otherwise, we are likely to face a problem where people will lose all their teeth. (Laughter) It possibly may be because of other issues like minerals or water which is being consumed. Therefore, we want to be protected. Can the Ministry of Health do research and inform us so that we are able to address this problem? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.23
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you. I rise on an issue of national importance. Last year, it came to the notice of the public that the Government was proposing to give away part of the land under ranches to private bidders and investors. The committee picked up the issue because there was a big public outcry. We invited the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to a meeting with the committee and he confirmed that there was that proposal. 

The committee then directed the minister to halt the process until a report is presented to the House. Thereafter, the committee carried out a comprehensive assessment of the activities under these ranches. We also made wide consultations with various stakeholders. Madam Speaker, the report is ready to be presented to this House. We delayed in getting this report ready due to the reasons we discussed with you when you met the chairperson of the committee.

It is very unfortunate that over the weekend, we saw in the newspapers that the Government has given away part of the land under these ranches. How were these bidders or investors or individuals selected? How was their capacity assessed? What is the credibility of these investors? 

Madam Speaker, apparently, no clear procedure was used to identify these individuals. We request that the Government, specifically the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, halts this process until we present the report to this House for Members to come up with a resolution. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, may I add that I also received a petition from some citizens on the same issue. They named 17 giveaways in Maruzi, Aswa, Nshaara and so many places. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I hope you can say something on this matter when you are speaking so that you assure the population about what is happening. However, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is required to come here and give us an update on the ranches. The Ministry of Health should also come back on Busolwe Hospital, hepatitis B and dental problems in Masindi.

3.27
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance. It is a matter that has been raised here before but there was no response and it has reached a critical point. 

In 2015, this Parliament passed a loan request of $100 million. This loan was procured from the African Development Bank (ADB) to extend power to different parts of Uganda including Kaliro, Budiope, Luuka, Luwero, Serere and other places. I have received information that some officials either from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development mismanaged the procurement processing of this loan. Accordingly, the loan process is at a stalemate and the bank is considering cancelling it. 

The communities are expecting this power. Several studies were done and a lot of costs were incurred but because of some selfish people who wanted to make money, the whole procurement process has been mismanaged. 

Madam Speaker, I request that this House directs the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to come and explain the status of this loan. I think henceforth, we should not process other loans unless we have got explanations about these loans which were acquired long time ago. I would be glad, Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the issue of the ADB loan, we direct the Minister for Energy and Minerals to come here at the earliest opportunity and update us on what has happened to this loan so that we know how to move.

3.29
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I came back from Gulu this morning. However, while in Gulu over the last three days, we have had a lot of fear pertaining to the issue of security. In northern Uganda, right from West Nile up to Teso, there are messages that have been in the social media that have gone to the extent of threatening all the citizens from that part of the country. They have threatened that on 17 July 2018, there is an impending attack and all citizens are requested to pack assorted foods and nobody should move out of their households because that day is going to be a very serious day.

Throughout the local council elections that took place, everybody was in fear and that is the issue they were raising. Therefore, may we hear from the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs about the state of the national security of this country because this is very dangerous to all of us?  (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. That message is not only for northern Uganda. It has gone viral across the entire country. People are warning that they will attack Uganda with air force, ground force and all means on the 16th and 17th of July 2018. They say that they will overthrow the legitimate Government of Uganda –(Interjections)- They say on 15th and 16th of July, people should stay indoors. Therefore, it is a national problem. 

That is the information I wanted to give. Therefore, can the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the Ministry of Internal Affairs reassure Ugandans; should we stay indoors or start stocking food, or buy pangas? We need to be assured that we are safe.

MR KOMAKECH: That is the state, Madam Speaker. It is now a national issue and we would like the Government of Uganda, which is charged with the responsibility of protection of lives and property of all Ugandans under the Constitution, to give the position as regards to this information.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I direct the ministers in charge of security, defence and internal affairs to come and explain to this House what is happening concerning this issue. We should not take it lightly, honourable members. If you recall, before our colleague died, there were messages about his death and it happened. Therefore, it is a serious issue. We need answers tomorrow because this is important. 

3.33
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a matter of national importance concerning the power tariffs. 

Madam Speaker, the Electricity Regulatory Authority (ERA) has come up with new tariffs for electricity. As you may recall, in the previous session we took a decision as Parliament concerning the biggest contributor to our national tariff, which is Bujagali. Government came here and informed us that if we renegotiate for Bujagali and deal with their income tax, our tariffs would go down. 

At the time we took that decision, power tariffs reduced by 0.4 per cent, from Shs 718.9 to Shs 718.5. At that time, Government promised us that once we take this decision - Remember, the Bujagali loan was initially poorly negotiated and we thought that if we took a decision to renegotiate the loan and do away with their income tax, power tariffs would go down. Even with that realised drop, today the new proposed rate is Shs 771 up from Shs 718.5. It has been effected. 

As Parliament, when we sit here and take decisions, which we think are proper for Ugandans, these decisions should be respected. We should not be used as a tool to achieve certain objectives. I am wondering why this is happening when Ugandans were expecting a reduction. Just the other day, we procured a loan from China of over $200 billion to extend power lines to all subcounties. However, with these increments every other time, there is going to come a time where we shall extend power, which our people cannot consume.

Madam Speaker, this is the matter I am raising. Government should come up and take responsibility for these reckless decisions. Personally, I feel this is fraud. You come convincing us that this is what is going to provide a solution for the people of Uganda and at the end of the day it does not appear as a solution. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the members of the Government, the point raised by hon. Nsamba is not only annoying but also very painful. We sat here in the first session and we reluctantly accepted to give a subsidy because we were told that if we did this, power costs would reduce as we spread power to the entire country. Therefore, it means Government obtained our consent by fraud. We need answers Prime Minister. The Minister of Energy and Minerals must come here tomorrow and explain. This is not what we agreed to as the House.

3.38
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Independent, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Madam Speaker, as the minister comes here tomorrow, I would like to say that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is also bringing the House into disrepute. 

Madam Speaker, as much as you have tried very hard to protect the image of Parliament, some of our colleagues on the other side are making it difficult for us. When the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development came out and said that he did not know how the tax measures were brought in the House, the whole public went on rampage to abuse Members of Parliament and yet it is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who brought the Bill on the contentious rate of taxation. 

A tax Bill cannot be brought in by a private Member but under Article 93 of the Constitution. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should also come and explain. We either sit down here and waste a lot of time in supporting his position or we take it for granted that they are not in charge of what they are bringing into the House. 

The policies they bring depend on the statistics they collect from the public before they are tabled here. I cannot believe that before we passed the budget, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development spoke and said that he did not know where the Members of Parliament got the rate of taxation. The whole public is abusing Parliament as being hopeless but I know there are three arms of Government that must work and trust each other.

THE SPEAKER: We shall come to that. 

3.40
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, we conducted general elections for the Local Councils I (LC I), where the chairpersons of all the villages were elected. However, in Nwoya, we missed out on elections in one parish called Obira due to the forceful and unlawful evictions and occupation of the entire parish by armed men who were deployed by unknown persons.

Madam Speaker, this issue has been coming up on this Floor of Parliament and sometime back, you made a commitment to pay a visit to address the situation. As I speak, the people of Obira Parish, which has three polling stations and a primary school which was destroyed by armed men, are displaced. We would like to call for the intervention of the Parliament of Uganda in the plight of the people of Obira in Nwoya County, Nwoya District.

I would also like to raise an issue related to the security of the people of this country, especially the people of Nwoya, regarding the audio recording that went viral on social media. Our people are now panicking and are selling their property and animals. Some are now coming back to Karuma and Bweyale where they were displaced.

THE SPEAKER: Just state your problem and make your prayers.

MR OYET: We need some assurance from the ministers of defence and security so that our people stop being restless, selling their property and relocating in fear of war, which is stated will take place on the 15th and 17th of this month. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: That is the same matter which hon. Lyandro raised; the ministers will address it at the same time because it is the same issue.

Concerning the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I was flabbergasted when I heard him saying that it was Parliament that made that Bill. The minister will have to come here and apologise and if he does not, we shall not handle any work of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in this House. You cannot make Parliament a scapegoat. Revenue Bills belong to the Government. You are the ones who bring them here; they are your proposals. We want an apology and a public withdrawal of that statement from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Matia Kasaija of Buyanja County. He should come here and apologise.

3.44
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also observed some MPs on television accusing the presiding officer at that time when we passed the Bill. They said that Parliament voted “no” but the Speaker ruled that the “ayes” had it. 

We have our rules, which guide us. When the Speaker does not hear properly, you stand up and challenge the ruling. It is bad for some of our colleagues to accuse the Speakers in public and yet they have that provision to challenge the ruling of the Speaker so that we move in harmony.

I have no problem with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development coming to explain himself. However, I am also concerned about some of our colleagues who talked about the Speaker in the media.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in case you have not been using your rules, if you object to a report, you file a minority report and if you disagree with the Speaker’s ruling, you stand up and you must be 40; if not, you will not succeed.

3.46
MR ROBERT KYAGULANYI (Independent, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I rise on a matter of national importance. 

This morning, the young people of Uganda held peaceful demonstrations across the country protesting the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2018 that was recently passed, which imposes tax on mobile money and social media. Apart from the contradicting statements that we have got from the minister and the President about the rate of the tax, I would like to report that since that tax was introduced, there has been an outcry all over the country especially from young people, who are saying that the tax on social media is not only unnecessary but immoral and oppressive. 

People do not necessarily make money on social media. When I walked yesterday from Gayaza to Kasangati, I counted more than 100 mobile money -(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, you normally give us an opportunity to raise matters of national importance immediately after your communication. In your communication, you mentioned this matter, which numerous Members of Parliament also mentioned, and you told us that the ministers are coming to give a statement. 

I am raising a point of procedure as to whether we are proceeding well by beginning to debate a matter that you guided on. Why can’t we wait for the ministers to come and table this very important matter instead of smuggling it in during this time when you have given us a chance to raise matters of national importance?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I already raised that matter in my communication and informed you that I have two petitions. The mobile money operators wrote a petition and the young people also wrote a petition so we are alive to these matters. I raised it in my communication and I am waiting for answers from the Prime Minister. 
 
MR KYAGULANYI: Madam Speaker, can I conclude?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, go on.

MR KYAGULANYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Ugandans thought that this Parliament was reconvened to discuss this very important matter. Even in Kamuli District, which you represent, it is a burning issue. Young people are demonstrating because they believe that this Parliament is not attaching enough importance to this matter. It is very disappointing to see that we have not given it the importance it deserves. People are saying this tax must go –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, where were you on 30 May 2018?

MR KAYGULANYI: Madam Speaker, I was here.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, then sit down. Honourable members, I have just been informed that our colleague, Hajjat Syda Bbumba, lost her husband on Friday. I did not know until I reached here. Let us stand up for a moment of silence before the Prime Minister comes up.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

MR MUNYAGWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to give some clarification. As hon. Kyagulanyi has just stated, the country is on fire –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, were you here when we started the sitting? Did you hear what I said? Please, sit down.
 
STATEMENT BY THE RT HON. PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS ON THE OVER THE TOP (OTT) SERVICES AND MOBILE MONEY TAX

3.53
THE RT HON. PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I wish to make a statement to this august House on the recently introduced taxes on mobile money transactions and Over the Top (OTT) services. Madam Speaker, I present this statement under rule 51(1) of our Rules of Procedure. 

As you are all aware, there has been a lot of public discussion about the recently introduced taxes on mobile money transactions – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is an Order Paper and the Prime Minister is speaking on item No.3. I bought for you iPads. Honourable members, take your seats.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I was saying, there has been a lot of public discussion about the recently introduced taxes on mobile money transactions and over the top services commonly known as social media. 

The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2018 –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kasibante, please take your seat.

DR RUGUNDA: The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2018 was presented to this august House, debated and passed by this Parliament. It was subsequently assented to by His Excellency the President and consequently became an Act of Parliament. The Act imposes a one per cent levy on receiving payments and withdrawals through mobile money platforms. In addition, it imposes a specific charge of Shs 200 on over the top services per day for access.
 
Madam Speaker, since the Act came into force on 1 July 2018, Government has noted public concerns regarding some of the elements in the implementation of tax on mobile money transactions and OTT. His Excellency the President has provided guidance on the matter and encouraged further discussion with a view to reaching consensus on how we should raise the much needed revenue to finance our budget and undertake the development agenda we have set for ourselves without causing unbearable burden to the citizens of Uganda.

The Government is now reviewing the taxes, taking into consideration the concerns of the public and its implications on the budget. The review is being expedited to ensure that Government presents an amendment of the Excise Duty (Amendment) Act, 2018 to this august House for debate on Thursday next week. Honourable members will therefore have the opportunity to debate and consult widely so as to make an appropriate decision during the consideration and debate of the amendment Bill. 

I would like to assure Parliament that Government is committed to ensuring that taxes on mobile money and OTT are designed taking into account the public concerns and balancing the need to raise revenue to finance our development priorities. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are proposing to bring an amendment but what happens in the meantime?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, what is being implemented now is an Act of Parliament. That is why Government is taking quick measures to ensure that the Bill is debated by this House next week and an appropriate decision is taken to rectify the matter.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, that Bill is a Bill of this House. When it comes, it will be subjected to the ordinary rules of a Bill of 45 days. What will happen in the meantime? Do they continue paying the tax? This is because the Bill cannot be considered in a day. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, between now and when the law is reviewed and amended, there will be implementation of the existing law.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising relates to the law. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, whereas you refused to accommodate clarification, when you passed the law, in its implementation you charged people deposit fees on mobile money transactions and yet it is not under any law. The Commissioner General of Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) clarified to the public that the law as it is or as it was, did not make a provision for charging of deposit fees on mobile money transactions. 

Before you stopped the charging of deposit fees on mobile money transactions, you had collected a lot of money from the public, including from myself. May I know from you whether you are going to reverse those transactions, and if not, whether Government has the moral authority to utilise money stolen from its citizens? Thank you.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In his own submission, the Leader of Government Business has acknowledged that in the space of only four to five days, Government had to listen to the public outcry and what they are doing right now is reviewing the law. This is an Act of Parliament that has existed for only a few days and Government has found it necessary to sit down and find ways of reviewing it. This makes it sound more serious than one would expect; and secondly, it is an admission that the Act is actually a bad one. 

Madam Speaker, as the review is being done, Ugandans are still being subjected to what I would call extortion through the same levy. It is extortion because the Government is admitting that it is a bad law but Ugandans are being subjected to what we are all here admitting to as a bad law. 

Madam Speaker, I wonder whether it is not procedurally okay for this House to direct Government to suspend the same until it is reviewed. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to consult with my team to see how we can handle segments of that law. The motion should wait.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I think it is clear that the Government has admitted that the tax was erroneously passed in the House. Government has admitted to that. We passed the one per cent, they were not ready for it and they do not know how it came to the House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am not prepared to say that the House passed the law erroneously. These were proposals brought by the Government.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Government is denying it. 

Madam Speaker, the clarification I would like to have is: One, may we know where the money is being kept and how much has been raised so far? –(Interjection)- There is no point of order. I am the one ordering the Government; you must return the money which you have collected from the people.

THE SPEAKER: Before we go to where the money is, honourable members, we should defer the debate on this matter. I would like to seek advice on how we can address parts of an Act, which has already been assented to, legally before we move any motion. I will therefore give my ruling tomorrow on that issue.

MR FRANCIS ZAAKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We thank you for the decision you have just taken and for what you have just communicated to us. However, Ugandans are still paying this tax and we are still saying that this tax must go.

Our constituents are telling us that we must bring this tax to an end. They do not want this tax. Demonstrations are going on. In the meantime, let Government stop the tax. When did the telecom companies start collecting taxes from Ugandans? It is URA that is responsible for tax collection.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I said that I will give my ruling on this issue tomorrow so that we know how to move on. I will give my ruling on the Excise Duty Act; any debate on that issue will abide by my ruling.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

4.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to lay on the Table the list of accounting officers for the Financial Year 2018/19 for both the central Government votes and the local government votes. I beg to lay.

MR DONONZIO KAHONDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not know whether this has been done deliberately. What has been uploaded on our iPads goes from No.25 to No.101. They have skipped all those between No.25 and No.101. Some entities like the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) and others are not here.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you read the general heads under which you have the accounting officers, for the record?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, the last time when your deputy was in the Chair, we raised the issue, substantially, of a letter that was written to the Secretary to the Treasury, Mr Keith Muhakanizi. It said that certain accounting officers should not be re-appointed because of failure to account for funds. I formally presented the list of those accounting officers - it is here in the Hansard - and I still have the list. 

Madam Speaker, I now seek your indulgence under rule 86(1). I would like to know whether it would not be prudent for the minister to read the names of the accounting officers, one by one, or the minister tells us if those accounting officers, who have misappropriated public funds according to the Auditor-General’s report, appear on that list you are trying to lay on the Table ominously. These are public funds and I have a list of 10 of those officers by the way.  Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence.

4.09
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Section 11 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 clearly stipulates the roles of the Secretary to Treasury. Section 11 (g) specifically reads, “Appoint or designate accounting officers in accordance with this Act, except that the Secretary to the Treasury shall not appoint or designate a person an accounting officer where, according to the report of an Internal Auditor General or the Auditor-General, that person has not accounted for the public resources or assets of the vote for a financial year.” 

Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence to task the minister to provide evidence that the list he is about to lay on Table has confirmed and has been validated, in accordance with the provision of this Act. 

I also wonder if Parliament may want to confirm that the minister’s submission conforms to these two reports. To the best of my knowledge, the Auditor-General’s report comes to this House but the internal Auditor-General’s report does not necessarily have to come to this House. It comes as and when there is need. 

Therefore, I think it is in the considered view of this House that we interest ourselves in the list of the accounting officers, with the view of confirming whether they really comply with the provisions of this Act.  

MR ALEX BYARUGABA: I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I happen to sit on the Public Accounts Committee and these are some of the cases that have constantly come up; with the same names one year after the other. I think it is high time that this august House puts its feet down and says “yes” or “no” to the corrupt officials. 

In my district, we have a CAO and for the last four/five years, he has been reported to be very corrupt and incapable of being an accounting officer. However, at the end of the day, they tell you, “What will you do?” 

This is the time now for all of us to come up and say enough is enough. We must send a very strong message and we cannot do that unless we know the names as they were presented clearly by hon. Odonga Otto. I would like to thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I invite you to read all the names. 

4.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra):  Madam Speaker, I am much obliged. I will need some water because the list is so extensive and I have a cold so you will excuse me.

Madam Speaker, I will start with the list of accounting officers for central Government votes for the financial year 2018/2019: 

Vote 001: Office of the President - Ms Katuramu Deborah (Secretary) 
Vote 002: State House - Ms Lucy Nakyobe Mbonye 
Vote 003: Office of the Prime minister - Ms Christine Kintu 
Vote 004: Ministry of Defence - Ms Buturo Edith 
Vote 005: Ministry of Public Service - 

THE SPEAKER: Members, let him read the names and then after he has read them, you can identify the culprits. 

MR AJEDRA: Vote 005: Ministry of Public Service - Ms Catherine Bitarakwate 
Vote 006: Ministry of Foreign Affairs - Ambassador Patrick Mugoya 
Vote 007: Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs - Mr Francis Atoke 
Vote 008: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - Ms Betty Kasimbazi 
Vote 009: Ministry of Internal Affairs - Mr Aggrey Wunyi 
Vote 010: Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries - Mr Pius Kasajja
Vote 011: Ministry of Local Government - Mr Ben Kumumanya 
Vote 012: Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development - Mrs Dorcas Okalany 
Vote 013: Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports - Mr Alex Kakooza 
Vote 014: Ministry of Health - Dr Diana Atwiine 
Vote 015: Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives - Ambassador Julius Onen  
Vote 016: Ministry of Works and Transport - Mr Bageya Waiswa 
Vote 017: Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development - Ms Prisca Boonabantu 
Vote 018: Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Security - Mr Pius Bigirimana 
Vote 019: Ministry of Water and Environment - Mr Alfred Okot 
Vote 020: Ministry of Information and Communication Technology - Mr Vincent Bagire Waiswa 
Vote 021: Ministry of East African Community Affairs - Mrs Edith Mwanje 
Vote 022: Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage - Ms Doreen Sliver Katusiime 
Vote 023: Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation - Mr David Obong 

Government Agencies 

Vote 101: Judiciary - Mr Expedito Kivumbi 
Vote 102: Electoral Commission - Mr Rwakoojo Sam 
Vote 103: Inspectorate of Government - Mrs Rose Kafeero 
Vote 104: Parliamentary Commission - Mrs Jane Kibirige Lubowa 
Vote 105: Uganda Land Commission - Mr Lucus Omara Abong 
Vote 106: Uganda Human Rights Commission - Mr Patrick Nyakana 
Vote 107: Uganda AIDS Commission - Mr Nelson Musoba 
Vote 108: National Planning Authority - Mr Joseph Muvawala 
Vote 109: Law Development Centre - Mr Frank Nigel Othembi 
Vote 110: Uganda Industrial Institute - Prof. Charles Kwesiga 
Vote 111: Busitema University - Mr Matsiko Abert 
Vote 112: Directorate of Ethics and Integrity - Mr Alex Okello
Vote 113: Uganda National Roads Authority - Mrs Allen Kagina 
Vote 117: Uganda Tourism Board - Mr Asiime Stephen 
Vote 118: Uganda Road Fund - Eng. Dr Odong Michael 
Vote 119: Uganda Registration Services Bureau - Mr Bemanya Twebaze 
Vote 120: National Citizenship and Immigration Control - Ms Ekwang Josephine 
Vote 121: Dairy Development Authority - Dr Jolly Zaribwende
Vote 122: Kampala Capital City Authority - Ms Semakula Musisi
Vote 123: Rural Electrification Agency - Eng. Godfrey R Turyahikayo
Vote 124: Equal Opportunities Commission - Mr Mujuni Lawrence
Vote 125: National Animals Genetic Resource Centre - Dr Charles Lagu
Vote 126: NITA-U - Mr James Saaka
Vote 127: Muni University - Rev. Fr Dr Pincho Epiphany 
Vote 128: Uganda National Examinations Board - Mr Daniel Nokrach Odong
Vote 129: Financial Intelligence Authority - Mr Asubo Sydney
Vote 130: Treasury Operations - Mr Semakula Lawrence 
Vote 131: Office of the Auditor General - Mr Francis Masuba
Vote 132: Education Service Commission - Dr Asumani Lukwago
Vote 133: Directorate of Public Prosecution - Mr Ngolobe Amos
Vote 134: Health Service Commission - Ms Wenene Mary
Vote 136: Makerere University - Mr Charles Barugahare 
Vote 137: Mbarara University - Mr Melchior Byaruhanga
Vote 138: Makerere University Business School - Prof. Wasswa Balunywa
Vote 139: Kyambogo University - Mr Charles Okello
Vote 140: Uganda Management Institute - Dr James Nkata
Vote 141: Uganda Revenue Authority - Ms Doris Akol
Vote 142: National Agriculture Research Organisation -	Dr Agona James Ambrose
Vote 143: Uganda Bureau of Statistics -	Dr Paul Mungyereza Ben 
Vote 144: Uganda Police Force - Mr Rogers Muhirwa
Vote 145: Uganda Prisons Services - Mr Emiku Samuel Baker
Vote 146: Public Service Commission - Dr John Geoffrey Mbabazi
Vote 147: Local Government Finance Commission - Mr Lawrence Banyoya
Vote 148: Judicial Service Commission -	Dr Rose Nassali Lukwago
Vote 149: Gulu University - Mr Asaf Adebua
Vote 150: National Environmental Management Authority - Dr Tom Okia Okurut
Vote 151: Uganda Blood Transfusion Services - Dr Dorothy Kyeyune
Vote 152: National Agricultural Advisory Services - Dr Samuel Mugasi
Vote 153: Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority - Mr Benson Turyame
Vote 154: Ugandan National Bureau of Standards -	Dr Ben Manyindo
Vote 155: Cotton Development Authority - Ms Jolly Sabune
Vote 156: Uganda Land Commission -	Mr Nyombi Robert
Vote 157: Uganda Forest Authority - Mr Paul Musamali 
Vote 159: External Security Organization - Ambassador Joseph Ocwet
Vote 160: Uganda Coffee Development Authority - Dr Emmanuel Lyamulemye
Vote 301: Lira University - Mr Augustin Oyang Atubo
Vote 302: Uganda National Meteorological Authority - Mr Festus Luboyera
Vote 303: National Curriculum Development Centre - Mr Grace K. Baguma
Vote 304: Uganda Virus Research Institute - Dr Pontianno Kaleebo
Vote 305: Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory - Mr Kepher Mateo
Vote 306: Uganda Export Promotion - Mr Elly Kamugisha
Vote 307: Kabale University - Mr Johnson Baryatuma Munono
Vote 308: Soroti University - Ms Ruth Achimo
Vote 309: Executive Director - Ms Judith Obiter-Gama (NIRA)
Vote 310: Executive Director Uganda Investment Authority - Mr Basil Ajer
Vote 311: Chief Executive Officer for Uganda National Oil Company - Dr Josephine Wapakabulo
Vote 312: Executive Director of Uganda Petroleum Authority - Mr Ernest Rubondo

Petroleum Fund - Mr Lawrence Semakula (Accountant General)
Contingency Funds in the Office of the Accountant General -	Mr Lawrence Semakula

Referral Hospitals and Health Institutions

Vote 161: Mulago Hospital (Hospital Complex National Referral Hospital) - Dr Byarugaba (Executive Director)
Vote 162: Butabika National Referral Hospital - Dr David Basangwa
Vote 163: Arua Referral Hospital - Dr Alex Adaku
Vote 164: Fort Portal Referral Hospital - Dr Florence Tugumisireze
Vote 165: Gulu Referral Hospital - Dr Charles Elima
Vote 166: Hoima Referral Hospital-	Dr Peter Mukobi
Vote 167: Jinja Referral Hospital- Dr Edward Nkurunziza
Vote 168: Kabale Referral Hospital- Dr Sophie Namasopo
Vote 169: Masaka Referral Hospital- Dr Nathan Onyachi
Vote 170: Mbale Referral Hospital- Dr Emmanuel Tugaineyo
Vote 171: Soroti Referral Hospital- Dr Francis Wambuzi
Vote 172: Lira Referral Hospital - Dr Bernard Odu 
Vote 173: Mbarara Referral Hospital- Dr Celestine Barigye
Vote 174: Mubende Referral Hospital- Dr Andema Alex
Vote 175: Moroto Referral Hospital	- Mr Mawa Geoffrey
Vote 176: China Uganda Friendship Hospital, Naguru - Dr Emmanuel Paul Battibwe
Vote 114: Uganda Cancer Institute- Dr Jackson Oryem
Vote 115: Uganda Heart Institute - Dr John Omagino
Vote 116: Uganda Medical Stores - Mr Moses Kamabare (General Manager)

Missions Abroad For Financial Accountability 

Vote 201: New York - Ms Florence Kyasiimire
Vote 202: London - Mr Kwaba Godfrey
Vote 203: Ottawa - Mr Tazenya Allan 
Vote 204: New Delhi - Ms Kedisi Margaret Kirunda
Vote 205: Cairo - Zoe Kirunda
Vote 206: Nairobi - Bernadette Ssempa
Vote 207: Dar es Salaam - Mr Edule Oscar 
Vote 208: Abuja - Mr Nurh Byarufu
Vote 209: Pretoria - Mr Julius Kivuna
Vote 210: Washington - Mr Michael Bulwaka
Vote 211: Addis Ababa - Mr Serapio Tumwesigye
Vote 212: Beijing - Mr Nelson Kasigaire
Vote 213: Kigali - Ms Agnes Birungi
Vote 214: Geneva - Mr Brian Mwanika
Vote 215: Tokyo - Mr Michael Katungi and Mr Emmanuel Olobo
Vote 217: Riyadh - Ms Bwamono
Vote 218: Copenhagen - Ms Alex Mukubwa
Vote 219: Brussels - Amb. Manana Andy Dennis
Vote 220: Rome - Mr Victor Acellam
Vote 221: Kinshasa - Ms Georgina Nakawombe
Vote 223: Khartoum - Mr Opio Innocent
Vote 224: Paris – Mr Kamudoli Nasanairi
Vote 225: Berlin - Mr Moses Fred Muhkooli
Vote 226: Tehran - Mr Benjamin Mukabire
Vote 227: Moscow - Ms Susan Okodi
Vote 228: Canberra - Ms Lwabi Carol
Vote 229: Juba - Mr Agama Anthony
Vote 230: Abu Dhabi - Dr Omara Sam
Vote 231: Bujumbura - Mr Charles Mugabi
Vote 232: Guangzhou - Mr Stephen Ssenabulya
Vote 233: Ankara - Princess Irene Ndagire
Vote 234: Mogadishu - Mr Jackson Abigaba
Vote 235: Kuala Lumpur - Mr Alex Bigira
Vote 236: Mombasa - Ms Asha Nabbanja 
Vote 237: Algiers - Mr Benon Kayemba 

Madam Speaker, that covers the accounting officers for central Government votes. 

Local Governments Accounting Officers for the Financial Year 2018/2019
Vote 501: Adjumani District – Mr Gabriel Bwayo Rogers 
Vote 502: Apac District - Ms Stella Abyeto 
Vote 503: Arua District - Mr Ismael Ochengel 
Vote 504: Bugiri District - Mr Ezaruku Kazimiro 
Vote 505: Bundibugyo District - Mr Franco Olaboro 
Vote 506: Bushenyi District - Mr Elias Byamungu 
Vote 507: Busia District - Mr Walter Iriama 
Vote 508: Gulu District - Mr Milton Kato
Vote 509: Hoima District - Mr Nathan Lujumwa
Vote 510: Iganga District - Mr David Kawooya
Vote 511: Jinja District - Mr William Kanyesigye
Vote 512: Kabale District - Mr Wilson Tibugyenda
Vote 513: Kabarole District - Ms Phionah Sanyu
Vote 514: Kaberamaido District - Mr Bernard Ogwang
Vote 515: Kalangala District - Mr Robby Odyeny-Ochen
Vote 517: Kamuli District - Ms Elizabeth Namanda
Vote 518: Kamwenge District - Ms Edith Mutabazi
Vote 519: Kanungu District - Mr Eliab Begumya
Vote 520: Kapchorwa District - Mr Simon Peter Kandole
Vote 521: Kasese District - Mr Willy Kafureka
Vote 522: Katakwi District - Mr Jose Jimmy Walmoe
Vote 523: Kayunga District - Mr Allan Ashaba Ganafa
Vote 524: Kibaale District - Mr Christopher Sande Kyomya
Vote 525: Kiboga District - Ms Sarah Nakalungi
Vote 526: Kisoro District - Mr Sulaiman Kasozi
Vote 527: Kitgum District - Ms Roseline Adongo
Vote 528: Kotido District - Mr Charles Uma
Vote 529: Kumi District - Mr Peter Henry Wotunya
Vote 530: Kyenjojo District - Mr Samuel Kaija
Vote 531: Lira District - Mr Mark Tivu
Vote 532: Luwero District - Mr Godfrey Metuseera
Vote 533: Masaka District - Mr Anthony Lukwago 
Vote 534: Masindi District - Mr John Nyakahuma
Vote 535: Mayuge District - Mr Martin Kisule Mabandha
Vote 536: Mbale District - Mr Esau Ekachelan
Vote 537: Mbarara District - Mr Felix Esoku
Vote 538: Moroto District - Martin Jacan Gwokto
Vote 539: Moyo District - Mr Alex Chelimo 
Vote 540: Mpigi District - Ms Lucy Amulen
Vote 541: Mubende District - Ms Lillian Nakamatte 
Vote 542: Mukono District - Mr George Ntulume 
Vote 543: Nakapiripirit District - Mr Aloysius Aloka
Vote 544: Nakasongola District - Mr Robert Abenaitwe
Vote 545: Nebbi District - Mr Geoffrey Okaka
Vote 546: Ntungamo District - Mr Ananias Ruhemba
Vote 547: Pader District - Mr Christopher Okumu
Vote 548: Pallisa District - Mr Joseph Maira Mukasa
Vote 549: Rakai District - Mr Alex Kwizera
Vote 550: Rukungiri District - Mr Mathias Ndifuna
Vote 551: Sembabule District - Mr Willy Bataringaya
Vote 552: Sironko District - Mr Francis Andrew Oluka
Vote 553: Soroti District - Mr Joseph Balisanyuka
Vote 554: Tororo District - Mr Dunstan Balaba
Vote 555: Wakiso District - Mr Luke Lokwii Lokolimoi 
Vote 556: Yumbe District - Mr David Lubuuka
Vote 557: Butaleja District - Mr Alex Felix Majeme
Vote 558: Ibanda District - Mr Nathan Ahimbisibwe
Vote 559: Kaabong District - Mr Richard Bukone
Vote 560: Isingiro District - Mr Donath Eswilu
Vote 561: Kaliro District - Mr Fred Kizito Mukasa
Vote 562: Kiruhura District - Mr Charles Nsubuga
Vote 563: Koboko District - Mr George Adoko
Vote 564: Amolatar District - Mr Pius Epaju
Vote 565: Amuria District - Mr Andrew Leru
Vote 566: Manafwa District - Mr Charles Otai
Vote 567: Bukwo District - Mr Gabriel Atama
Vote 568: Mityana District - Mr James Nkata
Vote 569: Nakaseke District - Mr John Katotoroma
Vote 570: Amuru District - Mr Martin Kiplangat
Vote 571: Budaka District - Mr Abdu Batambuze
Vote 572: Oyam District - Ms Dorothy Magoola
Vote 573: Abim District - Mr Emmanuel Ofwono
Vote 574: Namutumba District - Mr Davis Dembe Beyeza
Vote 575: Dokolo District - Mr George William Omuge
Vote 576: Buliisa District - Mr Chrisestom Kayise
Vote 577: Maracha District - Mr Joseph Lomongin
Vote 578: Bukedea District - Mr Charles Kumakech Oluba
Vote 579: Bududa District - Ms Tappy Namulondo
Vote 580: Lyantonde District - Ms Alice Rushure Asiimwe
Vote 581: Amudat District - Mr Seraphine Alia
Vote 582: Buikwe District - Mr Yusuf Ssenteza
Vote 583: Buyende District - Mr Francis Opolot
Vote 584: Kyegegwa District - Mr Stephen Oloya
Vote 585: Lamwo District - Mr Patrick Olila
Vote 586: Otuke District - Mr Joshua Mabiya
Vote 587: Zombo District - Mr Musa Ismal Onzu
Vote 588: Alebtong District - Mr Ben Paul Otim Ogwette
Vote 589: Bulambuli District - Mr Lawrence Wadada
Vote 590: Buvuma District - Mr Joseph Kisubi
Vote 591: Gomba District - Mr Danson Yiga Mukasa
Vote 592: Kiryandongo District - Mr David Wasikye
Vote 593: Luuka District - Mr Saul Nsubuga
Vote 594: Namayingo District - Ms Joyce Loyce Nambozo
Vote 595: Ntoroko District - Mr Simon Bimbona
Vote 596: Serere District - Mr Issa Mbooge
Vote 597: Kyankwanzi District - Ms Marion Pamela Tukahurirwa
Vote 598: Kalungu District - Ms Fiida Nabirye
Vote 599: Lwengo District - Mr Grace Kisembe
Vote 600: Bukomansimbi District - Mr Amis Asuman Masereka
Vote 601: Mitooma District - Mr Peter Simon Akileng
Vote 602: Rubirizi District - Mr James Luyimbazi
Vote 603: Ngora District - Mr Andrew Mawejje
Vote 604: Napak District - Mr Abdulnoor Mbaagwa Muwonge 
Vote 605: Kibuku District - Mr Richard Mugolo
Vote 606: Nwoya District - Mr Innocent Asaba Birekeyaho
Vote 607: Kole District - Mr Eria Magumba
Vote 608: Butambala District - Mr Edward Musingye
Vote 609: Sheema District - Mr Moses Kanyarutokye
Vote 610: Buhweju District - Mr Fred Kalyesubula
Vote 611: Agago District - Mr Grandfield Oryono Omonda
Vote 612: Kween District - Mr Michael Wanje
Vote 613: Kagadi District - Mr Maalik Mahaaba
Vote 614: Kakumiro District - Mr Stephen Monday
Vote 615: Omoro District - Mr John Bosco Akera
Vote 616: Rubanda District - Mr Aggrey Winston Muramira
Vote 617: Namisindwa District - Mr Francis Odap
Vote 618: Pakwach District - Mr Godfrey Ogwang Okello
Vote 619: Butebo District - Ms Nakityo Joanita
Vote 620: Rukiga District - Mr Fredrick Ssemwogerere
Vote 621: Kyotera District - Mr Idris Bukenya Kasozi
Vote 622: Bunyangabu District - Mr Peter Ruhweeza Nsungwa 
Vote 623: Nabilatuk District - Mr Alfred Malinga
Vote 624: Bugweri District - Mr Jonathan Hosea Mukose
Vote 625: Kassanda District - Mr John Betungura
Vote 626: Kwania District - Ms Albina Awor
Vote 627: Kapelebyong District - Mr Nasser Mukiibi
Vote 628: Kikube District - Mr Robert Mulondo
Vote 751: Arua Municipal Council - Mr Jamiru Kaiiru Kasajja
Vote 752: Entebbe Municipal Council - Mr Charles Magumba
Vote 753: Fort Portal Municipal Council - Mr Deo Ndimo Ndimurwango
Vote 754: Gulu Municipal Council - Mr Francis Barabanawe
Vote 755: Jinja Municipal Council - Mr Francis Byabagambi
Vote 757: Kabale Municipal Council - Mr Monday Joseph Bagonza
Vote 758: Fort Portal Municipal Council - Mr Assy Abirebe Tumwesigire
Vote 759: Masaka Municipal Council - Mr Paul Omoko
Vote 760: Mbale Municipal Council - Mr Paul Batanda
Vote 761: Mbarara Municipal Council - Mr Edward Lwanga
Vote 762: Moroto Municipal Council - Mr Balaba Swaibu
Vote 763: Soroti Municipal Council - Mr Otimong Moses
Vote 764: Tororo Municipal Council - Mr Akuma Mazamil Vunnimva
Vote 770: Kasese Municipal Council - Mr Innocent Ahimbisimbwe 
Vote 771: Hoima Municipal Council - Mr David Kyasanku
Vote 772: Mukono Municipal Council - Mr Richard K. Monday
Vote 773: Iganga Municipal Council - Mr Alikwan Ayub Kisubi
Vote 774: Masindi Municipal Council - Mr Leonard Tumusiime
Vote 775: Ntungamo Municipal Council - Mr Christopher Ahimbisibwe
Vote 776: Busia Municipal Council - Mr Vincent Okurut
Vote 777: Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipal Council - Mr Gwavu Kiwanuka Edward
Vote 778: Rukungiri Municipal Council - Ms Lillian Kobusingye
Vote 779: Nansana Municipal Council - Mr Daniel Christopher Kawesi
Vote 780: Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipal Council - Mr Joseph Kimbowa
Vote 781: Kira Municipal Council - Mr Benon Yiga
Vote 782: Kisoro Municipal Council - Mr Peter Matsiko
Vote 783: Mityana Municipal Council - Mr Joseph Ssebudde
Vote 784: Kitgum Municipal Council - Mr Emmanuel Banya Natal
Vote 785: Koboko Municipal Council - Mr Stansloas Mangasa  
Vote 786: Mubende Municipal Council - Mr Godfrey Kateeba Kunihira 
Vote 787: Kumi Municipal Council - Mr Authman Ssebadduka 
Vote 788: Lugazi Municipal Council - Mr Francis Nyamugo
Vote 789: Kamuli Municipal Council - Mr Ronald Ross Baganzi
Vote 790: Kapchorwa Municipal Council - Mr Silimani Jalwiny
Vote 79l: Ibanda Municipal Council - Ms Justine Barekye
Vote 792: Njeru Municipal Council - Mr Ambrose Ocen
Vote 793: Apac Municipal Council - Mr Jacob Batemyetto 
Vote 794: Nebbi Municipal Council - Mr Moses Lorika 
Vote 795: Bugiri Municipal Council - Mr Fenard Katunda Mukuru
Vote 796: Sheema Municipal Council - Mr Geoffrey B. Bamanyisa
Vote 797: Kotido Municipal Council - Mr Henry Ddamba

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the entire list of all the accounting officers for local governments and central Government.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, minister. There are just three areas I would like you to advise us on. You have got two people on the mission in Cairo, Zoe Kirunda and Bernadette Mwesigye. Under Tokyo, there are two names, Michael Katungi and Emmanuel Olobo. There are also two names for Fort Portal Municipality, Deo Ndimo Ndimurwango and Assy Abirebe Tumwesigire. Please, give us some clarification.

4.46
MR MUBARAK MUNYAGWA (FDC, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much for this opportunity, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for reading them by name. I have reservations on one of the accounting officers.

THE SPEAKER: We are not discussing them today. Now that we have got the names and there were some concerns raised by Members, I would like to ask the Public Accounts Committee to verify from the internal audit report those who have issues and advise us before we can approve them.

MR MUNYAGWA: Madam Speaker, this concerns parliamentary resolutions. I would like to put it on record so that they consider it when they are investigating them. 

Madam Speaker, the committees of this Parliament made resolutions way back regarding the Executive Director (ED) of National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA). The Defence and Internal Affairs Committee made resolutions and the first one was in regard to the way the Learner’s Project was handled. The committee resolved and recommended for a forensic audit. 

In the same vein, the Parliamentary Criminal Investigations Department (CID) conducted investigations on the same person, the ED of NIRA. She came on oath to the committee and tendered in forged minutes. The report is out and it confirms this. I am wondering if such a person, with such a record, can be proposed to become an accounting officer.

THE SPEAKER: I do not think we shall discuss any of them today. What we are looking for is compliance with the Public Finance Management Act and we have asked the committee to assist us on that issue.

4.49
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Madam Speaker, the other appeal I would like to make is that out of my experience in accountability committees, I realised that when the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury (PS/ST) appoints permanent secretaries (PS) to become accounting officers, they normally negate the role of overseeing the ministry and instead concentrate on the accounting job – chasing vouchers. At the end of the day, the main function of the PS is normally lost. 

I appeal to the Prime Minister that he also needs to advise the PS/ST to take that into account because it has an impact on the performance of the ministry. Since we do not also want to inherit something, which is not good, we thought this advice should be passed on to the Government. Thank you.

4.50
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, as much as you have made a ruling that these records be further verified and we have a debate on this submission later, I am very concerned about these accounting officers. This financial year, we went ahead to approve the budget when over 17 agencies had not complied with the objectives of the National Development Plan II yet these accounting officers are at the centre of the running of these agencies in the country.

That is why, Madam Speaker, while you are referring, we would like Government to be very clear on these accounting officers because they are at the centre of ensuring the implementation of Government activities in the country. These accounting officers should ensure that these agencies are managed and controlled by them, in accordance with the law.

Madam Speaker, those who are coming tomorrow to verify these accounting officers must give Parliament the right officers without any cover-up. I was more disturbed by the report, which was submitted to Parliament and the ministry is presenting the same names, which we rejected, yet when we come to the end of the financial year, this Parliament goes ahead – in the way we have done in 2018/2019 – to approve a budget when agencies of Government had not complied with the objectives of the National Development Plan.

That is why I said that the budget we approved is not in compliance with what is supposed to be done, according to the law. Madam Speaker, you must take a firm stand on this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House normally depends on the report of the committee. If the committee had said “do not approve this budget,” we would not have approved it – but what was the overall recommendation of your committee to this House? Is there a committee that said, “Do not approve?”

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with you because your Chair took a position, when we were reading the final figures of the budget. The Deputy Speaker ruled, and even ordered the Clerk to Parliament to bring the list of those accounting officers because others were cleared late. Therefore, in all fairness, at least the Office of the Speaker has played its role as far as this issue is concerned. 

The only thing that should be done, Madam Speaker, is that where the Secretary to the Treasury writes to you and says: “Please, do not appoint the following officers” this is the Secretary to Treasury and this Parliament thanked Keith Muhakanizi for the first time, then, because he listed officers who could not be reappointed. 

Fortunately or unfortunately, the Chair then ordered the Clerk to Parliament to bring an additional list – there had been word saying that the accounting officers were submitting their accountability to Parliament. If the Secretary to Treasury says, “The following people should not be approved” and they start laying box files onto this Table that “This one was cleared. This one was cleared.” I think the clearing house should be the Auditor-General, who raises those very queries.

Therefore, this Parliament should support the Office of the Speaker. I know in the next sitting they will bring those lists. They were submitting accountabilities to the Clerk to Parliament, bypassing the Auditor-General who raises those very queries. 

Therefore, in all fairness, Madam Speaker, not to be seen to be frustrating the work of the Executive, in the next sitting after the Committee on Public Accounts presents its report, this House should pronounce itself on those permanent sectaries who have no issues because the money for the first quarter of the financial year was released last week. In order not to frustrate Government work, those accounting officers without issues can continue working but for those perennial and habitual offenders, we will say they will not handle public funds. Thank you.

MR JOHN TWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is just a small clarification. May the minister clarify to us what Vote 13 is about? This is because during the budget discussions, we were dealing with the Ministry of Education and Sports, not the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports. My worry is that if it remains like this, it brings a picture that funds can go astray from the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, I thought we had an accounting officer for the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation?

MR AJEDRA: Vote 013 should be the Ministry of Education and Sports because science and technology have moved to another ministry.

MS ANNITA AMONG: Madam Speaker, some of the accounting officers whose names have been read, report to the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE). However, in the wise ruling, you said the Committee on Public Accounts should give a report. My suggestion would be that for commissions, statutory authorities and agencies, the report should be given by COSASE whereas for the ministries it should be given by the Committee on Public Accounts and the Committee on Local Government Accounts should also give for the local governments because they are all accountability committees.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let each public accounts committee handle their sector and report to the House tomorrow.

4.58
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Madam Speaker, I have been reading through the list of the worst 10 accounting officers. The most interesting of them is the second person on the list, who executed her power beyond Parliament. My interpretation on this matter is that it is contempt of Parliament. 

Secondly, the accounting officer for Vote 003, Ms Christine Guwatudde Kintu spent excess of warrant totalling to Shs 7.8 billion.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Oyet, we are not discussing those names now.   I have stated that the relevant committees on public accounts are going to bring their evaluation to the House; for now, no discussion.

MR OYET: Most obliged. 

MR KAHONDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister because there are some votes, which I think have been done deliberately. For example, if you look at votes 309 and 310, they have put the title under the name of the accounting officer; where there is accounting officer, they have put the title and where there is title, they have put the name of the accounting officer.

Madam Speaker, this vote has a lot of issues that were raised here. For instance, the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs made recommendations regarding the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA). What is the minister hiding there? Are you confusing us so that we do not identify easily?

Madam Speaker, much as you have directed that the relevant committees on public accounts handle this matter, I think some specifics were handled and recommendations were made and Parliament approved the recommendations of the committees regarding those particular accounting officers.  Madam Speaker, I need your clarification on this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if they have been handled by this House, the Clerk is the custodian of those records and I request that they should bring those records together with the records of the Committee on Public Accounts and then we handle them. 

The relevant committees on public accounts should handle this issue expeditiously and report tomorrow.

MR ONYANGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to inquire from the minister because most of the names that have been read are not new; they have been there for a while. 

I do not know whether before the reappointments the ministry carries out some appraisal and whether it would be necessary for the House to be briefed on the performance of some of these officers since they have been there and they are continuing to be reappointed time and again.

Maybe, that could be the reason why we are finding issues of graft where an officer is interdicted today and then tomorrow, he or she is again reappointed. We need to have performance indicators for some of these officers.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, how do you evaluate your officers? 

MR AJEDRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yes, before accounting officers are reappointed or new persons are appointed, there is an evaluation process that is undertaken by the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to Treasury, in consultation with the Ministry of Public Service. We do carry out those assessments and evaluations before reappointment and when appointing new officers as required by the Public Finance Management Act.

5.04
MR CHARLES ILUKOR (NRM, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for the wise ruling. These accounting officers had become lords. They would no longer respond to officers in the Office of the Auditor-General. 

The accounting officers would request the officers from the Auditor-General to raise their issues after which the accounting officers would tell them that they would sort them out in Parliament. It is like Parliament has become a clearing house. 

It is good that you have taken a firm decision on these people so that, that business of telling the officers of the Auditor-General to raise issues and that they would sort them out in Parliament ends. Parliament should take a firm decision so that we get some of these people whose names now and again have been mentioned but are reappointed as accounting officers dealt with.

Every year, the finance ministry Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury, Mr Keith Muhakanizi announces on radio and in the newspapers that the following people have not accounted for the money and yet at the end of the day, they still remain the same people whose names appear here. What is happening?

Madam Speaker, you have done the right thing. When the committees come with their reports, we should put our foot down on these names and have these people reprimanded. Otherwise, we shall continue to allow corruption to exist in this country with impunity. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have realised that the Ministry of Energy and Minerals Development does not have a permanent secretary and yet it is a very important ministry carrying out a lot of activities. I think you need to do something about that.

5.05
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we need special instruction from you since the financial year has started and money is now moving towards the system and many things must be cleared by these same accounting officers. 

Madam Speaker, could you give special instructions to the committees that they convene tomorrow so that by the afternoon, their work is done and we can make the decision. The process must be expedited.

THE SPEAKER: That is implied in our instruction because we want a report in the afternoon. So they must convene in the morning so that we clear the issue of the accounting officers. Next item.  

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising under Rule 234 (3) and Rule 3(4) and I wish to read the two rules verbatim. Rule 234(3) says, “The Speaker may at any time order Strangers to withdraw and the doors of the Chambers of the House to be closed”. Rule 3 (4) says, “Subsequent Oaths of Allegiance of Members of Parliament shall be administered by the Speaker and before the House.” 

Madam Speaker, in front of me is a lady with a scarf, whom I have never seen taking the Oath of Allegiance as a Member of Parliament. Therefore, the lady is a stranger in the House. 

I wonder whether it is not procedurally proper that the Sergeant-at-Arms is instructed to have this stranger removed from the House before we can proceed. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, she is a Member of Parliament for Pallisa District. She was sworn in before the Speaker of this House – I have powers to do that and she is welcome. It is not the first time. Next item.  

CONSTITUTION OF SECTORAL COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 184 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Can we have feedback from the whips on where they stand on this issue of the composition? Are you all ready?

5.09
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and my apologies. I need some little time. I will be ready on Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: Not tomorrow? 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Like I explained to you, Madam Speaker; if I am ready tomorrow, I will present. However, I am giving myself Tuesday because I do not want not to deliver on my commitment.

THE SPEAKER: Please complete the work so that we can establish our committees of the third session. Honourable members, sometimes we over subscribe so let us do it when we are together. 

Let us present on the same day and at the same time. Otherwise, we shall agree and then we have to adjust and move people. Let us do it all together - including hon. Andrew Baryayanga.

Honourable members, there being no other business, the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 5.10 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 12 July 2018 at 2.00 p.m.)
