
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 13 July 2021

Parliament met at 2.10 p.m.in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

    1. Ms Milly Babirye Babalanda

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Babirye, you are welcome to the 11th Parliament. We wish to congratulate you upon your appointment. We are giving you the Constitution and Rules of Procedure to help you in running your day-to-day business in the House. Congratulations. (Applause)

    2. Dr Monicah Musenero Masanza

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Dr Monicah Musenero, we wish to welcome you to the 11th Parliament and to the Parliament of Uganda. We know you have not been here. However, with the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and the Constitution that we are giving you, we believe you will be able to do your work as required by this Parliament. 

We would also like to appreciate what you have done so far concerning the innovation on COVID-19. We pray you continue in the same spirit for the good of Uganda. Congratulations. (Applause)

    3. Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kiryowa Kiwanuka, the Attorney-General of Uganda, we wish to welcome you to the 11th Parliament and to the Parliament of Uganda. 

As a learned counsel, you are going to give Ugandans legal advice on how the country should run. We wish to welcome you to this Parliament and wish you well in your new assignment. Congratulations. 

Please, receive the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and the Constitution that will guide you in the running of this House since you are a new Member in the House.

    4. Ms Judith Nabakooba

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Judith Nabakooba, welcome back to the 11th Parliament. I know that you are not new to the proceedings of the House. We wish to congratulate you for your new assignment. We hope you will help our poor Ugandans out there on issues of land. 

You know the Rules of Procedure used in running this Parliament. However, each Parliament makes its own Rules of Procedure. We wish to give you the Rules of Procedure for the 11th Parliament and the Constitution to help you in your new assignment. Congratulations.

    5. Ms Evelyn Anite

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Anite Evelyn, welcome back to the 11th Parliament. We wish to congratulate you upon your reappointment into the same ministry. We believe you are going to perform even better than what you did in the last term. Congratulations.

We are giving you the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and the Constitution to help you in the day-to-day running of the ministry. Congratulations, once again. 

    6. Henry Okello Oryem

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okello Oryem, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation, you are welcome to the 11th Parliament. Thank you for coming back and congratulations for catching the appointing authority’s eye. We wish to give you our Rules of Procedure and the Constitution to guide you in your day-to-day operations.

Members, we are in a session but I see sub meetings behind there. Please, keep social distance.

    7. Alice Karamuzi Kaboyo

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alice Kaboyo, Minister of State in the Office of the Prime Minister, Luwero and Rwenzori region, you are welcome to the Parliament of Uganda. 

We know it is your first time to be here and we believe that you will learn; that is why we are giving you the Rules of Procedure and the Constitution to help you in your new assignment. Congratulations.

    8. Vincent Ssempijja

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssempijja Vincent, we welcome you back to the 11th Parliament, now in a new position and no longer in agriculture. We wish and pray that when Members want your help in the new sector, you will be available for them. Once again, we are giving you the Rules of Procedure and the Constitution to help you in your new assignment. Congratulations.

    9. Dr Samuel Mayanja

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sam Mayanja, you are welcome to the Parliament of Uganda. We are aware it is your first time to be here. We are giving you our Rules of Procedure and the Constitution to help you in your new assignment. Congratulations.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. We had to restrict access to the building for 14 days because we had to disinfect it because of COVID-19. Thank you for cooperating with us. I welcome you back and request you to observe the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), so that we remain safe.

As indicated on the Order Paper, a motion will be moved to increase the membership of both the standing and sectoral committees to allow all the Members get accommodated in the committees, as per the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

In a related development, as you may be aware, rule 69 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament stipulates the procedure for consideration of a motion to amend the rules. The rule, inter alia, requires a five-day notice to amend the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and referral of the motion to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. Because of that, hon. Ssemujju will move a motion in respect of rule 69. This is not practical at the moment because the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline is not yet in place. That is why we are moving a motion on rule 69.

Since the Speaker is committed to many other parliamentary duties, I have assigned hon. Zijjan David Livingstone, Member of Parliament for Butembe County, to assist the Speaker as dean of independents in the Parliament work. In exercise of my powers, under rule 8 I have delegated him to present the Independent Members of Parliament in today’s sitting.

Honourable members, in today’s sitting, we shall also have nominees for backbench Commissioners tabled for election by the House. This will be done by the respective whips.

As you may be aware, most of our business comes from Government. We now have a fully constituted Government and Cabinet. Today’s Order Paper is largely about designation of Members to committees; let us focus on that.

I have received many notifications on matters of national importance. Those shall be considered in tomorrow’s sitting. All Members who have matters of national importance should present them tomorrow, after we have heard a statement from the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, under Rule 41 of the Rules of Procedure. We shall have a question-and-answer session under the Prime Minister’s Time. This is meant to be on Thursdays but we have brought it to Wednesday because on Thursday, we have a Business Committee sitting.

As part of the steps taken by the Parliamentary Commission to mitigate the threat of COVID-19, there will be routine tests for Members and staff prior to the sitting of the House. This will be a regular requirement. I urge Members to adhere whenever called upon because of this COVID-19 pandemic. Let us not take COVID-19 like it is something easy; it is real and is killing so many people.

Honourable members, in the exercise of the powers given to the Speaker under Rule 8 of the Rules of Procedure, and pursuant to Article 79 of the Constitution, I appointed a COVID-19 taskforce that is mandated to carry out an oversight role on behalf of Parliament. That was done when we were in recess. We could not simply wait and see what was happening. I appointed them and we will refer the matter to the Business Committee that is sitting on Thursday. As Parliament, we needed to be seen to be working and we are working. I must appreciate the committee; it is doing very good work.

If we had a Business Committee in place, it would have approved the taskforce but we did not have it. However, we are going to have it after today’s session and we will make sure this is sent to the Business Committee.

Honourable members, the Business Committee is sitting on Thursday, 15 July 2021 at 11.00 a.m. in the Parliamentary Conference Hall. This serves to notify the members of the Business Committee accordingly.

Honourable members, I received the following names of Members that the respective parties have designated to international bodies and delegations:

Inter Parliamentary Union

    1. Hon. Patrick Nsanja
    2. Hon. Alex Ruhunda
    3. Hon. Nancy Acora
    4. Hon. Susan Amero
    5. Hon. Abdul Mutumba
    6. Hon. Mohammed Kato
    7. Hon. Flavia Kalule

Commonwealth Parliamentary Association

    1. Hon. Enosi Asiimwe
    2. Hon. Baroda Kayaga
    3. Hon. David Kalwanga
    4. Hon. David Kabanda

ACP-EU

    1. Hon. Samuel Opio.
    2. Hon. Maurice Kibalya.
    3. Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo.

Organisation of Islamic Conference

1.	Hon. Bashir Lubega.

Representatives to the Parliamentary Pension Board of Trustees

    1. Hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara
    2. Hon. Aisha Kabanda.

Since the last sitting, we have lost so many Ugandans of different walks of life, including many prominent Ugandans, some of whom are loved ones to our honourable Members of Parliament. Notable among them is hon. Aggrey Awori, an eminent Ugandan economist, former ambassador, politician and an Olympian too. He served as a Constituent Assembly delegate, represented Samia Bugwe North in the Sixth Parliament, and served as Minister of Information and Communication Technology in Uganda. 

We condole with all the Ugandans who have lost their loved ones. I request, as representatives of the people of Uganda, that we rise and observe a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we receive the motion from the Government Chief Whip, we need to suspend rule 69. I, therefore, invite hon. Ssemujju. I would like Members to appreciate, as I said, that today we are designating Members to committees. We will come with all the procedural matters and matters of national importance tomorrow.

Before hon. Ssemujju comes in, I would like to announce that we are replacing hon. Anifa Kawooya with hon. Caroline Kamusiime as our representative to the Pan-African Parliament (PAP).

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Madam Speaker, thank you for your indulgence. I just want to put it on record that the Opposition – on ACP-EU and the Islamic Conference – is finalising consultations to designate Members. We shall be informing Parliament in the next few days.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will be waiting for the names.

2.56
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to move a motion under rule 16 of our Rules of Procedure.

“WHEREAS rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament provides that each standing committee, apart from the Business Committee, Budget Committee and the Appointments Committee, shall comprise not less than 15 members and not more than 35 Members of Parliament selected in accordance with the rules;

AND WHEREAS rule 188(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament provides that a sectoral committee shall consist of not less than 15 members and not more than 30 members selected from among Members of Parliament;

AWARE THAT the total number of Members of Parliament has increased from 443 in the Tenth Parliament to 529 in the Eleventh Parliament, making it impossible to meet the specific requirements under rule 157(3), which provides that a Member shall not belong to more than two committees, given the limits specified in the composition of standing and sectoral committees under rules 161, 163, 173(1) and 188(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament;

REALISING THAT there is urgent need to amend the rules on composition of committees to accommodate the increased numbers of Members;

NOTING, HOWEVER, THAT under rule 69, a motion to amend the Rules of Procedure of Parliament must be presented after giving not less than five days’ notice and after being proposed, it shall stand referred to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline and no further proceedings shall be taken on it until the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline reports;

AWARE THAT the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline itself is not yet constituted, and given that there is need to amend the provisions on the composition of committees to enable every Member belong to a committee;

APPRECIATING, THEREFORE, THAT there is need to suspend rule 69 to dispense with the requirement of the five days’ notice and the referral to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to enable the whole House to consider a motion to amend the Rules of Procedure;

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves that rule 69 is hereby suspended to enable the House to urgently consider a motion to amend the Rules of Procedure to determine the composition of standing and sectoral committees.”

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion on suspension of rule 69, moved by hon. Ssemujju Ibrahim, seconded? Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, in fact, the whole House should have supported this motion. Not doing so would mean that you have no committees to belong to. 

We had a meeting as whips to designate Members of Parliament to committees as the rules require, but we hit a snag. This is because the limitation is that you cannot have more than 35 Members of Parliament on a standing committee, yet as I have noted, the number of MPs has increased from 400 to now 529. If we strictly abide by that rule, it means that there will be Members who will not belong to a committee.

Therefore, this motion is more procedural; we must find room to accommodate all of us, and then we begin transacting the business of Parliament.

This motion simply invites you to use one of the rules of Parliament to suspend the requirement that to amend Rules of Procedure, you have to give a five-day notice. That being the case, even the committee to which the notice must be referred - the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline – is not constituted. It is also affected by the circumstances.

Therefore, I would like to limit my justification to circumstances that I think are easy for everybody to notice. We are unable to proceed with the business of designating Members to committees because the requirement under the rule catered for the last Parliament; it did not cater for this Parliament that has increased by nearly 100 Members of Parliament. 

Honourable members, that being the case, I would like to invite all of you to support this motion, so that we can designate Members to committees and they process work on behalf of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I would like to end here. I thank you for giving me the opportunity to present this motion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju. Can I have the seconder, hon. Sseggona Medard, and then we will have hon. Okot, who is the whip for the Democratic Party.

3.03
MR MEDARD LUBEGA-SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I rise to second the motion moved by the honourable Member for Kira Municipality. The reasons have been given.

However, I would invite the House as well to look at rule 188(1) in considering this motion. It caters for sectoral committees as well, which will equally be affected. It places a ceiling that a sectoral committee shall consist of not less than 15 members and not more than 30 members selected from Members of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, with your permission, I would pray that we cater for this in the proposed motion, and therefore consider the motion amended to that extent. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Sseggona. Can I have a seconder from the Government side? 

3.05
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a motion which all sides of the political divide in the House sat and agreed to because as whips, we had hit a snag. A very good example is that I would have 47 Members on my side who would not be members of standing committees if we were to follow the rules strictly.

Therefore, I would like to request colleagues that we do not waste much time; we should move and approve this motion. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I have hon. Opendi and we close it.

3.05
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do support the motion. I would like to mention that these Rules of Procedure were passed by this Parliament in the Tenth Parliament. This issue had been brought up by the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline; unfortunately, Members did not appreciate what the committee was talking about. 

Equally, another issue that was brought to this House and discussed was to increase the number of committees. There are certain committees that are loaded with a lot of work and are not able to even accomplish the task at hand. Look at the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Governments) and the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Agencies and State Enterprises (COSASE), which has very many statutory bodies to oversee. The Committee on Public Accounts (Local Governments) has the cities, 149 districts, sub-counties and town councils –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Opendi, you will bring that as a motion. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you. I do support the motion, but my proposal is that once the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline is fully constituted, it should equally look at these committees that are loaded so that they can be split. This will allow Members to meaningfully make contributions to those state enterprises, districts and the various committees that they oversee. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline should take note. Once fully constituted, there are matters that you should handle urgently.

I now put the question that the motion be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AMEND THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

3.08
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move this motion under rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, for a resolution of Parliament to amend the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to determine the membership and composition of standing and sectoral committees.

“WHEREAS Article 90(1) and (2) of the Constitution provides that Parliament shall appoint committees necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions and that Parliament shall, by its Rules of Procedure, prescribe the powers, composition and functions of its committees;

AND WHEREAS under rule 156 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the House shall, in accordance with Article 90 of the Constitution, appoint committees of Parliament necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions;

AWARE that under rules 160 and 188 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, members of standing committees and sectoral committees are selected from among Members of Parliament and as far as is reasonably practicable, the overall membership of these committees must reflect the proportionalmembership in the House, taking into consideration the numerical strength of the parties and the interests of the independent Members; 

AWARE THAT rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament provides that each standing committee, apart from the Business Committee, the Budget Committee and the Appointments Committee, shall comprise not less than 15 members and not more than 35 members selected in accordance with the rules; 

NOTING THAT rule 188(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament provide that a sectoral committee shall consist of not less than 15 members and not more than 30 members selected from among Members of Parliament; 

FURTHER NOTING that the total number of Members of Parliament has increased from 442 in the Tenth Parliament to 529 in the Eleventh Parliament, making it impossible to meet the specific requirement under rule 157(3), which provides that a Member shall not belong to more than two committees, given the limit specified on the composition of standing committees and sectoral committees under Rules 161, 163, 173(1), 188(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament; 

APPRECIATING that due to the increase in the total number of Members of Parliament and for Parliament to efficiently discharge its functions, there is need to amend the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to remove the limits with respect to the membership of standing committees and composition of sectoral committees respectively, to have each Member of Parliament belong to a committee of Parliament and further to allow for equal numbers in each standing or sectoral committee; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that rules 161, 163, 173(1) and 188(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament be amended as follows: 

    1. Under rule 161 - membership of standing committees - substitute the rule with the following:
	‘161. Membership of Standing Committees 
	Subject to these rules, all standing committees, except the Business Committee, shall as far as is reasonably practicable, comprise of the same number of members selected in accordance with Rule 160.’ 

2. 	Delete rule 163, which is about composition of the Committee on Appointments.

3. 	Under rule 173, which is about composition and functions of the Committee on Budget, delete sub-rule (1). 

4. Under rule 188, composition of sectoral committees, substitute rule 188(1) with the following: 
‘(1) All sectoral committees shall, as far as is reasonably practicable, comprise of the same number of members selected in accordance with these rules.’” 

Madam Speaker and members, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded by hon. Nambeshe, hon. Sseggona, hon. Zaake, hon. Attan, hon. Kabanda and many other Members of Parliament. Can you speak to your motion? Let us not take a lot of time because designation is going to take a little more time. 

MR TAYEBWA: You are absolutely right, Madam Speaker. These are the issues we have been discussing. This motion will solve the issue of amending our Rules of Procedure every time the number of Members of Parliament increases or decreases, as the case may be. 

Like I told you, I have been facing a dilemma of 47 Members not being designated to any committee. The moment we pass this motion, we shall move very well as party whips because Members will have the confidence that once they are voted, they will belong to a committee. 

With that, I request Members to support this motion. Thank you. 

3.14 
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, I come to throw my full weight behind this motion for a resolution of this Parliament to amend the Rules of Procedure to determine the membership and composition of the standing and sectoral committees. 

Rule 188(3) is as clear as day. It says, “…the overall membership of the committees shall reflect the proportional membership in the House.” The termhere is “proportional membership”. This would require us to apply the arithmetic formula of direct proportion – not inverse. The inverse proportion would require that when a quantity increases, the other quantity decreases and vice versa. 

In direct proportion, if you choose to pay three times more for the items you normally pay for, it is therefore compelling that you will pay three times as much money. The price you pay for the increase on the items you have bought should be directly proportional to the amount of money you are going to pay. 

The price that this 11th Parliament is paying is because the 10th Parliament, in its wisdom, generated new constituencies. It is in the 10th Parliament where we had a membership of 443 but now, in the 11th Parliament, we have 529. That is a variance of a whooping 89 Members. 

Madam Speaker, if we were to maintain the status quo on standing committees, the minimum limit would be 15 and the maximum limit 35. Equally, on sectoral committees, the minimum would be 15 and the maximum 30. If we were to maintain that status quo, as the rules provided then, we would be in a dilemma as to where to accommodate the rest of the Members on these committees. 

The sober bit in this motion is that it is not seeking to increase the number of committees. It is only seeking to remove those limits, and this is because of popular demand. It is bi-partisan and it has support across the political divide. It is not like the other unpopular limits which were removed by the previous parliaments. 

Madam Speaker, if I take you down memory lane, you will remember that the Seventh Parliament removed the presidential five-year term limit and it was very unpopular. However, this is a numerical limit, which we would want to remove - and it is very popular - so that we accommodate more Members on these committees. 

Equally, in the 10th Parliament, the controversial removal of the presidential age limit, which was – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Kindly limit yourself to the Rules of Procedure.  

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, these particular limits, which I am beseeching Parliament to remove, are popular because they are about accommodating Members of Parliament so that they can efficiently discharge their functions. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and the Members and implore them to support this motion. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are amending the Rules of Procedure and not the Constitution. Thank you very much, Chief Opposition Whip. Hon. Allan Ssewanyana. Limit the time; I am giving you two minutes.

3.19
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (NUP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion moved by hon. Tayebwa, but with only a few changes. His proposal is about leaving the number open. However, we are going to witness a scenario in future, which may not be very far, where a committee of Parliament is having the same number of members as former Parliaments - for example, 100 Members on a committee of Parliament.

Therefore, we should limit the number the way we are doing now, so that we give a chance to the next Parliament to see if it will be worthwhile for them to increase or decrease the numbers. We are always urged as Members of Parliament and Government to work on decreasing the size of Parliament because it creates so many problems, like the one we are now solving. That is my submission, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ssewanyana. The essence behind leaving it open is that we are not only legislating for today but also for tomorrow. Assuming in the next term we have 1000 Members, what happens? 

3.21
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to borrow from hon. Ssewanyana’s argument. Leaving it open is very risky for the future. Members may not hope to belong to particular committees; what will happen then? For example, if Members do not want to be on the committee –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of procedure. Before, the procedural matter comes in, I need to inform the House that all of you were represented in yesterday’s meeting by your whips. You all belong somewhere, especially hon. Olanya and hon. Ssewanyana - you belong to the Opposition and your whip was there and he spoke for you.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I would like to raise a procedural issue. My two colleagues seem to be debating a motion that has not been moved. The motion that has been moved provides a formula so that even if you are three MPs, you divide yourselves by the number of committees. If you are 10,000 MPs, like is likely to be as long as you have the NRM in power, you divide them.

Therefore, the procedural issue I am raising is whether the MPs should debate a motion that has not been moved and divert this Parliament from debating a motion that is very specific - providing a formula that you use regardless of the number and size of Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, the mover of the motion talked about the numerical strength and size of Parliament. Basing on that, honourable members, I now put the question for a resolution of Parliament to amend rule 161 and rule 181(1) of the Rules of Procedure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO STANDING COMMITTEES AND SECTORAL COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULES 160 AND 187 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are designating Members to several committees. We have standing committees and sectoral committees. We are going to start with standing committees. The rules say that the Speaker shall present the names but the Speaker equally has powers to delegate.  

I, therefore, delegate the Government Chief Whip to read for Government, the Chief Opposition Whip for the Opposition, the dean of the independents for the independent Members, and then the head of the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) to read the UPDF list. Can we start with standing committees?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, the procedural matter I am raising is that as the UPDF comes up to designate its members, we should share them across the House - five should seat on the Opposition side and five on NRM side. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, they are non-partisan, but whenever we are here, UPDF representatives are put on the side of NRM. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that this time we have five UPDF on the Opposition side and five on the NRM side, and actually they should always vote on our side. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, the UPDF are non-partisan. For now, before we have our new chamber, we have free sitting. If you want, you can go and sit on the other side near the Government Chief Whip. Can we have the Government Chief Whip? 

3.26
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I start with the Committee on Budget. On this committee, the Government side has designated the following Members:

    1. Hon. Opolot-Isiagi Patrick, Kachumbala County -Chairperson 
    2. Hon. Wamakuyu Ignatius Mudimi, Elgon County -	Deputy Chairperson
    3. Hon. Keefa Kiwanuka, Kiboga East County  
    4. Hon. Namukuta Brenda, Kaliro District 
    5. Hon. Moses Magogo, Budiope East County 

    6. Hon. Kaberuka James, Kinkizi County West 
    7. Hon. Katalihwa Donald, Mwenge County South 
    8. Dr Lodoi Mutono, Butebo County 
    9. Hon. Lokii John Baptist, Matheniko County 
    10. Hon. Akamba Paul, Busiki County 

    11. Hon. Mwine Mpaka, Mbarara South Division 
    12. Hon. Namujju Cissy, Lwengo District 
    13. Hon. Gyaviira Ssemwanga, Buyamba County 
    14. Hon. Dickson Kateshumbwa, Sheema Municipality 
    15. Hon. Nayebale Sylvia, Gomba District 

    16. Hon. Moses Aleper, Chekwii County (Kadam) 
    17. Hon. Katusiime Mugisha Annet, Bushenyi District 
    18. Hon. Atim Agnes Apea, Amolatar District 
    19. Hon. Pascal Mbabazi, Buwekula County 
    20. Hon. Mourine Osoru, Arua City 

    21. Hon. Kankunda Amos Kibwika, Rwampara County
    22. Hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire, Buyaga West County 
    23. Hon. Apollo Yeri Ofwono, Tororo Municipality 
    24. Hon. Catheline Ndamira Atwakiire, Kabale District 
    25. Hon. Kabanda David, Kasambya County 

I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the list of Members constituting the Budget Committee. I put the question to confirm those Members as members of the Budget Committee – I will now have the list from the Opposition side for the Budget Committee.

3.29
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, in accordance with rule 160(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, I hereby designate the following National Unity Platform Members to the Budget Committee:

1. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, Butambala County
2. Hon. Allan Ssewanyana, Makindye Division West
3. Hon. John Baptist Nambeshe, Manjiya County
4. Hon. Patrick Oshabe, Kassanda County North
5. Hon. Gorreth Namugga, Mawogoola County South

Others include:

6. Hon. Maxwell Akora (UPC), Maruzi County
7. Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju (FDC), Kira Municipality 
8. Hon. Anna Adeke (FDC), Soroti District 
9. Hon. Anthony Akol (FDC), Kilak North County 
10. Dr Bayigga Lulume (DP), Buikwe County South. 

I beg to designate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from theUPDF. 

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I wrote to the ChiefOpposition Whip and to the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) Whip expressing my interest to be on the Budget Committee. However, I have not heard my name being mentioned and I have not changed my name. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, I only receive what has been processed by the different parties. That can only be corrected within your house. I only get what is processed, so that can be handled by your whip. Let us hear from the UPDF.   

3.33
COL CHARITY BAINABABO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am Col Charity Bainababo, one of the 10 representatives of the UPDF to the 11th Parliament and now the Whip of the UPDF caucus. We present Gen. Wilson Mbadi as our nominee to the Budget Committee. I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Members, having heard from Government, Opposition and UPDF, it is now the independents’ turn. 

3.34
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am David Zijjan, representing the people of Butembe and the Dean of Independents as you have assigned. We are very grateful, Madam Speaker. I now present to you the following Members for the Budget Committee:

    1. Hon. Paul Omara, Otuke County
    2. Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, Ndorwa County East
    3. Hon. Mary Nakato, Buyende District
    4. Hon. Denis Nyangweso, Samia-Bugwe Central County
    5. Hon. Paska Menya, Pader District
    6. Hon. Shartsi Musherure, Mawogoola North County.

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Dean of Independents. I request all parties to follow the formula that we gave you. If you are giving us excess numbers, we will have no option other than reject the committee.

Honourable members, you have listened to the list of members constituting the Committee of Budget. I put the question that the House confirms the names of those Members to the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

3.36
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP(Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I designate the following members to the Committee on Climate Change:

    1. Hon. Lawrence Songa, Ora County - Chairperson
    2. Hon. Jacinta Atuto, Kapelebyong District - Vice Chairperson.
    3. Hon. Hellen Wandera, Busia District
    4. Hon. Esenu Anthony, Kapelebyong County
    5. Dr Isamat Abraham, Kapir County

    6. Hon. Benjamin Kamukama, Ruhaama East County
    7. Hon. Albert Lokoru, Tepeth County
    8. Hon. John Magolo, Bungokho County North
    9. Hon. Enosi Asiimwe, Kabula County
    10. Hon. Godfrey Onzima, Aringa North County

    11. Hon. Janet Okori-Moe, Abim District
    12. Hon. Godfrey Wakooli, Butiru County
    13. Hon. Peggy Waako, Older Persons Representative
    14. Hon. Seth Wambede, Northern Division, Mbale City
    15. Hon. Richard Oseku, Kibale County

    16. Hon. Cosmas Elotu, Dakabela County
    17. Hon. Enock Nyongore, Nakaseke North County
    18. Hon. Pamela Kamugo, Budaka District
    19. Hon. Abrahams Lokii, Jie County
    20. Hon. Christine Nakwang, Kaabong District

    21. Hon. Samuel Okwir, Moroto County
    22. Hon. Ismail Lomwar, Kotido Municipality
    23. Hon. James Nsaba-Buturo, Bufumbira County East
    24. Hon. Kisos Chemaswet, Soi County
    25. Hon. Edson Rugumayo, Youth Representative, Western. 

I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Opposition.

3.38
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Designation of members to the Committee on Climate Change:

    1. Hon. Christine Kaaya (NUP), Kiboga District
    2. Hon. Charles Matovu (NUP), Busiro County South 
    3. Hon. Jimmy Lwanga (NUP), Njeru Municipality 
    4. Hon. Ronald Balimwezo (NUP), Nakawa Division East
    5. Hon. Helen Nakimuli (NUP), Kalangala District 

    6. Hon. Nicholas Kamara (FDC), Kabale Municipality 
    7. Hon. Timothy Batuwa (FDC), Jinja South Division West 
    8. Hon. Nyakato Asinansi (FDC), Hoima City
    9. Hon. Richard Lumu (DP), Mityana County South

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Independents. 

3.39
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Madam Speaker, the Independents designated on the Committee on Climate Change are:

    1. Hon. Rauben Arinaitwe, Isingiro West County
    2. Hon. Susan Amero, Amuria District
    3. Hon. Rita Atukwasa, Mbarara City
    4. Hon. Kenneth Kiiza, Bujenje County
    5. Hon. Moses Kamuntu, Rubanda County West
    6. Hon. Arthur Waako, Budaka County

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Uganda Peoples Defence Forces. 

3.41
COL CHARITY BAINABABO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The UPDF is not presenting anyone for the Committee on Climate Change. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have listened to the list of Members constituting the Committee on Climate Change. I put the question that this House confirms these Members belonging to that committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

3.41
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The following Members are designated to the Committee on National Economy: 

    1. Hon. John Bosco Ikojo, Bukedea County - Chairperson
    2. Hon. Robert Migadde, Buvuma Islands County- Vice Chairperson
    3. Hon. Jane Awich, Kaberamaido District
    4. Hon. Tonny Ayoo, Kwania County
    5. Hon. Stephen Mugabi, Bukooli County North

    6. Hon. Oliver Koyekyenga, Buhweju District
    7. Hon. Midius Natukunda, Rukungiri District
    8. Hon. Phyllis Chemutai, Kapchorwa District
    9. Hon. Alex Byarugaba, Isingiro County South
    10. Hon. Isaac Etuka, Upper Madi County

    11. Hon. Iddi Isabirye, Bunya County South
    12. Hon. Kajwengye Wilson, Nyabushozi County
    13. Hon. Aisa Agaba, Bugangaizi East County
    14. Hon. Pauline Kemirembe Kyaka, Lyantonde District
    15. Hon. Ruth Lematia, Maracha East County

    16. Hon. Peterkhen Locap, Bokora East County
    17. Hon. Jovanice Twinobusingye, Kiruhura District
    18. Hon. Lillian Aber, Kitgum District
    19. Hon. Jane Pacuto Avur, Packwach District
    20. Hon. Nathan Byanyima, Bukanga North County

    21. Hon. Henry Maurice Kibalya, Bugabula County South
    22. Hon. Sylvia Vicky Awas, Nabilatuk District
    23. Hon. Paul Kwizera, Kisoro Municipality
    24. Hon. Simon Peter Wokorach, Aswa County
    25. Hon. John Teira, Bugabula County North

I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Opposition.

3.43
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): We have designated the following Members to the Committee on National Economy:

    1. Hon. Francis Katabaazi (NUP), Kalungu East County
    2. Hon. Hassan Kirumira (NUP), Katikamu County South
    3. Hon. Derrick Nyeko (NUP), Makindye Division East
    4. Hon. Godfrey Saazi (NUP), Gomba East County
    5. Dr Abed Bwanika (NUP), Kimaanya-Kabonera Division
    6. Hon. Jimmy Akena (UPC), Lira East Division
    7. Hon. Moses Kabuusu (FDC), Kyamuswa County
    8. Hon. Moses Attan (FDC), Soroti East Division
    9. Hon. Denis Oguzu (FDC), Maracha County
    10. Hon. Fred Kayondo (DP), Mukono County South.

I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Independents.

3.45
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): I beg to designate the following Members to theCommittee on National Economy, Madam Speaker:

    1. Hon. Jonathan Ebwalu, Soroti West Division
    2. Hon. Allan Atugonza, Buliisa County
    3. Hon. Margaret Makhoha, Namayingo District
    4. Hon. Susan Abeja, Otuke District
    5. Hon. Geoffrey Macho, Busia Municipality
    6. Hon. Julius Tusiime, Rwampara East County

I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Uganda Peoples Defence Forces.

COL CHARITY BAINABABO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. To the Committee on National Economy, the UPDF is presenting Lt Gen. James Mugira. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the list of Members constituting the Committee on National Economy. I put the question that this House confirms the names.

(Question put and agreed to.)

3.46
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, to the Committee on Equal Opportunities, the Government side designates the following:

    1. Hon Judith Alyek, Kole District – Chairperson
    2.  Hon. Dorcas Acen, Alebtong District – Vice Chairperson
    3.  Hon. Norah Bigirwa, Buliisa District
    4.  Hon. Bashir Lubega, Mubende Municipality
    5.  Hon. Sharon Balmoyi, Gulu District

    6.  Hon. Muhamad Ssentayi, Bukoto County West
    7.  Hon. Moses Ogwal, Dokolo North County
    8.  Hon. Ephraim Biraaro, Buhweju West County
    9.  Hon. Sanon Bwiire, Bulamogi County
    10. Hon. Agnes Kunihira Abwoli, Workers Representative

    11. Hon. Jane Bainomugisha, Ibanda District
    12. Hon. Sam Otukol, Pallisa County
    13. Hon Juliet Bashiisha, Mitooma District
    14. Hon. Solomon Alinga Chelangat, Too County
    15. Hon. Paul Chelimo, Kongasis County

    16. Hon Siraji Ezama Brahan, Aringa County
    17. Hon. Flavia Kabahenda Rwabuhoro, Kyegewa District
    18. Hon. Catherine Lamwaka, Omoro District
    19. Hon. Geoffrey Mutiwa, Bunyole West County
    20. Hon. Alex Brandon Kintu, Kagoma North County 

    21. Hon. Joram Tibasiimwa, Older Persons Representative
    22. Hon. Loy Katali, Jinja District
    23. Hon. Yona Kayogera, Busiki North County
    24. Hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro, Sheema District
    25. Hon. Gideon Thembo Mujungu, Busongora County South

I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Opposition.

3.48
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Designation of Members to the Committee on Equal Opportunities for NUP – 
 
    1. Hon. Aloysius Mukasa, Rubaga Division South
    2. Hon. Juliet Nakabuye Kakande, Woman Representative, Masaka City
    3. Hon. Frank Kabuye, Kassanda County South
    4. Hon. Christine Nandagire Ndiwalana, Bukomansimbi North County
    5. Hon. Denis Sekabira, Katikamu County North

Others include – 

    6. Hon. Stella Apolot Isodo (FDC), Ngora District
    7. Hon. Businge Joab (FDC), Masindi Municipality
    8. Hon. Isabirye David, Jinja North Division
    9. Hon. Okot Peter (DP), Tochi County. 

I beg to designate.

3.50
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): To the Committee on Equal Opportunities, I beg to designate the following independent Members:
 
1. Hon. Kangwagye Stephen Rwakanuma, Bukanga County
2. Hon. Komol Emmanuel, Dodoth East County 
3. Dr Musa Noah, Koboko North County
4. Hon. Were Godfrey Odero, Samia-Bugwe County South
5. Hon. Miriam Mukhaye, Mbale District
6. Hon. Nantaba Idah, Kayunga District. 

I beg to designate.

3.51
COL CHARITY BAINABABO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The UPDF is not designating anyone to the Committee on Equal Opportunities.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you have listened to the list of Members constituting the Committee on Equal Opportunities. I put the question that this House approves the Members whose names have been read to the Committee on Equal Opportunities.

(Question put and agreed to.)

3.51
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. To the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, I hereby designate the following honourable members: 

1. 	Hon. Abdu Katuntu, Bugweri County - Chairperson 
2. 	Hon. Charles Onen, Laroo-Pece Division - Deputy Chairperson 
3. 	Hon. Kauma Sauda, Iganga District 
4. 	Hon. Mutembuli Yusuf, Bunyole East County 
5. 	Hon. Okiror Bosco, Usuk County 

6. 	Hon. Ssebikaali Yoweri, Ntwetwe County
7. 	Hon. Otimgiw Isaac, Padyere County 
8.	Hon. Kanushu Laura, Persons with Disabilities Representative, National 
9. 	Hon. Kunihiria Faith, Kyenjojo District 
10. 	Hon. Bingi Patrick Nyanzi, Butemba County 

11. 	Hon. Kato Mohammed, Katerera County
12.	Hon. Christine Akumu Mavenjina, Older Persons representative, Northern 
13. 	Hon. Nakazibwe Hope, Mubende District 
14. 	Hon. Francis Twinomujuni Kazini, Buhaguzi County 
15. 	Hon. Nebanda Florence, Butaleja District 

16. 	Hon. Nyakato Dorothy, Kitagwenda District 
17. 	Hon. Achayo Juliet Lodou, Ngora County 
18. 	Hon. Adome Francis Lorika, Moroto Municipality 
19. 	Hon. Timuzigu Michael, Kajara County
20. 	Hon. Okot Boniface, Youth Representative, Northern 

21. 	Hon. Kabuura Derrick, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality
22. 	Hon. Kahunde Helen, Kiryandongo District
23. 	Hon. Kamara-Nzeyimana John, Bufumbira County North
24. 	Hon. Tibasiimiwa Joram, Older Persons Representative, Western 
25. 	Hon. Aleper Margaret, Kotido District. 

I beg to submit.

4.01
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): To the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, the National Unity Platform begs to designate the following honourable members: 

1. Hon. Malende Shamim, Kampala
2. Hon. Nalule Aisha Kabanda, Butambala District 
3. Hon. Hannington Wakayima Musoke, Nansana Municipality 
4. Hon. Kayemba-Ssolo Geofrey, Bukomansimbi South County 
5. Hon. Nambooze Teddy, Mpigi District.

From FDC, I beg to designate – 

6. Hon. Ogwal Cecilia, Dokolo District 
7. Hon. Katusabe Atkins, Bukonzo County West. 

I beg to designate.

3.55
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): To the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, I beg to designate the following independent honourable Members:

1. Hon. Onen Charles, Laroo-Pece Division 
2. Hon. Abdu Katuntu, Bugweri County 
3. Hon. Adidwa Abdu, Bukooli South County 
4. Hon. Opio Samuel, Kole North County 
5. Hon. Masaba Karim, Industrial Division, Mbale City 
6. Hon. Musana Eric, Buyaga East County –(Interruption)

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and congratulations. The Government Chief Whip designated hon. Abdu Katuntu, now here the dean of the Independents is designating the same person.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there any problem with that?

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, I want to know something about the provisions in our rules for double designation - Where does this individual specifically belong? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Abdu Katuntu is an Independent Member of Parliament just like hon. Onen and the NRM thought it wise that the people who they want to represent them on that committee should be Independents; I do not see any problem with that. Go ahead!

MR ZIJJAN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will repeat the names for purposes of recollection by the House. The Independent Members designated to this committee are: 

1. Hon. Onen Charles, Laroo-Pece Division 
2. Hon. Abdu Katuntu, Bugweri County
3. Hon. Adidwa Abdu, Bukooli South County 
4. Hon. Opio Samuel, Kole North County 
5. Hon. Masaba Karim, Industrial Division, Mbale City 
6. Hon. Musana Eric, Buyaga East County. 

I beg to designate.

3.58
COL CHARITY BAINABABO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The UPDF is not designating any Member to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you have listened to the list of Members constituting the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)  

MR TIMUZIGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did not indicate my interest to serve on the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. Instead –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Kindly go and sort that out in your house. Which party do you belong to? I receive what is processed. I do not get involved in designating. 

MR TIMUZIGU: Madam Speaker, I thought you are the custodian of the privileges of Members of Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The next is the Committee onHIV/AIDS and related matters.

3.59
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. To the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters, I designate the following: 

    1. Hon. Sarah Netalisire, Namisindwa District – Chairperson
    2. Hon. Stephen Kisa, Luuka South County – Vice Chairperson
    3. Dr Charles Ayume, Koboko Municipality
    4. Hon. Josyline Kamateneti, Ntungamo District
    5. Hon. Christine Bukenya Sendawula, Kyankwanzi District

    6. Hon. John Ntamuhiira Twesigye, Bunyaruguru County
    7. Hon. Michael Wanyama, Namayingo South County
    8. Hon. Tony Awany, Nwoya County
    9. Hon. Joel Leku, Terego West County 
    10. Hon. Linos Ngompek, Kibanda North County

    11. Hon. James Olobo, Kioga North County
    12. Hon. Josephat Tumwesigye, Bugangaizi South County
    13. Hon. David Wakikona, Bushigai County
    14. Hon. Agnes Acibu, Nebbi District	
    15. Hon. Julius Acon, Otuke East County	
			
    16. Hon. Christine Akello, Erute County North			
    17. Hon. Judith Alyek, Kole District				
    18. Hon. Margaret Ayebare, Mbarara District 	
    19. Hon. Jeniffer Ayoo, Kalaki District				
    20. Hon. Josephine Bebona Babungi, Bundibugyo District

    21. Hon. Harriet Businge, Hoima District		
    22. Hon. Jennifer Driwaru, Maracha District
    23. Hon. Esther Mbayo, Luuka District.			

I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Opposition.

4.08
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): On the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters, we have:

    1. Hon. Michael Kakembo, Entebbe Municipality
    2. Hon. Veronica Nanyondo, Bukomansimbi District 
    3. Hon. David Sserukenya, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality
    4. Hon. Charles Tebandeke, Bbale County
    5. Hon. Geoffrey Lutaaya, Kakuuto County
    6. Hon. Gilbert Olanya, Kilak South County
    7. Hon. Joan Acom Alobo, Soroti City 

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nambeshe, those names have not been heard well. Can you use the other microphone as this one is being sorted out? Please sort out this microphone.

MR NAMBESHE: On the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters, we have:

    1. Hon. Michael Kakembo, Entebbe Municipality
    2. Hon. Veronica Nanyondo, Bukomansimbi District 
    3. Hon. David Sserukenya, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality
    4. Hon. Charles Tebandeke, Bbale County
    5. Hon. Geoffrey Lutaaya, Kakuuto County
    6. Hon. Gilbert Olanya, Kilak South County
    7. Hon. Joan Acom Alobo, Soroti City 

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Independents?

4.09
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Tothe Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters, Madam Speaker, we have the following Members:

    1. Hon. Christopher Komakech, Aruu County
    2. Hon. Moses Acrobert Kiiza, Bughendera County
    3. Hon. Nathan Twesigye, Kashari South County
    4. Hon. Patrick Isingoma-Mwesigwa, Hoima East Division
    5. Hon. Isaac Katenya, Bulambuli County
    6. Hon. Polycarp Ogwari, Agule County

I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Uganda Peoples Defence Forces.

4.10
COL CHARITY BAINEBABO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. To the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters, we present the honourable Maj. Dr Jennifer Alanyo. I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you have listened to the list of Members constituting the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters. I now put the question that the House confirms the names on that committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next is the Committee on Human Rights.

4.06
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I designate the following Members:

                1. Hon. Fox Odoi, West Budama North East – Chairperson
                2. Hon. Janepher Mbabazi, Kagadi District – Vice Chairperson 
                3. Hon. Rose Obigah, Terego District 
                4. Hon. Milton Muwuma, Kigulu County South 
                5. Hon. Agnes Kirabo, Youth Representative, Central

                6. Hon. Maximus Ochai, West Budama County North 
                7. Hon. Simon Peter Opolot, Kanyum County
                8. Hon. Anne Mary Tumwiine, Ntoroko District
                9. Hon. Herbert Tayebwa, Kashongi County
                10. Hon. Nathan Nabeta-Igeme, Jinja South Division East 

                11. Hon. Robert Kasolo, Iki-Iki County
                12. Hon. Noeline Basemera Kisembo, Kibaale District 
                13. Hon. Dononzio Mugabe, Ruhinda South County
                14. Hon. Stephen Mugole Mauku, Kabweri County
                15. Hon. Molly Asiimwe, Rwampara District

                16. Hon. James Baba, Koboko County
                17. Hon. Yona Musinguzi, Ntungamo Municipality
                18. Hon. Peter Werikhe, Bubulo County West 
                19. Hon. Paul Asaba, Kyaka North County
                20. Hon. Alex Niyonsaba, Bufumbira South County

                21. Dr John Paul Ninkusiima, Ibanda South County
                22. Hon. Sowedi Kitanywa, Busongora County North 
                23. Hon. Ben Baatom Koryang, Dodoth West County
                24. Hon. Tarsis Rwaburindore, Ibanda Municipality 
                25. Hon. Peninah Busingye, Older Persons Representative, Central

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Opposition.

4.08
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): To the Committee on Human Rights, we have the following Members from NUP:

    1. Hon. Hanifa Nabukeera, Mukono District 
    2. Hon. Francis Zaake, Mityana Municipality
    3. Hon. Muhammad Ssegirinya, Kawempe Division North
    4. Hon. Flavia Nabagabe, Kassanda District 
    5. Hon. Allan Mayanja, Nakaseke Central County

    6. Hon. Allan Mayanja of Nakaseke Central,
    7. Hon. Jonathan Odur of Erute County South, 
    8. Hon. Junior Moses Bitek of Kioga,
    9. Hon. Tom Julius Ekudo of Gweri County and
    10. Hon. Geofrey Okello of Nwoya East.

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Whip for the Independents.

4.09
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Committee on Human Rights Madam Speaker:

    1. Hon. Moses Walyomu Muwanika of Kagoma County,
    2. Hon. Florence Nambozo Wamala, Woman Representative Sironko,
    3. Hon. Joseph Andrew Koluo of Toroma County,
    4. Hon. Vincent Shadrick Obong of Lira West Division,
    5. Hon. Naome Kabasharira of Rushenyi County,
    6. Hon. Baroda Kayanga of Kamuli Municipality.

I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have the UPDF.

4.10
BRIG. GEN. CHARITY BEINABABO (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, the UPDF is not nominating any member to the Committee on Human Rights. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us have order in the House.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, with all due respect, I am blessed that I was a Member of Parliament in the 10th Parliament and we had so many issues of human rights concerning the UPDF. I believe it is not proper for the UPDF not to have a Member on this committee. This is because good governance goes hand in hand with security and human rights. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Macho, we equally appreciate what you are saying. However, since they have decided not to designate, maybe they want to remain non-partisan, as we said before.

MR NAMBESHE: I had skipped hon. Francis Mwijukye of Buhweju on the Committee on Human Rights. I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you whips. Honourable members, you have listened to the list of Members constituting the Committee on Human Rights. I put the question that this House confirms the names of Members on that committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES AND IMPLEMENTATION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we start with the Chief Opposition Whip since this is an accountability committee.

4.12
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Committee on Government Assurances – NUP

    1. Hon. Betty Nambooze Bakireke of Mukono Municipality, as the    chairperson designate. 
    2. Hon. Joseph Ssewungu Gonzanga of Kalungu East as the Vice Chairperson of the committee.
    3. Hon. Stephen Sserubula of Lugazi Municipality.
    4. Hon. Robert Ssekitoleeko of Bamunanika South.
 
    5. Hon. Paul Nsubuga of Busiro North.
    6. Hon. Nelson Okello
    7. Hon. Julius Peter Emigu of Ochero County
    8. Hon. Florence Kabugho of Kasese District

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

4.14
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation, I designate:

    1. Hon. James Mamawi, Adjumani East County
    2. Hon. Jenifer Abaho Muheesi, Kazo
    3. Hon. Nelly Begumisa, Sembabule.
    4. Hon. Beatrice Akello Akori, Agago
    5. Hon. Amooti Tom Bright, Kyaka Central

    6. Hon. Mariam Naigaga, Namutumba
    7. Hon. Peter Okeyo, Bukooli Island
    8. Hon. John Bosco Ngoya, Bukora County
    9. Hon. Isaac Ssejjoba, Bukoto County Midwest
    10. Hon. Luke Kyobe, Luuka North County

    11. Hon. Henry Nkwasiibwe Zinkuratire, Ruhaama County
    12. Hon. Alfred Edakasi Elalu-Olale, Kaberamaido County
    13. Hon. Stephen Kasaija, Burahya County
    14. Hon. Sharifah Taban, Koboko
    15. Hon. Betty Louke Chelain, Upe County

    16. Hon. Grace Kesande, Bunyaruguru County
    17. Hon. Herbert Kinobere, Kibuku County
    18. Hon. Racheal Magoola, Bugweri
    19. Hon. David Muhumuza, Mwenge County North
    20. Hon. Phiona Nyamutooro, National Female Youth

    21. Hon. Tom Alero Aza, West Moyo County
    22. Hon. William Chemonges, Kween County
    23. Hon. Alioni Yorke Odria, Aringa South County
    24. Hon. Apollo Masika, Namisindwa County
    25. Hon. Felix Okot Ogong, Dokolo South County

I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have the Independents.

4.16
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation, Madam Speaker.

    1. Hon. Mohammad Nsereko, Kampala Central Division.

MR NSEREKO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleague for giving way. Honourable members, I invite you on a point of procedure under our rules, Rule 160(4) of our Rules of Procedure.

Madam Speaker, our rules on the constitution of standing committees as regards independent members of Parliament are very clear - and they state, “independent Members of Parliament under sub rule (4) shall apply to the Clerk to join committees of their choice.” The key word therein is “shall” and the Speaker shall accordingly ensure that the Members join the committee of their choice.

Madam Speaker, we had three choices in our application and I tendered my application in the Office of the Clerk, and indicated the following committees in pecking order. The Standing Committee I chose was the Public Accounts Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE). My second choice was the Committee on Climate Change and the third was the Committee on Public Accounts. I have heard none of the above reading my name. 

Madam Speaker, the reason we converge towards you as Independent members of Parliament is to secure our choices because they are premised on the aspirations of the people that voted for us. My desire to serve on an accountability committee is based on the notion of vouching for accountability in performance of state enterprises.

Therefore, never was I consulted for this decision to be arrived at or as Independents, we have not even had a shade to sit and share. Probably, all of us would mitigate through ourselves and decide where to give in and where to leave.

The purpose of our coming here is to perform. We have no doubt every Member can perform but your best performance is where you are best suited in ability to deliver to your people through committees and plenary.

My humble prayer is that let our prayers be heard. When someone seeks choices, there is a reason they do so. It is for better performance in this august House. Empathetically, if it were you or any other person, you would do the same as I to come and seek equity. I am here before you to seek that. At least, I should have been consulted but not to be tossed around into a committee that I had no choice over.

Madam Speaker, unless you are dragging me by force into this committee, you will find my service and that of the people of Kampala may not be best suited in that nature.

Wherefore, I pray that you indulge in this and we be called upon. The Dean is my good friend and I cannot doubt his judgment but we, as Independents, should sit and harmonise. There is no rush; we can go onto the committees much later. That is why we welcomed the motion of the expansion of committees so that we cater for capability, abilities and also public performance –(Member timed out.) – Thank you. I have brought the matter to the whole House because I did not get the opportunity –

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable member, your issue has been heard. Much as we are mindful of the performance of members of Parliament, as we were coming here, we did not say we must be in this committee. Mindful of the fact that the committees are limited and we are many, bear with us for now and we form the committees. We will change during the course of the second term. The committees were over-subscribed. The whips or the Dean of the Independents has a right to move a Member to another committee.

Dean, can you continue?

Mr nsereko: Madam Speaker, just a second. This is a command of the law and not your opinion. The law commands you that Independent Members shall apply. I did that. The command to you is that the Speaker “shall”. The word “shall” is very instrumental. There is nowhere in these rules that it states that a Dean can alter – the only rule talks about whips –

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable member, can we sort that out?

Mr nsereko: This is the law. I am not quoting air – 

The Deputy Speaker: If you want to opt out of the committee, well and good.

Mr nsereko: Madam Speaker, there must be a procedure, which is prescribed by law.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable member, can we have the designation done? 

Mr okin: Madam Speaker, I would like to first say that the honourable member who has just spoken is actually right but I am raising a point of order. The law stipulates very clearly that designation of Members of Parliament, especially the Independents, shall be done by the Clerk and the Speaker. If the Speaker has designated this responsibility to the Dean of the Independents, is the honourable member right to challenge the decision you have made?

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable member, we have heard your issue. Can we continue with the Dean?

Mr zijjan: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our rules also provide for relocation of Members from committees and so, I would like to advise honourable colleagues with similar sentiments that this is a matter we can follow up and rectify.

Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation:

Hon. Muhammad Nsereko –Kampala Central Division, Kampala.

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Okot, can you have a seat.

Mr zijjan:  
    1. Hon. Bahireira Tumwekwase Sylvia – Woman Representative, Kamwenge.
    2. Hon. Mukasa Julius Opondo – Bujumba County, Kalangala.
    3. Hon. Ameede Agnes –  Woman Representative, Butebo.
    4. Hon. Akugizibwe Aled Ronald – Buruuli County, Masindi
    5. Hon. Nakayenze Connie Galiwango - Woman Representative Mbale City.

I beg to designate.

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Muhammad Nsereko, we have taken note of your issue. We are going to adjust to that and to so many other Members who have issues; the whips must sit down and amend the lists and bring back to this House. 

Mr nsereko: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. Therefore, the motion must read, “With amendments” because I know –

The Deputy Speaker: For now, we are putting the motion with amendments. 

Mr nsereko: Okay.

4.27
Ms charity BEINABABO (UPDF): Madam Speaker, the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) is not designating anybody to the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation. Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, you have listened to the list of Members constituting the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation. We have had amendments on it. I, therefore, put the question that this House confirms the names of Members who have been mentioned, with amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT)

4.28 
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): I designate the following members to the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government); 

    1. Hon Medard Lubega-Sseggona - Chairperson 
    2. Hon. Susan Mugabi 
    3. Hon. David Kalwanga Lukyamuzi 
    4. Hon. Brenda Nabukenya 
    5. Hon. Manjeri Kyebakutika

    6. Hon. Mathias Mpuuga 
    7. Hon. Asuman Basalirwa - Vice Chairperson 
    8. Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi 
    9. Hon. Okin P.P Ojara 
    10. Hon. Denis Onekalit Amere
    11. Hon. John-Paul Lukwago 

I beg to designate. 

4.14 
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government), I designate the following: 

    1. Hon. Yovan Adriko 
    2. Hon. Stella Atyang 
    3. Hon. Frederick Angura 
    4. Hon. Ronald Afidra 
    5. Hon. Jackson Atima 

    6. Hon. Basil Bataringaya 
    7. Hon. Michael Bukenya Iga
    8. Hon. John Amos Okot 
    9. Hon. Michael Mawanda 
    10. Hon. Flora Natumanya 

    11. Hon. Eddie Kwizera 
    12. Hon. John Lematia 
    13. Hon. Lillian Paparu 
    14. Hon. Isaac Modoi 
    15. Hon. Boaz Ninsiima 

    16. Hon. Emmanuel Otiam Otaala 
    17. Dr Elisa Rutahigwa 
    18. Dr Joseph Ruyonga 
    19. Hon. Muhamad Nsegumire 
    20. Hon. Remigio Achia 

    21. Hon. Emely Kugonza 
    22. Hon. Sarah Opendi 
    23. Hon. Hillary Lokwang 
    24. Hon. Xavier Kyooma 
    25. Hon. Solomon Silwany 

I beg to designate. 

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, for UPC, there is a member that had been skipped on the designation of PAC (Central Government); Hon. Bob Okae. I beg to designate. 

4.33 
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Public Accounts committee (Central Government), I designate the following: 

    1. Hon. Everlyn Chemutai  
    2. Hon. Silas Aogon 
    3. Hon. David Zijjan 
    4. Hon. William Museveni 
    5. Hon. Juliet Kyinyamatama 
    6. Hon. Patrick Okabe 

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker. 

4.34
COL CHARITY BEINABABO (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, to the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government), we present Maj. Gen. Sam Kavuma. I beg to designate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the list of Members constituting the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government). 

I now put the question that the House confirms the names of those members.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES)

4.34
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): For the Committee on Public Accounts, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises, I designate the following: 

    1. Hon. Joel Ssenyonyi - Chairperson 
    2. Hon. Muwada Nkunyingi
    3. Hon. Bashir Kazibwe 
    4. Hon. Abdallah Kiwanuka 
    5. Hon. Joyce Bagala 

    6. Hon. Kenny Auma 
    7. Hon. Yusuf Nsibambi
    8. Hon. Lucy Akello - Vice Chairperson 
    9. Hon. Geofrey Ekanya 
    10. Hon. Richard Sebamala

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker. 

4.38
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises), I designate:

    1. Hon. David Lagen, Agago County
    2. Hon. Mbwatekamwa Gaffa, Igara West County
    3. Hon. Esther Afoyochan, Woman Representative, Zombo
    4. Hon. Ricky Richard Anywar, Agago West County
    5. Hon. Joyce Acan, PWDs National

    6. Hon. Judith Peace Achan, Woman Representative, Nwoya
    7. Hon. Prossy Mbabazi Akampurira, Woman Representative, Rubanda
    8. Hon. Dan Kimosho, Kazo County
    9. Hon. Charles Bakabulindi, Workers Representative
    10. Hon. Richard Muhumuza Gafabusa, Bwamba County

    11. Hon. Martin Muzaale, Buzaaya County, Kamuli
    12. Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, Rwemiyaga County
    13. Hon. Cuthbert Mirembe Abigaba, Kibale County
    14. Hon. Gabriel Okumu, Okoro County
    15. Hon. Naome Kibaaju, Sheema North County

    16. Hon. Alex Ruhunda, Fort Portal Central
    17. Hon. Benard Sekyanzi, Budyebo County
    18. Hon. Robert Wandwasi, Bungokho County South
    19. Hon. Sulaiman Hashim, Nebbi Municipality
    20. Hon. Zumura Maneno,	Woman Representative, Obongi

    21. Hon. Gerald Nangoli, Elgon North County
    22. Hon. Jesca Ababiku, Woman Representative, Adjumani
    23. Hon. Pius Wakabi, Bugahya County
    24. Hon. Irene Linda, Fort Portal City
    25. Hon. Fadil Twalla, Tinge County

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

4.40
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Public Accounts Committee (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises), I designate the following Members:

    1. Hon. Elijah Okupa, Kasilo County.
    2. Hon. Bumali Mpindi,	PWDs.
    3. Hon. Patrick Nsanja, Ntenjeru County South.
    4. Hon. Nancy Acora, Woman Representative, Lamwo.
    5. Hon. Peter Mugema, Iganga Municipality. 
    6. Hon. Roland Ndyomugyenyi, Rukiga County.

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: PPP -

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, I am designating the PPP Whip on COSASE; hon. Okot Santa of Aruu North. I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Jeema? UPDF?

4.41
COL CHARITY BEINABABO (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, to the Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises) I present hon. Col Dr Victoria Nekesa. I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have listened to the list of Members constituting the Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises). I put the question that this House confirms the names of Members on COSASE.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The next is Public Accounts Committee, Local Government. 

4.42
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Public Accounts Local Government, from NUP I designate:

    1. Hon. Betty Naluyima, Woman Representative, Wakiso
    2. Dr Twaha Kagabo, Bukoto South
    3. Hon. Fred Ssimbwa, Nakifuma Central
    4. Hon. Richard Evans Kanyike, Bukoto East
    5. Hon. Kiyaga Hilary, Mawokota South
    6. Hon. Abubakar Kawalya, Rubaga North 

From UPC

Hon. Patrick Ochan,	Apac Municipality	

From FDC

    1. Hon. Emmanuel Ongiertho,	Jonam County
    2. Hon. Naboth Namanya, Rubabo County
    3. Hon. Harold Muhindo, Bukonzo East

From DP

Hon. Paulson Luttamaguzi, Nakaseke South County

The chairperson is hon. Martin Mapenduzi Ojara and the vice chairperson is hon. Paulson Luttamaguzi of DP. I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Chief Opposition Whip. Can we have Government?

4.44
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the Committee on Public Accounts - Local Government, I hereby designate:

1. 	Hon. George Bhoka, Obongi County
    2. Hon. Caroline Kamusiime,	Rukiga County
    3. Hon. Emma Cherukut,	Woman Representative, Kween
    4. Hon. Geoffrey Feta, Ayivu Division East
    5. Hon. Kevin Ojinga, Woman Representative, Pallisa

    6. Hon. Patience Nkunda, Woman Representative, Kanungu
    7. Hon. Ibrahim Kyoto, Budiope West County
    8. Hon. Joanne Aniku, Woman Representative, Madi-Okollo
    9. Hon. Fred Opolot, Pingire County
    10. Hon. Richard Wanda, Bungokho Central County

    11. Hon. Philiphs Lokwang-Ilukol,	Napore West County
    12. Hon. Nulu Byamukama, Kitagwenda County
    13. Hon. Jacob Karubanga, Kibanda South County
    14. Hon. Davis Kamukama, Bunyangabu County
    15. Hon. Agnes Taaka, Woman Representative, Bugiri

    16. Hon. Micah Lolem, Upe County
    17. Hon. Noman Ochero, Labwor County
    18. Hon. Joseph Komol, Dodoth North County
    19. Hon. Christine Apolot, Woman Representative, Kumi 
    20. Hon. Noah Mutebi, Nakasongola County

    21. Hon. Faith Nakut, 	Woman Representative, Napak
    22. Hon. Abdul Mutumba, Kiboga West
    23. Hon. Samuel Okwir, Moroto County
    24. Hon. Ismail Lomwar, Kotido Municipality
    25. Hon. Mwesigwa Rukaari, Mbarara North Division

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR NAMBESHE: From DP, Madam Speaker, hon. Fortunate Nantongo is designated on the Public Accounts Committee - Local Government. I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Independents?

4.47
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Public Accounts Committee, Local Government, I beg to affirm my colleague’s designation of:

    1. Hon. Martin Mapenduzi Ojara, Bardege-Layibi Division
    2. Hon. Stephen Aseera, Buhaguzi East County
    3. Hon. Dr Abdul Byakatonda, Workers’ Representative
    4. Hon. Ibanda Rwemulikya, Ntoroko County
    5. Hon. Linda Auma Agnes, Woman Representative, Lira
    6. Hon. Peter Ocen, Kole County South.

I beg to designate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: UPDF -

4.48
COL CHARITY BEINABABO (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, to the Committee on Public Accounts-Local Government…

4.48
COL. CHARITY BEINABABO (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, to the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Governments), I present Maj. Gen. Henry Masiko. I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have listened to the list of Members in the Public Accounts Committee (Local Government). I put the question that the House confirms the Members that you have heard on this committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this marks the end of designation of Members in the standing committees of this House for now. Can we now move to the sectoral committees of this House? I will start with the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You mention your name and the procedural matter. 

PROF. MUSHEMEZA: My name is Elijah Mushemeza, Member of Parliament, Sheema County South. I have not heard my name.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you are on the Business Committee.

PROF. MUSHEMEZA: I have not heard my name.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you heard the Business Committee being read?

PROF. MUSHEMEZA: Not yet.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are on the Business Committee.

MR LEMATIA: Madam Speaker, I am called John Lematia. I have also not heard my name.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Whip, please take note of all those who have not heard their names. If it is on the same matter, you do not need to go to the microphone. Kindly go to your whip, he will take note of that and bring it to the House.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I designated hon. John Lematia to the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government), and I read his name. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lematia, I think you are not attentive. You are on the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government).

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Government side designates:

    1. Hon. Keefa Kiwanuka – Chairperson
    2. Hon. Jane Pacuto – Vice Chairperson
    3. Hon. Wamakuyu Mudimi
    4. Hon. Amos Kankunda 
    5. Hon. Jackson Atima 

    6. Hon. Basil Bataringaya 
    7. Hon. Enosi Asiimwe
    8. Hon. Moses Aleper 
    9. Hon. Isaac Ssejjoba 
    10. Hon. Herbert Tayebwa 

    11. Hon. John Lematia
    12. Hon. Xavier Kyooma 
    13. Hon. Faith Nakut 
    14. Hon. Gerald Nangoli 
    15. Hon. Katali Loy

    16. Hon. Maximus Ochai 
    17. Hon. Patrick Opolot-Isiagi 
    18. Hon. Richard Wanda 
    19. Hon. Okwir Samuel

I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Government side. Independents.

4.53
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Madam Speaker, Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development: 

    1. Hon. Paul Omara 
    2. Hon. Muhammad Nsereko 
    3. Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba
    4. Hon. Paska Menya
    5. Hon. Juliet Kyinyamatama 
    6. Hon. Karim Masaba

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Opposition.

4.54
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

NUP:

    1. Hon. Nabukeera Hanifa
    2. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi
    3. Hon. Joel Ssenyonyi

DP

    1. Hon. Paulson Luttamaguzi 

FDC

1. 	Hon. Nandala-Mafabi
    2. Hon. Timothy Batuwa 
    3. Hon. Anthony Akol

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: UPDF.

5.00
COL CHARITY BEINABABO (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, the UPDF is not designating anyone to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you have listened to the list of Members constituting the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I put the question that the House confirms the names of Members that have been read on this committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we try to be faster? We have so many sectoral committees.

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the Government side designates:

    1. Hon. Janet Okori-Moe – Chairperson
    2. Hon.  Agnes Atim - Vice Chairperson
    3. Hon.  Lillian Aber 
    4. Hon. Christine Akello 
    5. Hon. Jennifer Driwaru
    6. Hon. John Baptist Lokii 
    7. Hon. Enock Nyongore 
    8. Hon. Davis Kamukama 
    9. Hon. Derrick Kabuura
    10. Hon. Joseph Komol 
    11. Hon. Grace Kesande 
    12. Hon. Pius Wakabi 
    13. Hon. Rachel Magoola 
    14. Hon. Robert Migadde 
    15. Hon. David Muhumuza 
    16. Hon. Mary Begumisa 
    17. Hon. Gabriel Okumu 
    18. Hon. Amos Okot
    19. Hon. Ricky Anywar 

I beg to designate.

4.58
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): On the Committee on Agriculture, I beg to designate the following opposition honourable members from NUP:

    1. Hon. Dr Abed Bwanika, Kimanya Kabonero;
    2. Hon. Susan Mugabi, Buvuma;
    3. Hon. Manjeri Kyabakutika, Jinja; and
    4. Hon. Charles Matovu, Busiro South.
    5. Hon. John Paul Lukwago Mpalanyi, Kyotera County (DP); 
    6. Hon. Maxwell Akora, Maruzi County, Apac (UPC);
    7. Hon. Santa Okot, Aruu North (UPC);
    8. Hon. Stella Apolot Isodo, Ngora District (FDC); and
    9. Hon. Isaias Ssasaga, Budadiri East (FDC).

I beg to designate.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

4.59
MR DAVID ZIJJAN: Madam Speaker, I beg to designate the following independent members of Parliament to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries:

    1. Hon. Walyomu Muwanika Moses, Kagoma County;
    2. Hon. Julius Tusiime Karuhanga, Rwampala East County;
    3. Hon. Martin Ojara Mapenduzi, Bardege-Layibi Division;
    4. Hon. Julius Mukasa Opondo, Bujumba County; and
    5. Hon. Kayanga Baroda, Kamuli Municipality.

I beg to designate.

BRIG. GEN. CHARITY BEINABABO: Madam Speaker, to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, I present hon. Maj. Gen. Sam Kavuma. I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have listened to the list of Members constituting the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. I put the question that this House confirms Members whose names have been designated to that committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO THE COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

5.01
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the following honourable members from the Government side be designated to the Committee on Foreign Affairs:

    1. Hon. Norah Bigirwa Nyendwoha, Woman Representative, Bulisa – Chairperson;
    2. Hon. Boaz Kasirabo Ninsiima, Kooki County – Vice Chairperson 
    3. Hon. Judith Achan
    4. Hon. Hashim Sulaiman, Nebbi Municipality
    5. Hon. Yona Kayogera, Busiku North

    6. Hon. Boniface Okot, Youth Representative, Northern Uganda
    7. Hon. Noah Mutebi, Nakasongola County
    8. Hon. Patrick Mutono Lodoi, Butebo County
    9. Hon. Stephen Kisa, Luuka South
    10. Hon. Zumura Maneno, Obongi

    11. Hon. Muhammad Kato, Katerera
    12. Hon. Jenifer Muheesi, Kazo
    13. Hon. Isamat Abraham, Kapir County
    14. Hon. Fred Opolot, Pingire County
    15. Hon. Patience Nkunda, Kanungu

    16. Hon. Eddie Kwizera, Bukimbiri County; and
    17. Hon. Prossy Akampurira, Rubanda.

I beg to designate. 

5.02
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, I beg to designate the following NUP honourable members to the Committee on Foreign Affairs:

    1. Hon. Muwada Nkunyingi
    2. Hon. Allan Ssewanyana
    3. Hon. Stephen Sserubula
    4. Hon. Bob Okae, (UPC); 
    5. Hon. Okin P.P. Ojara, (FDC);
    6. Hon. Lucy Akello, (FDC); and
    7. Hon. Richard Lumu, (DP).

I beg to designate.

5.04
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the following independent honourable members be designated to the Committee on Foreign Affairs:

    1. Hon. Allan Atugonza 
    2. Hon. Peter Ocen 
    3. Hon. Vicent Shedric Obong
    4. Hon. Christopher Komakech
    5. Hon. Twesigye Nathan Itungo

I beg to designate. 

5.04
COL CHARITY BEINABABO: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the hon. Gen. Wilson Mbadi be designated to the Committee on Foreign Affairs. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you have heard the list of Members constituting the Committee on Foreign Affairs. I now put the question that this House approves the honourable members whose names have been read as the designated Members to the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO THE COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

5.05
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the Government side, I beg to designate the following honourable members to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development:

    1. Hon. Kabahenda Flavia Rwabuhoro, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa – Chairperson;
    2. Hon. Sarah Najjuma, Woman Representative, Nakaseke – Vice Chairperson;
    3. Hon. Linda Irene
    4. Hon. Charles Bakkabulindi
    5. Hon. Dorcas Acen
    6. Hon. Rose Obiga
    7. Hon. Melsa Avako
    8. Hon. Laura Kanushu
    9. Hon. Kevin Kaala Ojinga
    10. Hon. Florence Asiimwe Akiki
    11. Hon. Jennifer Ayoo
    12. Hon. Locap Peterkhen
    13. Hon. Isabirye Iddi
    14. Hon. Pamela Kamugo
    15. Hon. Tonny Ayoo
    16. Hon. Ngompek Linos
    17. Hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara
    18. Hon. Peggy Joy Waako
    19. Hon. James Kaberuka.

I beg to move.

5.06
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the following opposition honourable members be designated to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development: 

    1. Hon. Frank Kabuye
    2. Hon. Hillary Kiyaga
    3. Hon. Allan Mayanja
    4. Hon. Flavia Nabagabe
5. 	Hon. Joab Busingye
6. 	Hon. Muhindo Harold

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker

5.12
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): For the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, the nominated Independents are: 

    1. Hon. Arthur Mboizi
    2. Dr Abdulhu Byakatonda 
    3. Hon. Miriam Mukhaye
    4. Hon. Margret Rwabushaija Namubiru

I beg to designate.

5.16
COL CHARITY BEINABABO (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, the UPDF is not designating anyone to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, you have listened to the list of Members constituting the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. I put the question that this House confirms the names that have been read.

(Question put and agreed to.)

5.09
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the Committee on Health, the Government side designates:

    1. Dr Charles Ayume of Koboko Municipality as Chairperson
    2. Hon. Yoweri Ssebikaali, Ntwetwe County, as Vice-Chairperson
    3. Hon. John Paul Ninkusiima, Ibanda County South
    4. Hon. Brenda Namukuta, Kaliro District
    5. Hon. Hope Grania Nakazibwe, Mubende District

    6. Hon. Ruth Lematia, Maracaha East
    7. Hon. Sharon Laker, Gulu District
    8. Hon. Josephine Bebona Babungi, Bundibugyo District
    9. Hon. Betty Chelain Louke, Amudat District
    10. Hon. George Bhoka Didi, Obongi

    11. Hon. Dan Kimosho Atwijukire, Kazo
    12. Hon. Isaac Ismail Otimgiw, Padyere
    13. Hon. Margaret Ayebare, Mbarara District
    14. Dr Elisa Rutahigwa, Rukungiri
    15. Dr Joseph Ruyonga, Hoima West

    16. Hon. Benard Kirya Sekyanzi, Budyebo County
    17. Hon. Irene Muloni, Bulambuli District
    18. Hon. Fredrick Angura, Tororo South
    19. Hon. Esther Mbayo, Luuka District 

I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.10
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): For the Committee on Health, the National Unity Platform designates: 

    1. Hon. Christine Nandagire
    2. Dr Mzee Twaha Kagabo
    3. Hon. Francis Zaake
    4. Hon. Veronica Nanyondo

From the Democratic Party, we have Dr Michael Lulume Bayigga of Buikwe. 

From the Uganda People’s Congress, we have Dr Kenny Auma of Kwania. 

From the Forum for Democratic Change, we have Hon. Yusuf Nsibambi of Mawokota South Dr Nicholas Kamara of Kabale Municipality. 

I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.12
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County Jinja): For the Committee on Health, we have: 

    1. Hon. Margaret Makhoha
    2. Hon. Mary Annet Nakato
    3. Hon. Samuel Opio
    4. Hon. Sylvia Bahireira Tumwekwase
    5. Hon. Victorious Zawedde

I beg to designate.

5.12
COL CHARITY BEINABABO (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, I present Col Dr Victor Nekesa. 

I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you have listened to the list of Members constituting the Committee on Health. I put the question that this House confirms the Members who have been designated.

(Question put and agreed to.)

5.13
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance, the Government side designates:

    1. Hon. Moses Hassim Magogo of Budiope East County as Chairperson
    2. Hon. Nathan Nabeta Igeme of Jinja South Division East as vice-chairperson
    3. Hon. Cosmas Elotu
    4. Hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire
    5. Hon. Alex Ndeezi

    6. Hon. Phyllis Chemutai
    7. Hon. Ferigo Kambale
    8. Hon. Julius Acon
    9. Hon. Micah Akasile Lolem
    10. Hon. Geoffrey Mutiwa

    11. Hon. Solomon Chelangat
    12. Hon. Edson Rugumayo
    13. Hon. Florence Nebanda
    14. Hon. Caroline Kamusiime
    15. Hon. Herbert Kinobere

    16. Hon. Geofrey Feta
    17. Hon. Esther Afoyochan
    18. Hon. Anne Mary Tumwine and 
    19. Hon. Jane Kabajungu Bainomugisha. 

I beg to designate.

5.14
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): For the Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance, we have:

    1. Hon. Joyce Bagala Ntwatwa of Mityana
    2. Hon. Gorreth Namugga of Mawogola South
    3. Hon. Bashir Mbaziira Kazibwe of Kawempe South.

From the Forum for Democratic Change, we have:

    1. Hon. Francis Mwijukye of Buhweju
    2. Hon. Florence Kabugho of Kasese District. 

I beg to designate.

5.15
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County Jinja): We have:

    1. Hon. Bumali Mpindi, PWD Representative
    2. Hon. Susan Jolly Abeja, Women Representative, Otuke
    3. Hon. Noah Musa of Koboko North County; and 
    4. Hon. Kenneth Nyendwoha Kiiza of Bujenje County. 

I beg to designate.

5.16
COL CHARITY BEINABABO (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, for the Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance, I present:
Col. Charity Beinababo. 

I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have listened to the list of Members constituting the Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance. I put the question that this House confirms the names that have been read.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR NOAH MUSA: I have just heard my name being read by the Dean of Independents on the Committee of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance but I have never expressed my interest in that committee.

I propose that we pass this motion with amendments as –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Dr Musa, we have already passed a resolution on that; that whoever has a query or anything should go and see the dean or the whips of the different parties. So, your issue will be handled.

DR MUSA: Madam Speaker, I think it will be proper to pass the motion with amendments. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion has already been passed. The next committee is Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

5.18
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs; 
I designate hon. Robinah Rwakoojo Gureme, Gomba West County as chairperson. She is to be deputised by hon. Mutembuli Yusuf from Bunyole East County. 

The Members are:

    1. Hon. Bosco Okiror, Usuk County
    2. Hon. Henry Nkwansiibwe Nzikuratire, Ruhama County
    3. Hon. Bernard Odoi, Eastern Youth MP
    4. Hon. Fox Odoi Oywelowo, West Budama North-East County
    5. Hon. Richard Oseku Oriebo, Kibale County	

    6. Hon. Stephen Baka Mugabi, Bukooli North County
    7. Hon. Rose Cherukut Emma, Kween Woman MP
    8. Hon. Wilson Kajwengye, Ruhaama County
    9. Hon. Joanne Okia Aniku, Madi Okollo Woman MP
    10. Hon. Rose Obigah, Terego Woman MP

    11. Hon. Lodou Achayo, Ngora County MP
    12. Hon. Stephen Kasaija, Burahya County
    13. Hon. John Taylor, Bugabula North County
    14. Hon. Yona Musinguzi, Ntungamo Municipality
    15. Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, Lwemiyaga County

    16. Hon. Paul Kwizera, Kisoro Municipality
    17. Hon. Christopher Werikhe, Bubuulo West County

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have the Opposition.

5.19
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): On the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs:

NUP

Hon. Shamim Malende, Kampala Woman MP
Hon. Medard Lubega Sseggona, Busiro East County
Hon. Robert Ssekitoleko, Bamunanika County

DP

Hon. Fortunate Nantongo, Kyotera Woman MP

JEEMA

Hon. Asuman Basalirwa, Bugiri Municipality

FDC

Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda, Kira Municipality
Hon. Anna Adeke Ebaju, Soroti Woman MP

UPC
Hon. Sandra Alum Santa, Oyam Woman MP

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have the Independents.

5.21
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): On the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs:

Hon. Shartsi Musherure Kuteesa, Mawogola North County
Hon. Abdu Katuntu, Bugweri County
Hon. Acrobert Moses Kiiza, Bughendera County

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have the UPDF?

5.21
COL CHARITY BEINABABO (UPDF REPRESENTATIVE): On the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, Madam Speaker, I designate hon. Lt Gen. James Mugira. 

I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Whip on the Government, can we have order on your side? People are having sub-meetings.

MR TAYEBWA: Colleagues, the Rt Hon. Speaker is requesting our side – the Government side – to behave. Please, let us behave.

Madam Speaker, allow me to amend the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Hon. Yona Musinguzi will be replaced by hon. Solomon Silwany, Bukooli Central MP. 

I beg to amend, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have the UPDF.

COL BEINABABO: Madam Speaker, I already submitted on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have listened to the submission.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Madam Speaker, thank you for your indulgence. Just like you have guided - the record we shall correct, as the Opposition, is that hon. Wilfred Niwagaba is the Shadow Attorney-General. Our anticipation was that he would appear on the list of Independents as a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

We shall work with your Office to correct that record.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is okay. Hon. Niwagaba is the Shadow Attorney-General and he will be part of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

Honourable members, you have listened to the list of Members constituting the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I put the question to this House to confirm the names of the Members that have been read and designated to this committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We move to the Committee on Natural Resources.

5.23
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the Committee on Natural resources, the Government side nominates hon. Dr Otim Emmanuel Otaala, West Budama South County, as chairperson. He is to be deputised by hon. Dr Emely Kugonza, Buyanja County.

We also designate:

    1. Hon. Lawrence Biyika Songa, Ora County
    2. Hon. Dickson Kateshumbwa, Sheema Municipality
    3. Hon. Seth Wambede, Mbale City Northern Division
    4. Hon. Juliet Agasha Bashiisha, Mitooma Woman MP
    5. Hon. Josephat Tumwesigye, Bugangaizi South County
    6. Hon. Christine Sendawula Bukenya, Kyankwanzi Woman MP
    7. Hon. Paul Akamba, Busiki County
    8. Hon. Clare Mugumya, Isingiro Woman MP
    9. Hon. Flora Natumanya, Kikuube Woman MP
    10. Hon. Yorke Alioni Odria, Aringa South MP
    11. Hon. Alex Ruhunda, Fort Portal Central Division
    12. Hon. John Faith Magolo, Bungokho North County
    13. Hon. Angura Fredrick, Tororo South County
    14. Hon. Derrick Orone, Gogonyo County
    15. Hon. Apollo Yeri Ofwono, Tororo Municipality
    16. Hon. Francis Twinomujuni Kazini, Buhaguzi County
    17. Hon. Kwizera Eddy Wa-Gahungu, Bukimbiri County

Madam Speaker, I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have the Opposition.

5.25
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe):On the Committee on Natural Resources, I designate:

NUP

Hon. Christine Kaaya Nakimwero, Kiboga Woman MP
Hon. Ronald Evans Kanyike, Bukoto East County
Hon. Charles Tebandeke, Bbale County
Hon. Aisha Nalule Kabanda, Butambala Woman MP

DP

Hon. Fred Kayondo, Mukono South MP

UPC

Hon. Jimmy James Akena, Lira East Division

FDC

Hon. Betty Aol Ochan, Gulu City Woman MP
Hon. Asinansi Nyakato, Hoima City Woman MP

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have the Independents.

5.27
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): On the Committee on Natural Resources and Environment, I designate the following Members:

    1. Hon. Abdu Adidwa, Bukooli South County 
    2. Hon. Moses Kamuntu, Rubanda West County
    3. Hon. Linda Agnes Auma, Woman Representative Lira.
    4. Hon. Patrick Musana, Buyaga East County. 

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. UPDF

5.27
BRIG GEN. CHARITY BEINABABO (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, the UPDF is not designating any Member to the Committee on Natural Resources. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, correction of hon. Betty Aol Ocan. She is a Member of Parliament representing Gulu City and not district. I beg to be corrected.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The correction has been noted. Honourable members, you have listened to the list of Members constituting the Committee on Natural Resources. I put the question that this House confirms those names that have been read and designated to that committee?

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE

5.28
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us maintain social distance. COVID-19 is real.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

To the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, the Government side designates:

    1. Hon. David Karubanga, Kigorobya County as Chairperson.
    2. Hon. Robert Kasolo, Iki-Iki County as Vice Chairperson.
    3. Hon. Sarah Opendi, Tororo.
    4. Hon. Gideon Thembo Mujungu, Busongora County.
    5. Hon. Muhammad Ensigumire Kibedi, Mityana North.
    6. Hon. Hillary Lokwang, Ik County.
    7. Hon. Michael Mawanda Maranga, Igara East County.
    8. Hon. Paul Asaba Nsabimana, Kyaka North County.
    9. Hon. Dr Michael Bukenya Iga, Bukuya County.
    10. Hon. Nathan Banyima, Bukanga County North.
    11. Hon. Issa Agaba, Bugangaizi East.
    12. Hon. Pascal Mbabazi, Buwekula County.
    13. Hoh. Stella Atyang, Moroto.
    14. Hon. David Kabanda, Kasambya County.
    15. Hon. Cissy Namujju, Lwengo.
    16. Hon. Sylvia Vicky Awa, Nabilatuk.
    17. Hon. Ssemwanga Gyaviira, Buyamba County.
    18. Hon. Mariam Naigaga, Namutumba.
    19. Hon. Catheline Atwakiire Ndamira, Kabale.

I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Opposition side, please.

5.30
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Committee on Physical Infrastructure:

NUP

Hon. Godfrey Saazi, Gomba East.
Hon. John Baptist Nambeshe, Manjiya County.
Hon. Denis Ssekabira, Katikamu North.
Hon. Ronald Balimwezo Nsubuga, Nakawa East.

DP

Hon. Richard Ssewamala, Bukoto Central.
UPC
Hon. Nelson Okello, Maruzi North County.

FDC

Hon. Moses Kabuusu, Kyamuswa County.
Hon. Moses Attan, Soroti City East.

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have the Independents.

5.31
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Madam Speaker, the Independents on the Committee on Physical Infrastructure are:

    1. Hon. Elijah Okupa, Kasilo County.
    2. Hon. Peter Mugema, Iganga Municipality.
    3. Hon. Rowland Ndimugyenyi, Rukiga County.
    4. Hon. Patrick Nsanja, Ntenjeru County South
    5. Hon. Rwemulikya IbandaNtoroko County.

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. UPDF -

5.32
COL CHARITY BEINABABO (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, the UPDF is not designating any Member to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, UPDF. Honourable members, you have listened to the list of Members constituting the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. I now put the question that the House confirms those names as members of that committee?

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS

5.33
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the Committee on Presidential Affairs, the Government side designates:

    1. Hon. Jessica Ababiku, Woman Representative Adjumani, as chairperson
    2. Hon. Naome Kabasharira, Rushenyi County, as the vice Chairperson
    3. Hon. Francis Adome Lolika, Moroto
    4. Hon. Agnes Taaka, Bugiri
    5. Hon. Naomi Kibaju, Sheema North County
    6. Hon. James Mamawi, Adjumani East
    7. Hon. Judith Alyek, Kole
    8. Hon. Hellen Auma Wandera, Busia
    9. Hon. Tonny Awany, Nwoya County
    10. Hon. David Lageni, Agago County
    11. Hon. Mbabazi Kyomuhendo, Kagadi
    12. Hon. Albert Lokoru, Tepethi
    13. Hon. Jacob Karubanga, Kibanda South County
    14. Hon. Fadhir Twaala, Tingei County
    15. Hon. Siragi Brahan Ezama, Aringa County
    16. Hon. Benjamin Kamukama, Ruhama East
    17. Hon. Buturo Nsaba, Bufumbira East
    18. Hon. Faith Philo Kunihira, Kyenjojo and,
    19. Hon. Peninah Businge, Older Persons Central

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have the Opposition.

5.34
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): On the Committee on Presidential Affairs;

NUP

Hon. Derrick Nyeko, Makindye East.
Hon. Muhammad Segirinya, Kawempe South.
Hon. Abubakar Kawalya, Rubaga North.

DP

Hon. Peter Okot, Tooki County.

FDC

Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, Tororo North County.
Hon. Denis Onekalit Amere, Kitgum Municipality.

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Independents.

5.36
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Presidential Affairs, I designate:
 
    1. Hon. Naomi Kabasharira, Rushenyi County.
    2. Hon. Nancy Achola, Woman Representative Lamwo.
    3. Hon. David Livingstone Zijjan, Butembe County.
    4. Hon. Stephen Asera, Buhaguzi East County.
    5. Hon. Evelyn Chemutai, Woman Representative Bukwo.

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.36
COL CHARITY BEINABABO (UPDF Representative): On the Committee on Presidential Affairs, Madam Speaker, I designate hon. Maj. Gen. Henry Masiko. I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you have listened to the list of Members constituting the Committee on Presidential Affairs. I put the question that this House confirms the names of those Members that have been read and designated to form the Committee on Presidential Affairs.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

5.37
The government chief whip (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, I designate:

                1. Hon. Godfrey Onzima, Aringa North County, Yumbe as Chairperson
                2. Hon. Christine Apolot,  	Woman Representative, Kumi as the Vice Chairperson
                3. Hon. Midius Natukunda,  Woman Representative, Rukungiri.
                4. Hon. Paul Reuben Chelimo, Kongasis County
                5. Hon. Agnes Kunihira Abwoli, Workers Representative

                6. Hon. Isaac Modoi, Rutseshe County
                7. Hon. Jovanice Twinobusingye, Woman Representative, Kiruhura 
                8. Hon. Sanon Bwiire Nadeeba,   Bulamogi County, 
                9. Hon. Yovan Adriko,Vurra County
                10. Hon. Joyce Acan Okeny, PWD, National

                11. Hon. Sowedi KitanywaBusongora County North
                12. Hon. Martin Mugabi Muzaale, Buzaaya County
                13. Hon. Alex Byarugaba, Isingiro County South 
                14. Hon. Ben Baatom Koryang, Dodoth West County
                15. Hon. Ephraim Biraaro, Buhweju West County 

                16. Hon. Michael Wanyama, Namayingo South County 
                17. Hon. Robert Wandwasi, Bungokho County South 
                18. Hon. Simon Peter Wokorach, Aswa County.

I beg to designate.

5.39
The chief opposition whip (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): On the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, I designate the following Members:  

NUP

                1. Hon. Betty Ethel Naluyima, Woman Representative, Wakiso
                2. Hon. Jimmy Lwanga, Njeru Municipality
                3. Hon. Teddy Nambooze, Woman Representative, Mpigi
                4. Hon. Juliet Nakabuye Kakande, Woman Representative, Masaka City

FDC:

Hon. Katusabe Atkins: Bukonzo County West, Kasese
Hon. Emigu Julius: Ochero County, Kaberamaido

I beg to designate.

5.40
Mr David zijjan (Ind. Butembe County, Jinja): Committee on Public Service and Local Government

    3. Hon. Nyangweso Denis: Samia-Bugwe Central County, Busia 
    4. Hon. Okabe Patrick: Serere County, Serere
    5. Hon. Dr Isingoma-Mwesigwa Patrick: Hoima East Division, Hoima City
    6. Hon. Komol Emmanuel: Dodoth East County, Kaabong
    7. Hon. Namutaawe Joan: Woman Representative, Masaka.

I beg to designate.

5.40
COL charity BEINABABO (UPDF): Madam Speaker, the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) is not designating any Member to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, you have listened to the list of members constituting the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. I put the question that this House confirms the names of members who have been read and designated to that committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation

5.41
The government chief whip (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation, the Government side designates:

                            1. Hon. Achia Remigio: Pian County, Nabilatuk – Chairperson
                            2. Hon. Dr Florence Akiiki: Woman Representative, Masindi- Vice Chairperson
                            3. Hon. Atuto Jacinta: Woman Representative, Kapelebyong 
                            4. Hon. Leku Joel: Terego West County, Terego
                            5. Hon. Katalihwa Donald: Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo
                            6. Hon. Bingi Patrick Nyanzi: Butemba County, Kyakwanzi
                            7. Hon. Kyobe Luke Inyensiko: Luuka North County, Luuka
                            8. Hon. Yona Musinguzi: Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo
                            9. Hon. Okot-Ogong Felix: Dokolo South County, Dokolo
                            10. Hon. Rwaburindore Tarsis: Ibanda Municipality, Ibanda
                            11. Hon. Alero Tom Aza: West Moyo County, Moyo
                            12. Hon. Chemonges William: Kween County, Kween
                            13. Hon. Olobo James: Kioga North County, Amolatar 

I beg to designate.

5.42
The chief opposition whip (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation;

National Unity Platform (NUP)

Hon. Sserukenya David: Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso
Hon. Kirumira Hassan: Katikamu County South, Luwero
Hon. Nakimuli Helen: Woman Representative, Kalangala 

Forum for Democratic Change (FDC)
Hon. Acom Joan Alobo: Woman Representative, Soroti City

I beg to designate.

5.43
Mr david zijjan (Ind. Butembe County, Jinja): Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation
Hon. Ogwari Polycarp: Agule County, Pallisa
Hon. Katenya Isaac: Bulambuli County, Bulambuli.
Hon. Wamala Nambozo Florence: Woman Representative, Sironko.

I beg to designate.

5.43
Ms charity BEINABABO (UPDF): Madam Speaker, to the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation, Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) designates:

Hon. Maj. Dr Jennifer Alanyo: UPD

I beg to designate.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, you have listened to the list of members constituting the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation. I put the question that this House confirms the names of those members to the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, kindly be patient. We are about to finish.

Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry 

5.44
The Government Chief Whip (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. To the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry, the Government side designates:

    1. Hon. Mwine Mpaka: Mbarara South Division, Mbarara City - Chairperson.
    2. Hon. Catherine Lamwaka: Woman Representative, Omoro - Vice Chairperson
    3. Hon. Mugole Mauku David: Kabweri County, Kibuku
    4. Hon. Mbwatekamwa Gaffa: Igara County West, Bushenyi
    5. Hon. Timuzigu Kamugisha Michael: Kajara County, Ntungamo
    6. Hon. Afidra Olema Ronald: Lower Madi County, Madi-Okollo
    7. Hon. Kemirembe Pauline Kyaka:   Woman Representative, Lyantonde
    8. Hon. Aleper Margaret Achira:    Woman Representative, Kotido
    9. Hon. Amooti Tom Bright: Kyaka Central County, Kyegegwa
    10. Hon. Awor Betty Engola: Woman Representative, Apac
    11. Hon. Businge Harriet: Woman Representative, Hoima

Honourable colleagues, the Rt Hon. Speaker had requested earlier on –

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Sarah Opendi, can you go back to where you were seated? You will have a discussion after the House.

Mr tayebwa: Sorry about that.
    1. Hon. Edakasi Alfred Eralu: Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido
    2. Hon. Nayebale Sylvia: Woman Representative, Gomba
    3. Hon. Kirabo Agnes: Youth (Central)
    4. Hon. Oliver Koyokyenga: Woman Representative, Buhweju
    5. Hon. Osoru Mourine: Woman Representative, Arua City
    6. Hon. Ssentayi Muhamad: Bukoto County West, Lwengo
    7. Hon. Gafabusa Richard Muhumuza: Bwamba County, Bundibugyo
    8. Hon. Wanyama Michael: Namayingo South County, Namayingo.

I beg to designate.

5.46
The chief opposition whip (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): To the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry:

    1. Hon. Ssimbwa Fred: Nakifuma County, Mukono, NUP
    2. Hon. Kalwanga David Lukyamuzi: Busujju County, Mityana, NUP
    3. Hon. Kayemba-Ssolo Geoffrey: Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi, NUP
    4. Hon. Geofrey Okello: Nwoya East County, Nwoya, DP
    5. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal: Woman Representative, Dokolo, FDC
    6. Hon. David Isabirye: Jinja North Division, Jinja City, FDC  

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker. 

5.47 
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): For the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry, I designate the following members: 

    1. Hon. Joseph Koluo: Toroma County, Katakwi, Independent  
    2. Hon. Rita Atukwasa: Woman Representative, Mbarara City, Independent
    3. Hon. Godfrey Were: Samia-Bugwe County South, Busia, Independent 
    4. Prof. Elijah Mushemeza: Sheema County South, Sheema, Independent
    5. Hon. Susan Amero: Woman Representative, Amuria, Independent

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker. 

5.57 
MS CHARITY BEINABABO (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, the UPDF is not designating any member to the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have listened to the list of members constituting the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry. 

I put the question that this House confirms the names of members that have been designated to that committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries -

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, we covered that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us go to the next committee. Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs -

5.49
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, the Government side designates the following:  

    1. Hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro: Woman Representative, Sheema – Chairperson 
    2. Hon. Milton Muwuma: Kigulu County South, Iganga – Vice Chairperson 
    3. Hon. Godfrey Wakooli: Butiru County, Manafwa 
    4. Hon. Noman Ochero: Labwor County, Abim
    5. Hon. Alex Niyonsaba: Bufimbira County South, Kisoro
    6. Hon. Simon Peter Opolot: Kanyum County, Kumi
    7. Hon. Patrick Aeku: Soroti County, Soroti 
    8. Hon. Christine Nakwang: Woman Representative, Kaabong 
    9. Hon. Peter Okeyoh: Bukooli Island County, Namayingo
    10. Hon. Nulu Byamukama: Kitagwenda County, Kitagwenda
    11. Hon. Donozio Kahonda: Ruhinda South County, Mitooma
    12. Hon. Sauda Kauma: Woman Representative, Iganga
    13. Hon. Agnes Acibu: Woman Representative, Nebbi
    14. Hon. Alex Kintu: Kagoma North County, Jinja
    15. Hon. Ibrahim Kyoto: Budiope West County, Buyende 
    16. Hon. Bashir Lubega: Mubende Municipality, Mubende 
    17. Hon. Abrahams Lokii: Jie County, Kotido
    18. Hon. Rukaari Robert Mwesigwa: Mbarara North Division, Mbarara City 
    19. Hon. John Bosco Ikojo: Bukedea County, Bukedea
 
I beg to designate, Madam Speaker. 

5.50 
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): For the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, I beg to designate the following: 

    1. Hon. Francis Katabaazi: Kalungu East County, Kalungu 
    2. Hon. Hannington Wakayima: Nansana Municipality, Wakiso 
    3. Hon. Abdallah Kiwanuka: Mukono County North, Mukono 
    4. Hon. Betty Nambooze: Mukono Municipality, Mukono 
    5. Hon. Jonathan Odur: Erute County South, Lira 
    6. Hon. Naboth Namanya: Rubabo County, RUkungiri
    7. Hon. Moses Okot: Kioga County, Amoratar 

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker. 

5.52 
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): On the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, I designate the following Independents: 
Hon. William Museveni: Buwekula South County, Mubende 
Hon. Stephen Kangwagye: Bukanga County, Isingiro  
Hon. Rauben Arinaitwe: Isingiro West County, Isingiro 
Hon. Margaret Lamwaka: Chua East County, Kitgum 

I beg to designate. 

5.53 
MS CHARITY BEINABABO (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, the UPDF presents Lt Gen. Peter Elwelu. I beg to designate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you have listened to the list of members constituting the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. I put the question to this House to confirm the names of those members that have been read and designated. 

(Question put and agreed.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Committee on East African Community Affairs -

5.54 
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Government side designates the following: 

    1. Hon. Noeline Kisembo: Woman Representative, Kibaale - Chairperson 
    2. Hon. Chemaswet Kisos: Soi County, Kween – Vice Chairperson 
    3. Hon. Ismail Lomwar: Kotido Municipality, Kotido
    4. Hon. Apollo Masika: Namisindwa County, Namisindwa
    5. Hon. John Bosco Ngoya: Bokora County, Napak 
    6. Hon. Sarah Netalisire: Woman Representative, Namisindwa 
    7. Hon. Goli Ogwal: Dokolo North County, Dokolo 
    8. Hon. Anthony Okullo: Lamwor County, Lamwor 
    9. Hon. Maurice Kibalya: Bugabula County, Kamuli
    10. Hon. Helen Kahunde: Woman Representative, Kiryandongo
    11. Hon. John Kamara-Nizeyimana: Bufumbira County North, Kisoro
    12. Hon. Anthony Esenu: Kapelebyong County, Kapelebyong
    13. Hon. James Baba: Koboko County, Koboko
    14. Hon. David Wakikona: Bushigai County, 

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker. 

5.56 
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): For the Committee on East African Community Affairs, I designate the following members: 

    1. Hon. Aloysius Mukasa: Rubaga Division South, Kampala 
    2. Hon. Paul Nsubuga: Busiro County North, Wakiso 
    3. Hon. Geoffrey Lutaaya: Kakuuto County, Kyotera 
    4. Hon. Gilbert Olanya: Kilak County South, Amuru 
    5. Hon. Tom Ekudo, Gweri County, Soroti 

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker. 

5.56 
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): For the Committee on East African Community Affairs, I designate the following members: 

    1. Hon. Idah Nantaba: Woman Representative, Kayunga 
    2. Hon. John Musila: Bubulo East County, Namisindwa
    3. Hon.  Nakayenze Connie: Woman Representative, Mbale City
    4. Hon. Ameede Agnes: Woman Representative, Butebo

I beg to designate 

5.57
COL CHARITY BEINABABO (UPDF Representative):  Madam Speaker, the UPDF is not designating any member to the Committee on East African Community Affairs. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you have listened to the list of Members constituting the Committee on East African Community Affairs. I put the question that this House confirms the names of Members that have been read and designated. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Education and Sports

5.58
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the Committee on Education and Sports, I hereby designate;

    1. Hon. Twesigye John: Bunyaruguru, Rubirizi - Chairperson
    2. Hon. Abigaba Cuthbert: Kibale County, Kamwenge -Vice Chairperson
    3. Hon. Mavenjina Catherine: Older Persons	 
    4. Hon. Asiimwe Molly: Woman Representative, Rwampara
    5. Hon. Nyakato Dorothy: Woman Representative, Kitagwenda
    6. Hon. Nyamutoro Phiona: Youth Reprentative, Female
    7. Hon. Awich Jane: Woman Representative, Kaberamaido
    8. Hon. Kamateneti Josyline: Woman Representative, Ntungamo
    9. Hon. Kubeketerya James: Bunya County East, Mayuge
    10. Hon. Lokwang Philiphs: Napole West County, Karenga
    11. Hon. Mutumba Abdul: Kiboga West County, Kiboga
    12. Hon. Etuka Isaac: Upper Madi County, Madi-Okollo 
    13. Hon. Aate-Taban Sharifah: Woman Representative, Koboko
    14. Hon. Paparu Lillian: Woman Represntative, Arua
    15. Hon. Katusiime Annet: Woman Representative, Bushenyi
    16. Hon. Tibasiimwa Joram: Older Persons, Western
    17. Hon. Bagiire Aggrey: Bunya County West, Mayuge
    18. Hon. Beatrice Akello: Woman Representative, Agago

I beg to designate 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Opposition?

5.59
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Education and Sports- NUP

    1. Hon. Nabukenya Brenda: Woman Representative, Luweero
    2. Hon. Ssewungu Gonzaga Joseph: Kalungu West, Kalungu
    3. Hon. Patrick Nsamba Oshabe: Kassanda County North, Kassanda 
    4. Hon Kakembo Michael: Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso

From FDC

    1. Hon. Ongiertho Emmanuel: Jonam County, Pakwach 
    2. Hon. Oguzu Denis: Maracha County, Maracha

I beg to designate Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Independents?

6.00
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Committee on Education and Sports;

    1. Hon. Onen Charlse:  Laroo-Pece Division, Gulu City 
    2. Hon. Macho Geoffrey: Busia Municipality, Busia
    3. Hon. Aogon Silas: Kumi Municipality, Kumi
    4. Hon. Akugizibwe Ronald: Buruli County, Masindi
    5. Hon. Ebwalu Jonathan: Soroti West Division, Soroti

I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. UPDF?

6.01
COL BEINABABO CHARITY (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, the UPDF is not designating any Member to the Committee on Education and Sports. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you have listened to the list of Members constituting the Committee on Education and Sports. I put the question that this House confirms the names of those Members to be Members of the Committee on Education and Sports.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Business Committee. Independents?

6.02
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Madam Speaker, for Business Committee, I have;

Hon. Mushemeza Elijah: Sheema County South, Sheema
Hon. Namutaawe Joan: Woman Representative, Masaka

I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you have heard the list of the two people on the Business Committee. I now put the question that this House confirms the two names of Members on the Business Committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

DESIGNATION OF BACKBENCH COMMISSIONERS

6.03
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In line with rule 11 (4) of our Rules of Procedure, on the Government side, I designate the following as Backbench Commissioners;

    1. Hon. Akampurira Prossy: Woman Representative, Rubanda
    2. Hon. Silwany Solomon: Bukooli County Central, Bugiri
    3. Hon. Afoyochan Esther: Woman Representative, Zombo

I beg to designate Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Chief Opposition Whip

6.04
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, in accordance to section 2 of the Administration of Parliament Act, 2006 and rule 11(4) I hereby designate hon. Zaake Francis (NUP, Mityana Municipality) as our Parliamentary Commissioner. I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Procedure

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the point of procedure-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under which rule?

MR NSEREKO: Under the rule of privilege- that we have heard submission and designation of Commissioners whose role is to take care of the welfare of Members in this august House.


Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your intervention whether it would not be procedurally right that these Commissioners come and stand before us so that we know them. 

We are more than 500 Members and the Members that have been mentioned, you might probably find that we do not actually know them- so that on every single matter, we do not have to run to your office but first approach our commissioners. It is my humble request that through your intervention that the Commissioners step forward so that they are known to us in the House and we approve them accordingly. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have four Commissioners whose names have been read. The Member’s concern is genuine. You will find that we do not know these Commissioners and yet they are supposed to be in-charge of the welfare of Members- can the Commissioners stand from where they are so that Members see you. I can see hon. Zaake and hon. Silwany there. Where are the other commissioners? Hon. Prossy is there coming. Where is hon. Afoyochan? We need an acceptance from you that you are going to serve this House. A minute each, on the microphone. 

6.07
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank my party, the National Resistance Movement, for giving me the opportunity to serve. Members of this Parliament, I request you – (Interruption)

MR ATTAN: My name is Moses Attan, Member of Parliament, Soroti East Division. I rise on a procedural matter. Since we have not yet approved the Commissioners, is it procedurally right that they accept before – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your procedure is on which rule? For us, we want to know the Commissioner. Commissioner, can you just greet your members? 

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I was seeking support from the House, and asking members to support my approval. I will always be there for you, honourable members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next commissioner.

6.09
MS PROSSY AKAMPURIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. For the honourable members who do not know me, my name is Prossy Akampurira, Woman Representative, Rubanda District. I would like to thank my party for giving me this opportunity to serve in this capacity. I also want to kindly request fellow members to support me so that I can support you, and you will see a strong Parliament. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Prossy Akampurira. 

6.09
MS ESTHER AFOYOCHAN (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am called Esther Afoyochan, Woman Representative, Zombo. Honourable colleagues, just like you know me, I also want to have an opportunity to know you better. We can only do that as we serve. I am here to seek for your support. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Zaake.

6.09
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (NUP, Mityana Municipality): Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can just greet people because they know you.

MR ZAAKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am Francis Zaake, Member of Parliament representing people of Mityana Municipality, and I belong to the National Unity Platform. I think all honourable members here know me. I am here to give you service and I will always be there to serve you because I understand the importance of this. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Zaake. Honourable members, the four members to serve on the Parliamentary Commission have been designated by different parties. I now put the question that the members, whose names have been designated to serve as Members of the Parliamentary Commission, be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We now have the four Commissioners.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I think many of us have become acquainted with the Rules of Procedure, which commands Parliament to ensure two things:

    1. A total of 40 per cent of the leadership of Parliament must be women; and

    2.  We must ensure that all political shades are accommodated in the composition of the leadership. I am particularly interested in the Commission.

I know that the party in Government takes the lion’s share. I also know that the Opposition has some slot. However, we are increasingly getting more Independent members in the House yet their interests aren’t being taken care of unlike when it comes to their designation to the international platforms like the Pan African Parliament and others. 

The Parliamentary Commission is very important organ because it takes care of the welfare of members.

Now, where an independent member has a problem, the only way they can express that, is to go through the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker or the Clerk. Now that is not the best way of expressing the interest of such a member of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, although we cannot do it now because we are just complying to the rules as it stands now, I pray that the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline will consider this because that is a command of our rules; that we must take care of all political shades in the House.

I beg to raise those two concerns. First, now that the committees have been constituted, 40 per cent of the women or more of the leadership if not, we have to reconsider.

Secondly, in future, we need to consider accommodating the Independent members. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Cecilia Ogwal for airing those concerns. However, for your information, in the Cabinet, the women are 55 per cent. I give you that assignment to go and crosscheck with different party whips. 

On the issue of Independents, I am surprised that it is being brought now. In the Tenth Parliament, we brought a motion but you shot it down, and it did not go through for. 

I, therefore, advise you to bring a fresh motion on Independents. I hope those who would wish to shoot it down, will not be there because any of us is capable of being an Independent. So, prepare a motion to that effect. 

ADJOURNMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you for staying here this long. I am aware of the curfew deadlines that start at 7.00 p.m. Therefore, House is adjourned to tomorrow, Wednesday, 14 July 2021 at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 6.15 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 14 July 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 

