Wednesday, 15 July 2015

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I will alter the Order Paper to accommodate a statement on the recently concluded Pan African Parliamentary elections. They were held in Midrand, South Africa, in May 2015. It will be done by the hon. Jacqueline Amongin. Let the Clerk alter the Order Paper to accommodate this item. 

Honourable members, you know that today is Wednesday; at 3 O’clock, we shall have the Prime Minister’s question time. Those of you with questions can start preparing now to interact with the Prime Minister when that time comes. 

Honourable members, I have not yet received the list from the whips of those who are going to participate in the debate of the State of the Nation Address. That motion was moved and the Leader of the Opposition responded. If there is no list by the time I come to that item today, I will put the question and we shall approve and move forward with other business. Thank you. 

2.09
MRS FREDA KASE-MUBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Two days ago, we buried a 12-year-old school boy. He was knocked down by a vehicle on that section of the road in Masaka District at Kirimya Town. This kind of tragic accident involving the death of children has happened many times. Last year, two children from the same family died from the same spot in Kirimya Town. In a space of three years, at least seven children have died; they have been knocked down by speeding vehicles at Kirimya Town.  

We are asking the Ministry of Works and Transport to do something about this by putting humps on the road to stem the accidents that are claiming the lives of our children. In this town, there are so many schools of religious denominations on either side of this road. For that matter, school going children are always crossing from one side to the other to attend school. However, on this section, cars are speeding and killing our children. 

We are asking that something as simple as a hump be put on the road. What we are asking for is not something unique; it is something that is put in all townships on the road. The road between Masaka and Kampala, for example, has so many humps in all townships that the road passes through. We are, therefore, appealing to the Ministry of Works to listen to our pleas and put humps on the road.

The people last week wanted to demonstrate their frustration and anger. They were wondering why we, their representatives, are not taking care. We have really done that because we have brought this matter to the House before. Unfortunately, we are not getting any result. We hope something can be done to stem the death of our children on this road. Thank you. 

2.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. The issue of accidents and road safety has been discussed in this House several times. We are going to work with the Ministry of Works and Transport to ensure that where especially school-going children use roads, there are humps and road signs. We shall do this to ensure that at least those bad spots across the country are catered for. 

2.23
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I represent Kween District and geographically, it has mountainous areas and lower plains. The lower plains have two very large sub counties and this area had been deserted because of the Karimojong cattle rustling. When the NRM Government came to power, there has been peace. However, I rise today on an issue of insecurity again in the same area. This is not by cattle rustlers but cattle thieves from the same Karamoja region. 

On Sunday, 8th July, thieves came at night and tried to steal animals from Ngenge Sub County from one homestead of someone called Cheboriot. When the owner of the family heard the noise outside, he tried to open the door and he was shot with an arrow. He made an alarm and the thieves ran away. On Monday, the causality was taken to Kapchorwa Hospital. He is undergoing treatment. 

Mr Speaker, cattle theft has become almost a daily issue in this region. These thieves steal from three different places in the same night. Even last night, they stole five animals. We have security personnel - the UPDF and ASTO - within the same region. However, when people inform them that their animals have been stolen, these days they are reluctant; when they decide to follow the thieves, they do not even go up to the destination. Previously, when animals would be stolen, these people would follow their animals with the cooperation of our neighbours, the Karimojong. With the leadership and the security there, the animals would be recovered.

However today, things have become so difficult. If there is any recovery made, they do not usually recover all the animals. When I tried to talk to the leaders of these security personnel within the region, they told me that they have issues. One of them is that they have very little money for fuel to facilitate operations. The owners of the animals have to contribute towards the fuel and yet you know there is poverty within that region.

Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the government to ensure that there is security for my people. They are now living in panic. I therefore request that they boost security by increasing the number of the personnel. We only have 90 ASTO in that region.

Secondly, I would also like to request the Government to come in and help this causality who is in the hospital to at least give aid. When they operated him, they realised that the arrow went through part of the liver and the intestines. We all know how important and delicate those organs are in our bodies. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. Government representative on the issue of cattle theft not cattle rustling.

2.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Since the disarmament of Karamoja, the region has enjoyed peace for some time and Government is committed to ensure that the peace in that region and also in Uganda is maintained.
 
We regret the incident and we will ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to quickly swing into action and attend to this matter. They should equally get in touch with the Member of Parliament and also the leaders in the region. I thank you.

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER

2.18
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I wish to present a statement on the recently concluded Pan-African Parliamentary Elections held in Midrand, South Africa, in May 2015.

I would like to take this opportunity, on behalf of my colleagues - Uganda’s representatives to the Pan African Parliament - to thank the whole House for the support and guidance you have accorded to us in pursuing our representative role at the continental Parliament. I wish also, Mr Speaker, to inform you and the whole House that every three years, the Pan African Parliament changes leadership both at the level of the Bureau, which is the top leadership of the Parliament, and at committees and caucuses.

In the recently concluded PAP elections, I wish to inform the Ugandan Parliament that at the Bureau level, hon. Dang Nkodo from Cameroon was elected as the President; hon. Eduardo Joachim Mulembwe from Mozambique was elected as the first Vice-President; hon. Ashebir Gayo from Ethiopia was elected as the second Vice-President; hon. Suilma  Hay Emhamed Elkaid from Saharawi Arab Democratic Republic was elected as the third Vice-President; and hon. Dr Benardett Lahai from Sierra Leone was elected fourth Vice-President.

Mr Speaker, elections were also held for the 10 permanent committees that we have at the continental Parliament and five regional caucuses as well as the women and youth caucuses. Uganda got two top positions. I was elected in a competitive election as the chairperson of the Committee of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Economy. Hon. Kakoba Onyango was re-elected as chairperson of the Justice and Human Rights committee.

I would like to note that when you elected me to join my four other colleagues at the Pan-African Parliament, issues of the youth were never on the agenda of the continental Parliament; my colleague and former Member of Parliament PAP, hon. Cecilia Atim Ogwal, will bear me witness. I moved a motion on the same and today we have a fully functional bureau of the youth both at the Pan African Parliament and also a department at the African Union Commission. I would also like to inform this House that I was re-elected as the first Vice President then of this bureau, until recently when I handed over to the new team after taking over the mantle of chairperson of the Committee of Agriculture and Natural Resources.

I therefore will not take this for granted, honourable members. Your support has been immense. I take this opportunity to thank the leadership of Uganda led by visionary leader, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for having prioritised empowering the vulnerable, especially the youth, the women and the disabled, compared to other African countries. I can bear witness that Uganda is among those first African countries to ratify the African Youth Charter. Even when I handed over the leadership of the youth caucus, so many countries had not yet ratified but Uganda is among those that have ratified. We therefore give credit where it is due. We applaud His Excellency the President of Uganda. 

It is also in Uganda and a few other countries in Africa where we have youth represented in Parliament and all other structures, women represented in Parliament and all structures, and the disabled represented in Parliament and all structures. I believe that by so doing, the issues of those interest groups are well represented. We take credit as a country.

Honourable members, we are among the first countries to ratify and even domesticate the African Youth Charter, which most countries have not taken as priority. Honourable members, I intend in future to move a motion in this House to have a committee to handle African Union Affairs. This is because there are many declarations made by the heads of state, summits and ministers that need keen follow-up and implementation at the country level. When policy statements are presented to Parliament, there is need for them to reflect the various commitments made on behalf of the people at the continental and other levels.

Mr Speaker, as for the committee that I now chair, we need at country level to push for, among others, the implementation of the Ngor Dakar Declaration on Water and Sanitation as a country, the Malabo Declaration on Agriculture, the Gaborone Declaration on Climate Change, and the soon to come sustainable development goals in our planning as a country.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to thank you for your continuous support, especially the Office of the Speaker, that has enabled us to be effective representatives of Uganda at the continental level. We do not take this lightly. I move my case. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Amongin, member for Ngora County, for bringing those issues on our record. Also, as you said, we may have time to think more carefully through these things and see how these matters can be captured properly when we handle the continental issues that affect us.

LAYING OF PAPERS 

2.25
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I stand here to lay on the Table the report of the Public Accounts Committee delegation to the CPA UK Fifth Westminster Workshop on Effective, Independent and Transparent Public Accounts Committees for Robust Public Financial Oversight that was held in Malta from 1 to 4 June 2015.

Mr Speaker, before I do so, allow me to –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, just lay. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay the report on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, we will find an appropriate time when this matter can be discussed and the recommendations from this particular visit captured. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT UNDER ARTICLE 179(4) OF THE CONSTITUTION PROVIDING FOR CREATION OF NEW COUNTIES

2.27
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I beg to move a motion for a resolution of this honourable House under Article 179(4) of the Constitution to provide for the creation of new counties.

“WHEREAS under Article 179(4) the criteria is provided for the alteration of boundaries of or creation of administrative units including counties; 

AND WHEREAS section 7 (7) of the Local Governments Act empowers Parliament to approve the alteration of the boundaries of or even creation of a new county;

AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to create the counties specified hereunder for the effective representation and streamlining administration, internal emancipation and the reduction of marginalisation and the need to improve planning of those areas and bring services closer to the people; having taken in to account the means of communication, the geographical features, the density of the population and the wishes of the people in the areas concerned;

I NOW THEREFORE, move that this Parliament resolves as follows:

That the following new counties be created in Uganda as indicated herein:
i) 	Agago North County out of Agago County in Agago District.
ii) 	Orungo County out of Amuria County in Amuria District.
iii) 	Lutseshe County out of Manjiya County in Bududa District.
iv) 	Kachumbala County out of Bukedea County in Bukedea District.
v) 	Bukomansimbi South County out of Bukomansimbi County in Bukomansimbi District.
vi) 	Elgon County out of Bulambuli County in Bulambuli District.
vii) 	Dokolo South County out of Dokolo County in Dokolo District.
viii) 	Gomba West County out of Gomba County in Gomba District.
ix)	 Kilak North County out of Kilak County in Amuru District.
x) 	Ik County out of Dodoth East County in Kaabong District.
xi)	Bulamogi North-West County out of Bulamogi County in Kaliro District.
xii) 	Kabweri County out of Kibuku County in Kibuku District.
xiii) 	Kashongi County out of Nyabushozi County in Kiruhura District.
xiv) 	Kibanda North County out of Kibanda County in Kiryandongo District.
xv) 	Chua East County out of Chua County in Kitgum District.
xvi) 	Kole North County out of Kole County in Kole District.
xvii) 	Kanyum County out of Kumi County in Kumi District.
xviii) 	Butemba County out of Kiboga West County in Kyankwanzi District.
xix) 	Kyaka South County out of Kyaka County in Kyegegwa District.
xx) 	Mwenge Central County out of Mwenge North County in Kyenjojo District.
xxi) 	Luuka South County out of Luuka County in Luuka District.
xxii) 	Maracha East County out of Maracha County in Maracha District.
xxiii) 	Kashari South County out of Kashari County in Mbarara District.
xxiv) 	Ruhinda North County out of Ruhinda County in Mitooma District.
xxv) 	Tepeth County out of Matheniko County in Moroto District.
xxvi) 	Aruu North County out of Aruu County in Pader District.
xxvii) 	Buyamba County out of Kooki County in Rakai District.
xxviii) 	Mawogola North County out of Mawogola County in Sembabule District.
xxix) 	Dakabela County out of Soroti County in Soroti District.
xxx) 	Ora County out of Okoro County in Zombo District.
xxxi) 	Kibale County out of Butebo County in Pallisa District.
xxxii) 	Tororo North County out of Tororo County in Tororo District.
xxxiii) 	Kibale East County out of Kibale County in Kamwenge District.
xxxiv) 	Aringa North County out of Aringa County in Yumbe District.
xxxv)	Aringa South County out of Aringa County in Yumbe District.
xxxvi) 	Kigorobya County out of Bugahya County in Hoima District.
xxxvii) 	Koboko North County out of Koboko County in Koboko District.
xxxviii) 	Bukuya County out of Kasanda County in Mubende District.
xxxix) 	Adjumani East County out of East Moyo County in Adjumani District.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the new counties take effect from 1 July 2015 and I also beg to move that this Parliament notes the composition of the counties and town councils in the new and old counties herewith attached.

The motion is accompanied by a duly signed certificate of financial implications from the Ministry of Finance, clearly confirming that funds are available for operationalisation of the counties. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Dr Chrispus Kiyonga, honourable members for Bulambuli District, Amuria County, Kilak County, Kiboga District, Nyabushozi, Agago, Mubende, Okoro County and Bukedea. It is a very popular motion apparently. 

Honourable members, this is not a matter that we can handle immediately. From the mood of the House, it could have been handled now but it is not a matter that we can handle now. The procedure will be to refer this to your committee. I am going to give the Committee on Public Service and Local Government - hon. Kwiyucwiny, Member for Zombo District - to handle this expeditiously and have this matter reported back to the House in two weeks so that we can finalise with it. Honourable chairperson, be on record.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Grace Kwiyucwiny): Mr Speaker, I propose that two weeks will be adequate to handle this issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They are raising issues of nominations. Are there nominations soon? [Hon. Members: “Yes.”] Honourable chairperson, can you report by Thursday next week?

MS KWIYUCWINYI: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, this motion will be coming back to the House on Thursday next week. It is so ordered.

MS AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter. For purposes of record, Ngora District resolved at a district resolution in the district council -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that will not be a procedural matter; it will go to the committee. Let the committee come back with the matter and you can address that issue there.

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, we know that counties are also constituencies and we know that we are heading for the electoral period, and we are also informed that there are some municipalities being formulated. Wouldn’t it have been better for the minister or Government to bring them together so that they are handled together, so that we do not find the committee handling the same thing at a different time? Can the minister also indicate as to whether these municipalities are coming and when? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am handling item 4 on the Order Paper: “Motion for a resolution of Parliament under Article 179…” That is what I have just handled. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the minister has brought counties to be divided and I am aware that there are also municipalities which may come, whatever time they may. 

Mr Speaker, initially you had given two weeks in which the committee can handle the matter but now it is one week –(Interjection)– I know even if they gave hon. Kamuntu a sub county he cannot become an MP again. (Laughter) The procedural issue I am raising is: is there a way for us to know how the minister came up to divide some counties and left out others? The number of voters in Kasilo County, for example, is about 80,000 but I have seen here some counties which have 3,000 voters. I will give an example -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, those are matters that the committee will advise us on and then we have a debate and see whether to approve or not.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, the proposal which has been laid on the Table by the minister is very important. I would like to know what arrangements have been made for the general public to be seen to participate in the scrutiny of the proposal at the committee stage because their voices -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are a senior member of the House; you know there are public hearings in the committees and that is why it is going to the committee.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think there has been a lot of information passed over to the public about municipalities and some of us come from areas where such information has been circulating. It would be better for the minister to clarify whether they are coming or not and whether the matter is closed or still open. You may not say which ones but we need to know so that we can at least give some information to the public. I know that you have ruled that we should go to the committee but this matter cannot go there to seek opinion. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the matter that is going to the committee is the motion; I have not referred any other matter to the committee. We also know that there are issues of the districts which are still pending. Honourable minister, a matter has been raised over municipalities.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been able to bring to this House what I was authorised to. The body that authorises me to appear here and move motions on its behalf is Cabinet. When I am authorised to bring a motion for creation of municipalities, I will come at the appropriate time. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, ordinarily we should start at 3 O’clock for Prime Minister’s question time but now that the Prime Minister is here earlier and normally we lack time to deal with these issues, we have a bonus of 15 minutes to handle this matter today.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

2.41
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have a school in northern Uganda, Gulu District, that was built by the Government of Uganda to help the war affected children. As I speak, the school was almost auctioned because of the debts incurred by the school from suppliers. 

Government tried to do its best but up to now the issue is not yet over and as I speak, the school has been closed since last year in November. Our children did not study last year’s third term, this year’s first term and second term and yet the school has got more than 700 pupils. I would like to know when the school will be opened since our children are so redundant doing nothing at home. Thank you.

2.42
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I thank my brother, hon. Olanya, for raising this matter. I wish it had been raised earlier because it has been apparently going on for quite some time. 

It is not right that our children should spend a week or months at home instead of studying. If the local community has not been able to resolve this matter, as indeed your question indicates, the Ministry of Education and Government will take it up straight away. Please, give us the necessary information through the Minister of Education to follow up the matter with you and the leadership in the community.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, that matter is very disturbing because they were about to auction the school last week and it took the intervention of the Minister of Finance to save the situation. Even all those matters are still pending. You might need to take a keener look at that institution; it is a big institution.

2.43
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last week, the Prime Minister answered my question very vaguely. I sought to know why the Government of Uganda has deployed forces in Burundi without the permission of Parliament, pursuant to Article 210(d) of the Constitution of Uganda as well as Article 2 sub article 4 of the United Nations Charter, where it is said that no member shall invade the other.

Mr Speaker, this is a fundamental question; I do not agree that the Prime Minister can fail to know whether we have deployed forces or not. Tell us, Mr Prime Minister, are our forces deployed in Burundi or not? If so, shouldn’t we take action against you and the Government of Uganda because we are supposed to give you permission?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I recognise the intimidation from my dear brother, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, but as you know, this side of the House is not intimidated. I just would like to say that I do not have any information whatsoever about troop deployment by Uganda in Burundi. In case you have any information, I would very much value receiving it so that we can work on this together.

2.45
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I guess you are aware that there is a dry spell in the country but more so in Agago right from late April until now. Most of the crops have dried in the farmers’ gardens. Do you have any emergency plans that can help these people who do not have any crops in the garden? In case the rains start at the soonest time, will there be any short-term variety seeds?

Secondly, is there any report from the meteorological department regarding this kind of dry spell and the coming of the rainfall, if any, to help the people know and be expectant?

Finally, there is a massive outbreak of malaria in northern Uganda; Agago is one of them -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is one question. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, about the situation in Agago, it is true we have a few distressed areas in the country and we will work with the honourable Member of Parliament. We will have a team from the Office of the Prime Minister go and assess the situation and see what assistance Government can give the people of Agago, of course taking into account the constraints of resources.

2.47
COL (RTD.) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County Kiruhura): Thank you. Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the Prime Minister why the rural electrification programme, which is a very good programme for the Government, is being hampered by taxation. Why should Government tax itself?

Secondly, why is Government failing to pay the 24 per cent as a top-up? All these two factors are delaying the good programme of Government and it is causing an embarrassment to most areas of this country. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Well, I will need to get more specific details from hon. Mwesigye. However, what I can say is that Government in general, in order to reduce tax evasion and corrupt practices decided to provide funds within the budget to pay for taxes. If there is a problem with that or a problem of local funding, this is a matter that we will address because we are fully aware that it is a major national programme and Government gives it unequivocal support.

2.49
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to put this on record by seeking a response from the Prime Minister. 

Tororo District is the only district among the top 10 in terms of population. I come from West Budama South constituency and West Budama is made up of one county. You have just gotten on record about new counties. Nobody should tell me on the sides; this is a very sentimental matter and I cannot help but have it on the record. Prime Minister, can you comfort the people of West Budama South, who have one county with their neighbours now proposed to have two counties? Is there hope or hopelessness? (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, let me clearly comfort my dear brother, hon. Oboth, that there must be hope. As long as people have aspirations and concerns, the Government of the National Resistance Movement will always be responsive and considerate.

2.51
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to find out from the Government - Kitgum Government Hospital was among those which were supposed to be renovated, including Kiryandongo. As we speak, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Kitgum Hospital has no sign of being renovated. Last week I was admitted in the hospital and the walls are almost collapsing. When shall we have Kitgum government hospital renovated and yet it was earmarked but has been left out? Patients are sharing beds - four of them per bed and six children per bed.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that Kitgum Hospital is one of the old hospitals clearly in a dilapidated state; I saw it about a year ago. We have had a bit of procrastination in our programme to rehabilitate a number of hospitals because of discussions with development partners. However, the Government of Uganda is now talking with the Islamic Development Bank to cover a number of hospitals that have not been catered for. I do expect that Kitgum Hospital will be covered by one of the programmes for hospital rehabilitation that the Ministry of Health and Government are now engaged in. 

2.53
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to know from you when the issue at the Vurra customs border point will be solved. Remember, there was a time over 300 trailers and trucks were parked along the border between Uganda and Congo in Arua.

Also, there has been declining revenue collection at Afodi border point in Moyo District because of boundary issues. May I know from you as to when you will solve or whether you have already solved the issues between Congo and Uganda in Arua at the Vurra customs border point? Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true we have had a few border issues with our neighbours especially the DRC. Both the central governments in Kinshasha and Kampala and local communities are following up the matter. The latest information I got a few days ago is that there has been essential agreement on the matter. I do expect that this problem will disappear fairly soon.

2.54
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, creation of counties and municipalities should bring equality. Article 21 of the Constitution talks of non-discrimination; therefore, when we see counties with no municipalities being created, it means those municipalities will tend to be discriminated against. So, they will be denied better service delivery, lack proper planning and employment is of course another factor. 

The Prime Minister is the chief minister here and the Minister of Local Government indicated that he is given what is mandated from Cabinet. Now that the Prime Minister is here, could he explain why only counties were selectively brought yet some of these counties have only one sub-county? Could he explain why municipalities were left out, although they have bigger populations? This could have been done for proper planning and to avert possible diseases and congestion in the country. I thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, regarding Ndungu Kwizera’s issue of municipalities, currently studies are ongoing on this issue. Cabinet will consider the results of these studies and Parliament will be duly informed about the progress of creating of municipalities. It is a question of time but this is going to be done.

2.56
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Mr   Prime Minister, last financial year Shs 9 billion was released to the Office of the Prime Minister for the resettlement of displaced people in Mt Elgon region. These included 41 families that were displaced by the creation of Mt Elgon National Park in the sub-counties of Bumasifa, Bugitimwa, Masaba and Zesui. When is Government effectively resettling these displaced people? It is overdue.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that Government, through the Office of the Prime Minister, is engaged in the resettlement programme of people in the Mt Elgon area, especially those threatened by the mountain itself and those who were removed from the national park. We have to resettle them and Government has bought a substantial amount of land, so the resettlement programme is beginning to take effect.

2.58
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in the Seventh Parliament, we passed a loan from ADB to establish 29 modern landing sites in this country. It was shocking that only nine were purportedly completed and one of the nine happens to be in Kasilo in Kagwara. 

When hon. Ruth Nankabirwa was Minister of State for Fisheries, she came to commission this landing site and she was disappointed. She rejected it and said that she could not commission substandard work. She further directed the contractor to re-do the work. 

Last year, I wrote to the new Minister of State for Fisheries and copied that letter to you, Mr Prime Minister. To date, nothing has been done and this landing site is rotting. We have not seen the culprits brought to book. There was even a forensic audit carried out by the Auditor-General but no action has been taken on the people who were named. When are we restoring or rebuilding these facilities? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I salute Ndungu Okupa for raising this matter. The issue of being accountable is crucial. It is good for political leaders and Members of Parliament to ensure that projects in their respective constituencies are on course. Since the minister responsible for fisheries has already been informed, we will ask the minister responsible to come and tell this House as to when that programme will be rectified so that the landing site can be formally opened when it is in good shape.

3.00
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in 2010 His Excellency the President promised to give the people of Kapchorwa a municipality. You have talked about it but since morning, my people have been calling me and they would like to hear from you. Moreover, they are watching right now. When is this municipality going to be created for the people of Kapchorwa? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my sister would have benefited from my earlier communication on this matter that studies are on-going for the creation of municipalities. As soon as these studies are completed, Cabinet will consider the subject matter and the Minister for Local Government will bring the issue of new municipalities to this august House.

3.01
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you may be aware that the Operation Wealth Creation, which was manned by army officers, was mismanaged during the previous planting season and many people failed to plant because of the way it was handled. What steps have you put in place to ensure that the next planting season is not going to be another fiasco like the last one was? What steps has Government taken to ensure that seeds and inputs are supplied to the people and that farmers can plant in time? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that when a programme is starting, it faces quite a number of challenges. Similarly, the Operation Wealth Creation is learning from the experiences it has accumulated over the course of time, especially on ensuring that inputs are supplied at the right place and are of good quality. Therefore, we are learning from those problems in order to create a better future for Operation Wealth Creation.

3.03
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is about tea growing in Nebbi-Zombo. 

In February, we put it to the President that tea planting should be started, that farmers should be organised and technical information and other support should be given to the farmers of Zombo-Nebbi Tea Project. However, that has barely started. There are two critical issues to be addressed: first, a contract to the lead agents for the tea and secondly, an MoU between the key stakeholders, that is, NAADS, the district and the lead agency. 

Since February to date, these two critical issues have not been addressed. The contract for the lead agency has not been signed and neither has the MoU. May I know from you whether it is a deliberate move to kill this project or whether there is hope that these issues can be addressed? Why is there a delay?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is a deliberate policy for Government to promote tea growing in many parts of Uganda, Okoro and others included. Therefore, if there has been a delay in this government supported project of tea growing, the minister responsible for agriculture will be able to give an appropriate and specific response on measures being taken by Government to promote tea growing in the area concerned.

3.05
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, while we were considering a report from Public Accounts Committee, we realised that Government owes a lot of money to various business people and traders in Uganda in terms of compensation and court awards.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my question to you is: what steps is Government taking to clear these compensations and court awards, well aware of the financial challenges that these people face? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government is committed to sorting out court awards. However, we are aware that there are budgetary constraints but despite those constraints, Government will do its best to sort out the court awards.

3.06
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in a spell of two weeks, fishermen on Lolwe Islands, Tama Islands and Buvuma Islands have lost about 50 engines and nets worth Shs 900 million to pirates. Efforts have been made by local leaders in vain. Police deployment cannot be effective due to lack of fuel and facilitation. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when will Government take action to protect Ugandans and their property?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member has narrowed the issue down to shortage of fuel. Since the problem is very serious, the Police and the Ministry of Internal Affairs will prioritise to ensure that some fuel is available so that the Police can effectively deal with these pirates who are a menace to the fishermen.

3.07
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my question is also in line with the new administrative units that are being formed or that are just about to be formed. 

Currently, people are busy canvassing for votes, like is the case within our party where we are asking people to present their papers for verification before being nominated as candidates for the various constituencies. My question is: what is the effective date of commencement of these counties? This is because some people are busy canvassing for votes and they need clarification as to whether those counties will be effective this financial year or at another date? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as the Minister of Local Government has just told this House, this is going to be with effect from 1st July this year.

3.09
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The question I am addressing to the Prime Minister is in reference to what he stated on pages 11 and 12 of the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda. 

This week, the Central Bank of the Republic of Uganda has revised the lending rate to commercial banks upwards. Mr Prime Minister, can you assure this nation that you will implement the President’s promise of injecting Shs 500 billion into the Uganda Development Bank to counteract what is currently happening as far as interest rates are concerned? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is the commitment of Government to implement the pledges and promises made by His Excellency the President as articulated in the budget that we recently passed. 

3.10
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. From the motion moved by the Minister of Local Government, hon. Adolf Mwesige, Government seems to be in a good position financially because he has said that the proposed counties will take effect from 1 July 2015.

His Excellency the President, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, promised the people of Busongora County North that he would take over two secondary schools namely Maliba Secondary School in Maliba Sub County and Kibanzanga High School in Kyabalungira Sub County. Now that Government is in a better financial position, wouldn’t it be prudent for Government to take over these two secondary schools at the same time that these new counties are being established?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, President Museveni pledged that Government would take over those two secondary schools and indeed, Government will do so.

3.12
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to ask the Prime Minister a question concerning cancer. Since last year, I have buried very many people in my district that died from cancer. Whenever I appear at the burials, the question I am asked is: “What is the cause of cancer and why were we not suffering from it previously?” 

What I would like to hear from you are the precautionary measures that Government is taking to curb this problem. When you go to the Uganda Cancer Institute, there are so many people suffering from cancer.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as colleagues are aware, cancer is caused by many environmental factors like infections, radiation and other associated issues. Smoking, for example, is one of the most well-known causes. Government, through research, is trying to identify these causes in order to deal with them as well as educate the population on prevention and to put in place the necessary preventive and medical measures to deal with cancer cases, in case they come up.

3.14
MS SYLVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am aware that Government committed itself to provide a complete unit of road maintenance equipment for each of the 112 districts in the country. I am also aware that Government procured some equipment but unfortunately, most of the equipment is not functioning as expected. The graders and other equipment continue to breakdown and as such they have become a liability to the districts. 

I am also aware that the President committed himself to bringing in more durable equipment to enable districts to maintain their own roads. My question is: when is Government procuring the additional and more durable road equipment to support the districts?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member is absolutely right that we have had these problems with the road equipment. However, Government is procuring funds to get more robust road equipment. As I speak, the loan request is before the Committee of National Economy. As soon as this is cleared, Government will go ahead with the procurement arrangements. 

3.16
MR EDWARD BALIDDAWA (NRM, Kigulu County North, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, the Uganda Communications Act, 1998 and the Uganda Communications Act, 2010, as amended, enjoins the Executive to establish a Communications Tribunal whose purpose is to arbitrate all issues in the communications sector. It is now 17 years since the Act was enacted. Mr Prime Minister, when does the Executive intend to establish a tribunal?

DR RUGUNDA: The Ministry responsible for ICT has been considering this matter and I expect that the tribunal will be formed in due course.

3.17
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for a long time, the Uganda Petroleum Institute, Kigumba has been having serious issues regarding its management to the extent that I have had to raise the issue here before. However, I have never received an answer to date.

The question that I am asking is, how far has the government gone in solving the management issues between the interim tax force whose term of office has expired and the governing council? Students who were admitted last academic year did not go to school and they are still stranded with their admission letters.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this matter is well known in Government and is being handled by the Ministry of Education. An inter-ministerial meeting on the matter was held, chaired by Rt Hon. Moses Ali and a way forward on the matter has been determined. I do not have the exact details with me but we are on course in sorting out that important problem. 

3.18
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue that I am raising was raised by me on the Floor previously and this is going to be the fourth time. Whenever I raise this issue, Government agrees that it is going to be worked on. This issue concerns the main road going to Jinja. There was a fake investor who came and dug up the road at Kyambogo but Parliament, in its wisdom, stopped the investor. When this was done, under the NEMA Act, that person should have refilled the ground but this was not done. 

The then Prime Minister and Government agreed that they would make sure that refilling is done. As we talk, the poles are about to fall and whoever uses Jinja Road near Banda has seen this. The place is bushy and has become a shelter for thieves. I would like to ask the Prime Minister when they are refilling that area.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, if that problem is as described by my brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, then the Minister responsible for Works who is in charge of the roads will address this matter with urgency so that we will no longer be promising anything. The road will be properly done and safe for all motorists.

3.20
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The question that I have for the Prime Minister is in regard to what was raised last week about the malaria outbreak in Acholi sub region. 

Last week on Saturday, I took a patient to Gulu Referral Hospital and I was informed that I should buy anti-malarial drugs. The only medicine available was Gentamycin in that referral hospital. The question I have is: when are we going to have medicine delivered to these hospitals because so many people are actually dying of malaria? I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, anti-malarial drugs are some of the most commonly available drugs in our hospitals and health centres. However, it is true that sometimes when there is an epidemic, the drugs distributed to those health centres and hospitals may be exhausted.

The usual quick practice is that the neighbouring hospitals would come in to support the hospital concerned or the headquarters would supply. In this respect, therefore, the Ministry of Health will do the needful, working with the National Medical Stores. I am glad that the Minister of State for Health is in attendance and will follow up the matter. 

3.22
MR AHMED AWONGO (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister concerns secondary schools in Koboko. We have 16 secondary schools and out of these, 10 are privately owned. There is talk that Government intends to stop USE in the private schools. However in Koboko, most of our children go to these private schools and this means that if USE is stopped in the private schools, most of our children will not have access to schools and this is worrying the people of Koboko. Can you confirm whether this statement is true, Mr Prime Minister?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that Government’s priority is to support Universal Secondary Education first and foremost starting with Government secondary schools. However, we have not ruled out supporting private secondary schools. In any case, each situation will be looked at closely to ensure that whatever position is taken, it does not victimise innocent young people who are in school.

Therefore, the concerns of the people of Koboko or any other area will be taken into account by the ministry responsible.

3.24
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a Government policy that each and every county should have a functional health centre IV. However, there are many counties without functional health centre IVs. 

May I know when Government intends to begin rolling out in terms of upgrading health centres III that have been identified in these respective counties, such that these counties without functional health centres IV can have them? When are we starting the process? I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: This is a well-known problem and Government is talking with some development partners to support Government on the programme of upgrading health centres III to health centres IV. We will await the results of these discussions but Government is anxious to have this programme take off as quickly as possible.

3.25
MR PETER LOKII (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Regarding exploitation of marbles and limestone in Karamoja, Tororo cement has a 25-year lease but the question of royalties and the destruction of the roads is becoming a menace. We have asked Government, on a number of occasions, to put up a weighbridge so that for purposes of fairness, the districts are able to know what quantities of minerals are leaving the districts. May I know when Government intends to put up a weighbridge in Karamoja?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we indeed want to protect the roads that we have invested so much in and it is true that we are increasing the measuring of weights being carried on our different roads. I do not have the exact timing but I know that arrangements are in place to have even mobile weighbridges in order to protect our roads. I think our friend from Karamoja will benefit from these plans of having both fixed and mobile weighbridges.

3.27
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is about issues of land. The citizens of this country, especially the poor ones, are leaving in fear of land grabbers. These land grabbers forge land titles and overnight, begin evicting or threatening citizens without following the law or compensating the people.

The rural people have been chased like dogs, Mr Prime Minister. What is Government doing or what assurance can you give to the rural population of this country?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my sister is raising a very serious point. It is true that as we increase in population and land becomes a more valuable commodity, the poor, the peasantry are likely to be the victims. Government is doing whatever it can to deal with land grabbers and people who are involved in fraudulent activities on land. 

However, let me take this opportunity to once again ask my comrades in this House and other political leaders at all levels to be vigilant and ensure that the rights of ordinary people who may not be able to have a loud political voice or access lawyers can get justice done.

Public awareness about land grabbing and other fraudulent activities is one important preventive measure of mobilising society against injustice on land issues.

3.29
MR SAM OKUONZI (Independent, Vurra County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there are disturbing reports from abroad regarding Uganda and Ugandans. There are reports that there are Darfurians, Sudanese and Eritreans who are in Israel and who have preferred to come to Uganda. They want to come and seek asylum in Uganda. 

There are also reports that in Tokyo, some Ugandans have been beaten by the Police on primitive suspicions and some of them have come to my office here. We do not know what the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is doing about many of these reports.

Finally, there are reports from Turkey that the ISIS war has spilled over into Turkey and Ugandans are stranded there because of that war. Some of the East African countries have managed to bring back their own people but our people are there and Government is doing nothing. May I know whether Government is aware of these reports and whether you can inform us about them? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, on the question of people who may just want to come and settle in Uganda, Uganda follows international conventions on refugees and Uganda will follow the same regulations. Uganda will not accept to be a dumping country for anybody.

On the question of Ugandans being in Turkey or some other areas, this information should be made available to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs so that as usual, they will provide the necessary consular services to Ugandans who may be stressed outside the country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, to avoid you standing all the time, I have Samia Bugwe South, Sheema, Budiope, Buzaaya, Kamwenge, Dokolo, Bungokho North, Nakifuma, Lira District and Youth Central. That is what I have for now.

3.32
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in February 2015, the President went and commissioned the road from Musita to Lumino; Busia-Majanji Road. That road has been under the Central Government under maintenance of murram roads, which UNRA has been working on seasonally. However, immediately the contractor took over, UNRA withdrew its support and funding for that road.

Right now, the situation is very bad. The road has broken down and vehicles are being damaged. What programme do you have to ensure that this road is maintained and accessible while the contractor plans to have it upgraded?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, through the Ministry of Works, Government is putting greater emphasis on road maintenance. I am sure that this information should reach the Ministry of Works to ensure that the ministry responsible takes quick measures to save the road. We do not want a road that has been built and repaired to suddenly deteriorate and, therefore, lose the investment that has worked on that road. 

3.34
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Ministry of Energy under REA came up with a very ambitious project of rural electrification and for the last two years, in some areas, they have put up poles that are not connected. They have made plans and holes have been dug everywhere and people are putting the blame on the MPs for not implementing that project. The people are anxiously waiting for those lines and for that huge ambitious plan. They are not only putting pressure on the MPs but also on Government. 

Therefore, when is the ministry implementing those projects especially where plans have been put in place and availed to the people? They are anxiously waiting for those lines.  

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this rural electrification programme is a major programme for Government. We are aware that in some areas, there has been a shortage of funds but fortunately, this august House has just passed a new budget and funds are now going to flow. Therefore, we shall ensure that the poles in place are properly connected to the wires and to the population.

3.36
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to find out from you when Government is extending electricity to Budiope East constituency in Buyende District, which the President promised when he came to commission Kagulu Rock two years ago as a tourist destination facility. The President also used that function to direct the Ministry of Energy to expedite the process. I am glad that the minister is also here.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I have just been assured by the honourable Minister of Energy that the plans are on and work is going to be done.

3.37
MR MARTIN MUGABI (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there is an increasing rate of unemployment especially among our graduates. Most of these families sell their land to take their children to school. In view of this situation, the economy is threatening investors in this country. What hope can you give to Ugandans who are selling pieces of land to take their children to school?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I salute the parents who are sacrificing, including sacrificing pieces of land, to ensure that their children get education. Education will empower their children to be able to eke life and to survive either by getting jobs or by creating jobs. 

I think the challenge is to ensure that our education system produces young men and women that can create jobs and that have skills to sell. Therefore, parents should be saluted and encouraged to spend more on education for their children.

3.38
MS DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a time when most of the political parties we have in this country have called those interested to come and submit their documents for the different positions in this country. 

However, it is very unfortunate that they are requesting us to have a voter’s number and yet I do not know what we are going to use in the actual sense. Are we going to use our old voter’s cards or the national identity cards, which are not yet distributed to us? I would like clarification from the Prime Minister. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the minister responsible will come and give us more detailed information on the matter.

3.39
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, in the Sixth and Seventh Parliaments, I served on the Committee of Presidential and Foreign Affairs and during that time, the issue of acquiring a residence for the Vice President of the Republic of Uganda was a very urgent one. 

I have been looking through the ministerial statement for a couple of years and I have not seen that issue of stating the requirements for the Vice President’s Office followed up in the ministerial policy. May I know from the Office of the Prime Minister what he intends to do to decently accommodate the Vice President of the Republic of Uganda? Would it be prudent to see the Vice President of Uganda living in the suburbs of Kampala where they make malwa? Would it be prudent for Uganda to have a Vice President living in those areas? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is malwa, honourable member? (Laughter)

MRS OGWAL: Malwa, ajono, kongo lango, konga acholi - (Laughter) I have given you the name in various languages. “Malwa” is millet or sorghum local brew.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my sister hon. Cecilia Ogwal is concerned with His Excellency the Vice President living with the people. I think that is perfectly in order. Nevertheless, Government has plans to have an official residence constructed or procured for His Excellency the Vice President. However, the constraint has been resources.

3.41
MR YAHAYA GUDOI (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister a similar question to the one I asked last time. Government indicated that it was going to build 500 secondary schools in sub counties, which do not have such facilities. My question is: when is that policy going to be implemented because I am one of those with sub counties without secondary schools? I had started smiling.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the programme is on-going of making sure that there is a government secondary school in every sub county. There is still a gap to fulfil this programme in its entirety but it is an on-going programme.

3.43
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (Independent, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Government of Uganda, through the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, has been carrying out a pilot programme for the elderly people known as Social Action Grant for Empowerment (SAGE). We were meant to understand that the piloting was to end in June 2015 and thereafter, all the districts of Uganda would benefit from this programme. I would therefore like to know when Government intends to roll out this programme in all the districts of Uganda. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this has been a very successful programme. Government has injected more resources under this current budget and the intention of Government is to gradually roll it over until the whole country is covered.

3.45
MS JOY ATIM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira):  Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Government, in a bid to curb incidents of malaria, came up with programmes such as distributing mosquito nets and Indoor Residual Spraying (IRS). 

Mr Speaker, IRS was conducted in Apac District and DDT was used. Recently however, the Minister of Health went to Lira and launched another programme with another chemical other than DDT. If you watched on TV last week, Apac despite all the spraying that was conducted, the incidence of malaria is still very high. For Lira or the Lango, they sprayed for the second time and the process ended last week. However, after only one week of spraying, there were a lot of mosquitoes in the houses. 

My question to the hon. Prime Minister is, is the chemical that we are using genuine? Is it effective? Is it meant for us? How effective is it? If you check Apac, it is worse as if it was not even sprayed. 

In all these other districts, including Tororo where she hails from, there are a lot of mosquitoes. Can you clarify to Ugandans whether this chemical we are using is helping Ugandans in terms of saving our money and lives?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, if what the honourable member has said is what is on the ground, that spraying attracted more mosquitoes, if there were more mosquitoes than before, it would suggest that the chemical used is not effective. Therefore, there is need to crosscheck the facts and ensure that Government is paying money for wholesome and good quality chemicals. This is a matter that our sister, the Minister of State for Health, will follow up to ensure that there is value for money.

3.47
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, a while ago you talked about the land challenge in Uganda. I would wish you to affirm to Ugandans and the House the status and commitment of the Government of Uganda toward the Land Fund.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the Land Fund has been operational in Uganda for the last 15 or so years. The problem, however, has been the quantum – the amount of money available to sort out the many land issues. As resources become more available, there will be more allocation to the Land Fund so that people can be helped to liberate themselves and buy land. 

Therefore, the Land Fund is in place and is operational. The problem is that the quantity of money available and its quantum is not commensurate to the enormous problem of land challenges that we face.

3.49
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, thank you for answering our questions. I need some clarification on the issue of land grabbing. This issue of landlessness is a big issue. If I take the example of my constituency or district, about 30 per cent of the people in my district have no land. Many of them are immigrants from neighbouring districts. Therefore, they are very poor. 

What is the long-term plan for people like that? Government set up a Land Fund which has never crossed the Nile. It has remained in central and western Uganda. We have never benefitted from the Land Fund.

Secondly, I need clarification on the issue of USE. It was asked by the honourable member from Koboko. I am glad the Minister for Education is here. Government has stopped funding or sending money under USE to private schools. However, it was done without plan; people were not given sufficient time. 

I think it should have been phased out by stopping to admit from year one. There are schools in my district which have now been advised to close. They were depending on USE and the fund was just abruptly cut off. One of the schools is called Kubusa in Buwunga Sub-County.

This applies to even Government schools. There is a school called Muterere Secondary School, which was getting something like Shs 24 million a year. This time, they were sent only Shillings one million and they were told that is what they can get. I think this should be clarified by the Ministry of Education.

On the issue of typhoid, when I was young, I never heard about typhoid. Today, everywhere you go peasants are told in the hospitals that they are suffering from typhoid. Is there an epidemic of typhoid? Why is it that there is now typhoid everywhere, hon. Prime Minister?

Lastly is the question of the VP’s house. I think we also need institutional houses for the Speaker and the Chief Justice as heads of the other two pillars of the state. Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the comments made by the Leader of the Opposition about the Land Fund not having been spread throughout the country is actually correct. It is consistent with what I have told this august House that the amount available needs to be beefed up so that it can help more people in the country. We are in absolute agreement on that point.

On the question of USE, I will ask the Minister of Education to make a statement to the House about the state of affairs, especially with regard to the private secondary schools and even Government schools that you are saying may not be receiving enough. I think it is proper that at regular intervals, departmental heads – ministers – should brief this House on important questions of that nature. Therefore, the Minister of Education will clarify this to this august House.

About typhoid, nothing has fundamentally changed. However, with more rapid urbanisation, congestion, challenges of water supply – typhoid being a water-related disease tends to more easily spread in unhygienic environment. I think that is why you see more and more problems connected with typhoid.

With regard to the official residence for H.E the Vice-President, Rt Hon. Speaker and the Chief Justice, I think the principle is correct that the heads of the main Arms of Government should be properly looked after by this country, including official residence, resources permitting.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Prime Minister. Thank you, Leader of the Opposition and thank you members for these questions. I think we are improving and we have covered a lot of ground today in this one hour and fifteen minutes. Thank you.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE TOBACCO CONTROL BILL, 2014

Clause 2

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairperson, I wanted us to insert the definition of “child” immediately after the definition of the phrase “brand new” to read as follows: “’Child’ means a person below the age of 18 years.”

The justification is –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, clause 2 is about interpretations which are definitions. Would it not be procedurally right that we stand over it and go to other clauses because more terms could come which we need to define?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, we could finish with this since it is only one. You wanted us to stand over clause 2?

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, let us stand over clause 2.

Clause 3

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairperson, in clause 3(2) we wanted to rephrase sub-clause (2) to read as follows:
“(2) The committee shall consist of the following - 
(a) 	The Director General of Health Services who shall be the Chairperson.
(b) 	A Commissioner responsible for Public Health.
(c) 	A representative of the Ministry of Trade.
(d) 	A representative of the Ministry of Education and Sports.
(e) 	A representative of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.
(f) 	A representative of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.
(g) 	Uganda National Bureau of Standards.
(h) 	National Environment Management Authority.
(i) 	One representative from civil society engaged in tobacco control nominated by a forum of organisations engaged in tobacco control.

The justifications are:
1. 	We want to create a reasonable size of the committee since some of those ministries or the organisations represented on the committee are not directly linked to the activities of the Tobacco Control Committee and others are already represented through other organisations.

2. 	To ensure that the Tobacco Control Committee is headed by the Director General of Health Services who is the highest technical person in the Ministry of Health.

Clause 3(3): we want to redraft the entire sub-clause (3) to read as follows:
“(3) All members of the committee other than the chairperson shall be appointed by the minister on the recommendations of their respective ministries or organisations, a third of whom shall be women.

(4)The members of the committee other than the chairperson of the committee shall not be below the rank of principal or its equivalent.”

The justifications are: 
1. 	To ensure that there is one appointing authority to whom all members of the committee are answerable.
2. 	To ensure gender equity.
3. 	The splitting of the provision is for clarity.

Clause 3 (4): to delete the entire provision. 

The justification is that the provision becomes redundant with the amendment made to Clause 3(3).

For clause 3 (6), delete sub-clause (6). 
The justifications are: 
1. 	With the introduction of the Director General of Health Services as the Chairperson of the Tobacco Control Committee, the provision becomes redundant.

2. 	The position of the secretary to the committee has been created under the proposed Clause 7.

In clause 3(7), substitute for the sub-clause (7) the following: 
“The minister shall appoint a Vice Chairperson from among members of the committee”.
The justification is that it is only prudent that both the Chairperson and the Vice Chairperson be appointed rather than having only one appointed and the other elected.

Clause 3(9): delete the entire sub-clause.
The justifications are:
1. 	Following the amendment made to Clause 3(2) (a), the provision would be redundant since the Director General of Health Services is appointed.

2. 	A qualification in public administration is not a prerequisite for one to become a principal officer hence the provision will not be practical.

For Clause 3 (10), delete sub-clause (10). The justification is that the implementation of the provision is not practical.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, those are the proposals from the committee. I need to seek the opinion of the honourable member who is sponsoring the Bill on the amendments proposed by the committee and then I will come to you.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank so much, Mr Chairperson. We would wish to amend Clause 3(2) (b) to replace it with, “The Tobacco Control focal person in the Ministry of Health” because there is no such a position as the commissioner responsible for public health in the Ministry of Health; we were reliably informed.

Mr Chairperson, we would wish to add URA on the list of the members of the committee because URA handles illicit trade, and therefore we wish it is a component this committee will work closely with since tobacco can be handled under that. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, are you in agreement with this?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairperson, there is a commissioner in the Ministry of Health responsible for community health. Therefore, I have a conviction that the person can serve that purpose. I thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is the honourable member suggesting that there is a person directly in charge of tobacco control in the ministry? Therefore, which one would be better, honourable members?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Chairperson, there is a direct person who is a focal person for tobacco control in the Ministry of Health. Since we have the ministers here, maybe they can clarify on this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable ministers, you could help us with this. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Chairperson. We actually have a Commissioner for Community Health and we also have a focal person, specifically in charge of this tobacco control. However, it is an issue that I request we stand over and we consult to agree because both are key -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that an issue that needs standing over? Is there a commissioner who is bigger than the other?

MS OPENDI: Mr Chairperson, the commissioner may be higher in position, but the focal person in charge of tobacco control has been the key person behind –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then, why don’t you take him and we go with that? Do we need to consult on that?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairperson, I concede on the issue of the focal person in charge of tobacco control.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Good. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, first to begin with, we agree with the committee to reduce the number of the committee members. I do not know if we have a budget in the ministry because we are creating a committee which must be looked after. I do not know -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable member, a certificate of financial implication was laid here and there is no problem with that. Please, go to the issue.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, why I am raising it is because if there is a financial implication. If you read through that section, you will see that they are supposed to raise money to facilitate the committee to do work of tobacco control and that means to maintain the committee.

Mr Chairman, you cannot be the supervisor, the controller and your own auditor. Therefore, to begin with, the chairpersonship should move from the Ministry of Health. The Bill proposed the Office of the Prime Minister to be the chairperson of the committee and that is the right place. It is because Ministry of Health is going to be the one to control this. You do not need to audit yourself. Therefore, I think the chairperson should agree that the Office of the Prime Minister remains the chairperson of the committee for accountability and transparency.

Secondly, on the committee, the moment you have the Director General of Health Services, you are done. You are reducing the number; it is up to the Director of Health Services to decide who should be the focal person there. We are saying the Director Health Services under the Bill should be the secretary to the committee. It is up to him or her to make a decision if she can do it or not. Creating a secretariat means you will have staff in that office. They are not necessarily supposed to be committee members. There can be staff to support the secretariat.  In health, the moment we have somebody like the Director Health Services, we are done. We do not need to have more than enough for that. This is the top organ for policy and guidance. 

I would propose that the office of the chairpersonship stays in the Office of the Prime Minister. The Ministry of Finance is represented. The Attorney-General’s Office needs the lawyers; they must be there. This is because disputes are going to arise. Legal matters are going to come up and they need to look at it. 

I have seen here on the law, you are only talking about ministries, but you have left out the people who participate in it; the private sector, for example, which includes the farmers who help grow it, the traders and the processors. Are you making a law so that you are the only ones who are alpha and omega? You should have those people who are involved in the sector to be part and parcel of this. Do you know everything about tobacco? In my proposal, the committee is right to reduce on the number of people, but we need to add in people from the private sector. 

I would also like to make a suggestion. Wouldn’t it be better for us to go section by section? This is because some will finish faster and so we deal with the remaining ones. If you do not mind, I could stop there. If you still want, I can go ahead. This is because I do not want to get confused. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chair, we were very mindful of the Ministry of Agriculture. This is because when we were interfacing with them, they gave us a very wonderful writing which we put in the minutes that we laid on the Table. 

The Ministry of Agriculture has got direct contact with the farmers. We have also gone ahead to put one representative from the civil society engaged in tobacco control nominated by a forum of organisations engaged in tobacco control. 

When you talk about a lawyer, I think the Attorney-General is there to represent Government. Since we have got this committee and the Attorney-General represents us, he can serve there. We do not need to put him here. That is what I think. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The initial proposal was to have the Office of the Prime Minister chair the committee. In the wisdom of the committee, it is the Ministry of Health that could directly be in the leadership of the committee; we do agree with that observation. We have no problem with that.

The reason why the Prime Minister’s Office was coming in was to have it as a super-sectoral office to oversee the other ministries. I think there is no big problem with the Ministry of Health chairing. 

The other issue raised by hon. Nandala-Mafabi was of the tobacco companies or those in the trade. I just want to say that there is a history to this Bill. Countries that subscribe to World Health Organisation came up with a framework convention on tobacco control which has been ratified. As of today, there are 177 countries out of 192 and Uganda is among them. 

In that framework convention which was ratified by our own Government in 2006, it is stated very clearly that as we make tobacco control policies and legislations which are public health legislations, we must protect them from the vested interests of the commercial dealers in the tobacco industry. 

It is deliberate that such a tobacco control committee superintends over public health issues to do with tobacco; you do not bring the tobacco industry in such a committee. This is because it is very clear in that framework convention that you must separate the commercial interests from the public health interest. 

In Article 5.2 of that framework convention which we ratified as a country, it says, “We must protect public health policies related to tobacco control from the commercial and other vested interests of the tobacco industry.” This is because of the understanding that there is irreconcilable conflict between promotion of public health and the commercial interest of the industry. 

As the Chair of the committee said, the civil society engaged in tobacco control is represented on this committee, but the treaty prohibits us from bringing on board the industry to sit on the committee that spearheads public health interests in as far as tobacco control is concerned.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can we now deal with the issue of leadership of this committee? The proposal in the Bill is that the Office of the Prime Minister; the committee thinks the Director General of Health Services in the Ministry of Health should take leadership of this committee. The honourable member for Budadiri West has a different opinion. 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chair, this is nearly inter-ministerial committee. You want to have one ministry take over the leadership. What has been the practise? Is this the first inter-ministerial committee that we are establishing? If the answer is in the affirmative, then we can look at the justification. 

If the Ministry of Health is going to be the watchman and also want to be the judge after the watchman arresting the intruder, then you will definitely lack credibility at the time of implementation and even discredit your reporting system. 

My suggestion would be - unless the original Bill had a proposal for the Office of the Prime Minister - in that office, the Prime Minister has several ministers. The spirit of this Bill can actually be killed by appearing to be overprotective. 

We can cause the Ministry of Health to be suspected of ulterior motives other than public health. We have seen Ministry of Trade. What is the role of the Ministry of Finance? 

The private sector striking the balance between commercial interests is a big argument. I agree with the hon. Baryomunsi. Must you close them out? Is that how to balance? Are you denying and suffocating yourself of information? 

The Private Sector Foundation is a recognised body in our legislation in this country. We are not going to say that you are going to bring a tobacco farmer or BAT or leaf tobacco or other players. You are regulating them. The law is about them. Must you leave them out? 

I am sure I am speaking on behalf of many when I say that if I could get that assurance that this is a fine other than that convention you are citing honourable minister -  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, would you like to propose directly the issue concerning the private sector foundation? 

MR OBOTH: We have a representative from the private sector. Then the chair of that committee should be from Office of the Prime Minister. Would that hurt so much, my honourable Minister General Duties, the UN World Health Organisation recent awarding? Or there is no capacity in the Office of the Prime Minister?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, I know the Private Sector Foundation that represents the interests of the industry has put up an advert and some of my colleagues are trying to fight for – yes, I see it here. I know that there is a lobby for some of these ideas.

However, my information was basically technical guidance that the basis for this legislation which many other countries have already put in place, is that it is hinged on that framework Convention of Tobacco Control by WHO, which Uganda is part of.

We also ratified this Convention in 2006 and one of the articles clearly expresses that we must separate the commercial interest from the public health interest. Therefore, if you include the tobacco industry on a committee, Uganda will be the first one to do something irregular in contravention of that treaty.

This is public health legislation and the interests of the industry are opposed to the interest of public health promotion. That is why we are very cautious and you could cross check the legislations from all over the countries that have actually domesticated this convention.

However, on the issue of the Prime Minister or the Minister of Health - I think we can tolerate consensus, we do not have very hard position for the initial proposal was –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you start by generating the consensus yourself?

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. Whereas it should be easy for us to generate consensus, on as to whether the lead person should be the Minister of Health or Prime Minister’s Office, I strongly agree with my colleague hon. Oboth, in that the OPM is the Leader of Government Business.

It would be very difficult in the ministerial committee for a junior ministry – junior in the sense that it is junior to the Office of the Prime Minister, to effectively summon his colleagues to come to a round table meeting. If it will be easier, we shall arrive to that.

However, the issue I would like to bring at this stage is what you have clearly indicated that Uganda will be the first country to attempt to put in place a Tobacco Control Bill, not to involve the interested parties like the tobacco companies as part of the control body.

I am convinced that if this is a body that is going to really harmonise and control the tobacco industry, it will be like a body which will be acting against the rules of natural justice because it will not seek the opinion of the tobacco industry to be represented.

I therefore strongly feel that tobacco companies must be represented on this committee regardless on whatever position they are going to hold. Otherwise, you cannot seek a high table to determine people’s fate, without giving them a hearing. I beg to submit, Mr Chairperson.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairperson, I wanted to concede on the issue of having everything under the Prime Minister since it is becoming an inter-ministerial committee. However, I will not agree to have tobacco industries on this committee because they are the violators.

When we met them, they did not mind about anybody dying of tobacco related diseases; they mind about money only. I am therefore conceding on the Prime Minister’s Office as hon. Nandala-Mafabi has put it but I am not conceding on the issue of - (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Mr Chairperson, hon. Bitekyerezo, the MP for Mbarara Municipality, has alluded to the fact that the tobacco industries are the violators of all that we are trying to do and yet the tobacco industry, in as much as it produces and churns out tobacco, is not the one that smokes tobacco. It is the people that smoke tobacco. The industry does not consume its own products. It is you and I who smoke. Is the honourable member therefore in order, to come up and attempt to mislead this House that the tobacco industry is the violator of all these good regulations that we have imbedded in this proposed law? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what does this law seek to regulate? Whose activities does this law seek to regulate? 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairperson, I thank you for your wise ruling. When you look at the objects of the Act – I would like to go to 1(d): the object of this Act is - and then there is “regulate the manufacture, sell, labelling, promotion, advertising, distribution, public use of tobacco products as sponsorship of tobacco products and to provide for other related matters in order to ensure that Uganda meets her obligations as provided for in WHO.”

Mr Chairperson, I still have a conviction that, my committee will concede on the chairperson of this committee to be somebody from the Prime Minister’s Office. That one has no problem because it is inter-ministerial. As for the tobacco promoters to be on this committee, it is a public health concern. Mr Chairperson, I would like to see you in the next 20 years with a normal lung. I thank you. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, are we agreeing? Can we make progress on this now? Honourable member for Budadiri West, can we make progress?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee. We are making progress. If he has a problem with the tobacco growers or the companies – you can see the reasoning; they are bringing a trade because there is trading. They are bringing education, because you need to do sensitisation. Are you getting it? You bring agriculture because you would like to tell the farmers about the dangers of the crop they are growing and see if you can give them another product.

The reason I am raising this is to show you that as much as we are talking, they are saying that they should tell people about trade, whether it is bad or good – 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much. Mr Chairman, I was consulting and - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, you have to wait for the cameras. This is among the things that have to be recorded in light –(Laughter) –

MS NANKABIRWA: Honourable Secretary General of FDC, my friend hon. Nandala-Mafabi, when he was part of the membership of this body, he deliberately mentioned trade without putting industry. He was implying that probably we just wanted to take interest in trade alone, but trade and industry go together –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, the proposal in the Bill is responsible for trade. There is no industry in what the committee is proposing.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Sir, the person who is going to be put on the Body will come from the Ministry of Trade and Industry. Trade and Industry takes care of both trade and industry; the component of industry – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, the proposal suggests a representative of the Ministry responsible for Trade. That is clear. Responsible for trade is not the same as responsible for industry. It may be one ministry but this one they are referring to the person responsible for trade, that sector responsible for trade. If they want to amend and put industry, then they will have to amend it.

DR BARYOMUNSI: The tobacco industry - particularly when you look at the tobacco company, governed under the Tobacco Marketing and Control Act of 1967, the Ministry responsible for Trade is the one which licenses these companies and supervises them. That is the wisdom of including the Ministry for Trade because it supervises those tobacco companies. I just wanted to give you that information. So, their interest will be communicated through that ministry.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, my brother honourable Minister for General Duties, Baryomunsi, is right. What the chairman was trying to explain to the Chief Whip of Government, is that she should not have jumped on the Secretary General without reading the report very well and the rules. (Laughter) 

What I am trying to raise is that we have trade, education, sensitisation, mention it. It will not do us harm, hon. Wadri has raised, if we can include people from British American Tobacco(BAT) or those who deal in tobacco -  if we have refused that, what about the issue of the private sector? They are the ones that deal with the private sector. Why can’t we have a representative from the private sector or Uganda Manufacturers Association? The reason is that, the one from the private sector will go and tell those companies that the reason something was done is because of  A, B, C  and E and there will be  - (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Mafabi for giving way. The information I would like to give is that, that will also be a channel of communication. Should the players in the tobacco industry have any issue; they have a channel of getting their voice heard in this committee and also, how they can get out the information from this committee. However, if it is in the wisdom of the sponsors of this Bill to close them completely out, so be it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The reason we are trying to raise is because we have the experience – we have Changaa in Kenya. Changaa is a drink that is killing people in Kenya but we shall discuss that later. There is need for information flow out of this committee. Unless you are telling us that the information should be entirely consumed by the government but if it is supposed to get out, there must be a channel. As my brother Oboth has said, it is right and the private sector would be the best to channel the information in and out - (Interruption)

MR SSASAGA: Guidance -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You need to move by procedure. I stopped doing guidance long time. (Laughter)

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. If the question for debate is about channelling information, I do believe that Government has several channels through which it can deliver the information, which has come out of the committee to the relevant interested groups as far as policies are concerned.

Secondly, including tobacco companies on that committee, in my wisdom, could be in other words jeopardising the good work to be done by that committee. This Bill has come a long way and to reach where it has reached – actually, those companies have tried their best to frustrate it. We came up with tax Bills to do with tobacco in the recent tax Bills, which we concluded here.

The way companies were ganging up against Parliament and the committees of Parliament – it was not easy. So, to get a representative from these companies directly and involve them on this committee, the decision making committee, in my opinion –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, hon. Ssasaga. Mr Chairman, we are dealing with an industry that is the lifeline of our communities. The communities that we come from believe so much in all information they get from the source out of which they earn their living. That is from the tobacco industry.

I would like to believe that my farmers in Terego will believe more in any information given by the tobacco industry than by Minister of Education, Ministry of Gender in the Uganda Government. So, what harm does it make for us to have these people there so that they can build confidence in the people with whom they do this business?

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you very Much, Mr Chairman. When hon. Baryomunsi was submitting, he indicated to us that World Health Organisation Framework Convention on Tobacco Control closes that window for tobacco industry, and private sector to be party to the controlling systems of tobacco in any country, which is a signatory. Uganda remains a signatory to that convention. Under Article 5 of the convention, we are not supposed to include tobacco industry on such committees and in such business. 

Therefore, is it procedural right for us to continue deliberating against something that Uganda is already a signatory to?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That raises the question whether this is a domesticating legislation of that treaty or not? Because this specific law only makes reference to fulfil Uganda’s obligation and commitment as a party to the World Health Organisation framework Convention on Tobacco Control. Does it, therefore, make it a domesticating legislation?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, when this framework convention on tobacco control was enacted, countries agreed that upon ratification within five years, they should domesticate this convention into municipal law and Uganda should have had this law by 2011/2012 and because of the delays, that is why I took an initiative as a private member to bring this. Therefore, it is domestication.

I have the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control here. Let me just read verbatim the provision I had made reference to earlier on. Article 5.3 says, “In stating and implementing their public health policies with respect to tobacco control, parties shall act to protect these policies from commercial and other vested interest of the tobacco industry.”

In processing of this law, we had a lot of consultations with various stakeholders and the Private Sector Foundation was actually the one representing the interest of the tobacco companies. I did have consultations before I brought the motion here; even after first reading, we interacted. Basically, the private sector through this advert, which most of you read saying, “Private sector calls for adoption of sensible tobacco regulation” is like pushing to have the tobacco industry and the companies on the committee, which would violate the basic principles of this framework convention.

Usually, it happens whenever parliaments have considered tobacco control legislations; there is a lot of interference and push from the industry because they do not want to be regulated. This is a public health legislation setting up a tobacco control committee to oversee the public health interest in as far as tobacco control is concerned. Therefore, it is not wise to bring the companies on this committee to supervise themselves in as far as the public health implications are concerned. However, if they have concerns, they can channel them through the sectors which supervise them like the Ministry of Trade and the farmers through the Ministry of Agriculture and those concerns will still be able to reach the committee.

Generally, the advice of this convention is that we should separate the industry from the policy makers in as far as public health is concerned. That is the best principle.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members? Can we make progress now on this?

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just want to refer Members to the functions of this committee, which are very clear: “To develop and implement tobacco control policies, that is on page 14; coordinate and monitor tobacco control interventions; amend and formulate policies relating to tobacco control; mobilise resources; monitor interference; and insulate tobacco control related policies.

When you read the World Health Organisation Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, specifically Article 4.9, let me read it as it is - these are the guidelines for implementation: “Parties should not nominate any person employed by the tobacco industry or any entity working to further its interests to serve on delegations to meetings of the Conference of the Parties, its subsidiary bodies or any other bodies established pursuance to decisions of the Conference of the Parties.” 

Mr Chairman, this matter is clear; we cannot therefore have these bodies on this committee, which is supposed to be coming up with policies. It is actually supposed to be enforcing or policing the tobacco industry; so, we cannot have them on this committee. The private sector interests can be catered for by the Ministry of Trade and the Ministry of Agriculture can take care of the farmers. You are well aware that even when we were appearing before the committee, the Ministry of Trade was against this Bill and the Ministry of Agriculture was stating something else. Thank you. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you cannot rise on clarification and then change to procedure. Very soon you are going to change to order –(Laughter)– and then you end up with privilege. (Laughter) A man must learn when to accept defeat and retire honourably.

Honourable members, the issues are clearer now. Let us move following the framework that has been provided. We cannot depart fundamentally from what has been stated. There is concurrence that the Prime Minister should take leadership of this committee and there is concurrence also that commercial interests must be kept out of the policy interest for tobacco control. I think those issues are now clear. (Applause)

In summary, those are the issues. Can we take a decision on clause 3 (2), which is the composition of this committee as proposed? The proposal takes the spirit of what was read by the chair and the adjustment that has now been agreed to, that the office of the Prime Minister shall be the chairperson of the committee. That has been agreed. 

Can I now put the question? That would mean we are retaining (2) (a) and adopting the proposals of the committee in relation to the rate of the composition of the committee. Can I put the question to this composition first?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have no objection since we have agreed about the chairperson. The moment the Director of Health is now just a member, (2) (b) will go out. If (2) (b) is out, why don’t we have a representative from the Attorney-General to be able to assist on legal issues as far as this committee is concerned?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: A representative from the Office of the Attorney-General?

MR BARYOMUNSI: Usually, we do not want to make committees excessively large and the understanding is that the Attorney-General is always there to service government departments and committees. I do not know whether it is extremely necessary that he must sit on this committee. If there are any issues for legal interpretation and guidance, the office of the Attorney-General will always be there. Therefore, I do not think it is extremely necessary.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We are talking about a committee, which has a quorum, attendance and it issues notices for the meetings. Would it be necessary for a legal person from the office of the Attorney-General to attend those meetings or not? That is the question here.

MR OBOTH: Voiding an attempt to be misconstrued, having worked in that office, and if it is increasingly becoming true that when it comes to office of the Attorney-General the number is appearing larger, -(Laughter)- we could also adopt that so that it is a new way of forming committees. 

When it comes to the Attorney-General, we say, “No, no; it is now becoming large.” However, there is what they call on-spot legal advice. This is the committee that wants it; if there is anything to determine on quorum, you have to adjourn that meeting and write to the Attorney-General. The reason they have Attorney-General’s representatives - and I had privilege for being there for several years - (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and thank you very much, hon. Oboth, for giving way. I would like to inform you that even in Kenya, the Tobacco Control Act has established a similar committee and its membership is 15. Why should it be seen as making the number large when we ask for just only one person from the Attorney-General’s chambers? We will still be within the size. In Kenya it is 15; I see no harm having the Office of the Attorney-General’s representative.

MR OBOTH: Thank you very much for that information. I just wanted to give that concern and if I appeared sarcastic, it was supposed to be for the movers who were saying that this committee is now apparently large when the Attorney-General’s representative was proposed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Remember there is also URA.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Hon. Oboth Oboth and hon. Nandala-Mafabi have convinced me with their proposal of including somebody from Attorney-General’s office. Let us have a lawyer who can help us in that – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, Attorney- General’s Office.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Yes, Attorney-General. We remove a commissioner responsible for public health and remain with the focal person in charge of tobacco control. So, we have it as the Attorney-General’s chambers.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The better wording would be a person responsible for tobacco control from the Ministry of Health. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: I would like us to have “the person responsible for tobacco control in the Ministry of Health”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What about the Uganda Revenue Authority? There was a proposal for URA.

DR BITEKYEREZO: I think URA can also be there. (Laughter) Mr Chairman, the spirit for reducing the number was to have fewer people because these committees sometimes consume money.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we are happy that the chairman is moving in the right direction, having agreed. However, when it comes to the ministry responsible for trade and education - You need to put here the ministry responsible for finance and the one responsible for finance would now be taking care of the URA issues.


The justification is very simple: we include a representative of the Ministry of Finance and that would take care of the tax part and other related issues. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Chairman, I would like to share this information with the House. Cabinet took a decision that when we are establishing boards, committee and commissions we have limited numbers, which we have to consider because of what has been happening; you find officers rotating between attending committees here and there. We therefore agreed on a minimum of seven and maximum of nine.

As I was seated here listening to Members rightly making proposals for relevant people to be included on the committee, the numbers were swelling and yet I have this information, which I thought I should share with you as we propose the numbers to be included on the committees. I want to be on record because I am present to share such information with the House.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, we have agreed to the office of the Attorney-General and the person responsible for tobacco control in the Ministry of Health. We have also agreed on the leadership of the committee.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. When you read further on page 7, it talks about the secretariat, which shall be headed by the national focal point person for tobacco control. I would like us to bring that office here. It should read, “The national focal point person for tobacco control, who shall be the secretary to the committee” - just that wording.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, are you taking away “the ministry responsible for…” Are you taking away the whole of Health from here? 

MS OPENDI: No, we leave the Director General Health Services, we remove the commissioner and then we have “the national focal point person for tobacco control who shall be the secretary…”  

MR OBOTH: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. You have the Director General of Health Services and you also have the tobacco control focal person from Ministry of Health. The Director General has so many things to direct in the Ministry of Health. I thought the intention of the law was to have the Ministry of Health have a focal person there.

The amendment my sister is making by bringing the national focal person is very much in order, so that that person would come from the seven members  to be a secretary to this committee and allow information flow. However, I resist any attempt to continue to widen and broaden this committee by having the director general. The director general should be looking at the possible causes of Ebola and other things and leave the tobacco control focal person in the Ministry of Health in this committee.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I think I concede to hon. Oboth’s submission that we remove the Director General Health Services and we leave the focal person in charge of tobacco control. The problem is having very many people there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if you follow the spirit of representation of ministries, why must you have a direct office? You have a person responsible from the ministry responsible for trade, education, agriculture, gender; why don’t you have another member responsible for health, so that he takes care of – 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: I would like to note that we had proposed the Director General Health Services because this is a policy person who sits at the decision making level. Therefore, removing her or him would -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: However, he or she will still be the person from the Ministry of Health.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Yes, but then the secretary automatically sits on that committee as a focal person for tobacco control in the Ministry of Health. The Director General Health Services is not going to be the secretary for that committee. Therefore, I believe that we should maintain the two people from the Ministry of Health; one as a focal person because there is already an existing secretariat and he or she would be running up and down for the flow of information.  The director general will then sit on this committee as a policy and decision maker from the Ministry of Health.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You see, there is something called consistency in drafting. If you are naming a specific officer when the rest are not named, it is not consistent. I draft laws; I know.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I think what you have raised is right. You should put here a representative from the Ministry of Health who will be the secretary –(Interjections)– Mr Chairman, we have been creating bodies, for example, Uganda Revenue Authority where the Commissioner General is the boss but he or she is a secretary to the board and has no voting rights. 

What we are trying to do here is determine what the committee comprises of? We are saying representative from the Ministry of Trade and here we should also say a representative from the Ministry of Health. Since the secretariat is under Ministry of Health, the person representing health is the secretary.

MR ROBERT SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think this has been a well protracted war on who comprises the committee. However, going forward, I propose that the member from the Ministry of Health be designated the secretary to the board and in their ministry nomenclature, he or she will be the focal person to the Ministry of Health.

We, therefore, do not need to say “secretary to the board” and “focal person”. Those are normal nomenclature from the ministry itself. We do not need to legislate that this is a focal person and we take a decision.

DR BARYOMUNSI: First of all, the position of a tobacco control focal person is a creature of this convention I referred to earlier on. Countries are expected and have indeed put in place those positions of tobacco control focal persons in the ministries of health. Therefore, we would want to have that reflected.

Secondly, the position of the Director General of Health Services is also a position created by law and it is the highest technical position within the health service. Therefore, apart from the issue of the numbers, we would have loved to have the two offices reflected because - (Interjections) - What is the problem? (Laughter) 

MR OBOTH: For the record, the highest technical position in Ministry of Health could be the Permanent Secretary. When we usually say in normal drafting a representative from Ministry of Internal Affairs, health or gender, the presumption is that it is incumbent upon the Permanent Secretary to know the composition of that committee or board then they either nominate a junior officer or a high ranking officer.

The chairperson of this committee of the whole House guided that if you are going to put director general - Unless you are saying director general also is the creature of the UN Convention - (Laughter) - but if the director general is for purposes of matters in Ministry of Health, you would rather leave him out. Is this the law creating the director general, the one we are considering, or another law says that he must sit on this committee. That is the clarification I seek, honourable minister, the WHO awardee. (Laughter)

DR BARYOMUNSI: First of all, to clarify to you that the way the Ministry of Health is structured is slightly different from the other ministries. We have the Permanent Secretary as an accounting officer  for administration issues but also we have the Director General of Health Services who is the head of the technical aspect of the ministry and these are technical policy issues. 

I was thinking that if the Director General Health Services is on this committee, because he or she heads the technical and policy issues in the ministry, then he or she links very well with the other structures within the ministry, the top and senior management. If it is not the problem of numbers, we would beg that that office plus the tobacco control focal person be part of the committee. Also, for your information, this is not a board in a sense that you have members and secretary with ex-officios. This is just an inter-ministerial committee drawing membership from various ministries.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I will put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee. The different aspect is that the leadership will be in the Office of the Prime Minister, the membership will include the Director General of Health Services and a focal person responsible for tobacco control in the Ministry of Health. The rest of what was read by the committee remains as it was read. I put the question to those amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We will now move to the other amendments that have been proposed in this particular clause. If there are no issues with them, I put the question to those amendments to sub clauses (3) to (10). There are some amendments proposed there.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, with that, it is clear that the remaining will have to stand now. This is because in sub clause (3), the person shall be at a certain rank - that cannot go away; we cannot not delete clause 3(3). The other one, which the committee was raising on the qualification, I think is vital because you cannot bring a cleaner - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I deal with clause 3. Is there any objection from the chair or Members that clause 3(3) should be retained? That is the substance of the proposal. You had recommended deletion but the Member is saying it should be retained. Should it be retained? Withdraw your amendments.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chair, I now withdraw the proposed amendment to sub clause (3) so that we can retain what is in the original Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there any other amendment on the rest of clause 3(4) to (10)?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, in sub clause (4) the numbering will change. According to the committee, it was supposed to be deleted but we are saying it should be maintained with the numbering. Then sub clause (9) has to remain, which the committee had proposed; sub clause (6) has to remain – no, I think we have named the secretary. I do not know which person gave the secretary for sub clause (6); sub clauses (8), (9) and (10) have to remain.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, there are no more deletions in clause 3 in view of what we have adopted in sub clause (2). Basically, those were the only amendments.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, clause 3(5) says, “A member of the committee shall not have any affiliation with the tobacco industry or any other person…” I would like to propose that we delete “or any person” so that it remains, “A member of the committee shall not have any affiliation with the tobacco industry or entity furthering the interests of the tobacco industry.” The justification is: human socialisation is very wide; it would be very difficult for us to control or determine friends to a member of the committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable member, read it - “or any person or entity furthering the interest…” It is qualified; it is not general. “Furthering the interest” is a very specific recommendation and as I recall, those wordings are lifted from the convention; if I recall what was read here before.

DR EPETAIT: So, it is not referring to an individual but an entity? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, it is referring to a person or an entity furthering the interest of the tobacco industry. It is a qualification and it is not a general person by association or anything like that.

DR EPETAIT: That is where I particularly find discomfort.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: A person furthering the interest of tobacco industry?

DR EPETAIT: That your best man or friend is in a certain organisation and therefore, for that reason alone, you lose your membership of a committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I will not be furthering his interests, would I? That is an active matter. You do not further things by keeping quiet - furthering agenda of -

DR EPETAIT: I withdraw. (Laughter)

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Mr Chairman, whereas Dr Epetait has withdrawn, I still would like to pursue this further. A son or daughter from Terego may be working either in Ministry of Health, tobacco industry or in the Office of the Prime Minister or wherever. The fact that he comes from that committee and probably his brother, sister or uncles are cultivators of tobacco, will that not injure his chances of serving in this committee and would that not alienate him because he is going to -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, are we reading the clause?

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Yes, I am reading this clause. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, what it says is “A member of the committee shall not have any affiliation with the tobacco industry or any person or entity furthering the interests of the tobacco industry or its subsidiaries”. That is what it is saying; so the person has to be furthering the interests of the tobacco industry. Isn’t that clear enough, honourable members? Honourable members, can I put the question?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, not on that one. I have seen that the chairperson is going to appointed by the minister and in the absence of the chair, it is the vice chair. Here, it is saying the vice chair will be elected by the members. That amendment on sub clause (7) - both the chair and the vice must be appointed by the minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You have withdrawn all your amendments?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We have withdrawn the amendment and that is why I am suggesting that in sub clause (7), we say “The minister will appoint both the chair and the vice-chair.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, then maybe, we need to review the amendment proposed by the committee in (7) – “The Minister shall appoint a vice chairperson from among members of the committee” That is substituting sub-clause (7) for what the committee has proposed. Is that okay now? Can I put the question to the amendment on sub-clause (7) as proposed by the committee? I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, clause 4 is about the tenure of office. In clause 4(1), we are seeking to insert the words, “other than the chairperson” between the words “committee” and “shall” appearing in line one of the provision. The justification is that since the chairperson is designated, the tenure of office would not apply to him or her. 

In clause 4(2) (a), re-draft paragraph (a) to read as follows: “2(a) at any time, before the expiry of his or her term, resign his or her office by giving written notice to the Minister and copying the chairperson of the Committee.” The justification is: to harmonise the provision with the amendment in clause 3(3) where the appointing authority is only the minister responsible for health.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, all these are members, so all members of the committee should hold office for three years. So, there is no need to amend that. Whether you are the chairperson or not, you are still a member and you should hold office for three years. So the amendment brought by the committee, as far as clause 4(1) is concerned, does not stand.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, committee chairman, what do you say?

DR BITEKYEREZO: For purposes of institutional memory, I concede to hon. Nandala’s suggestion.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So you withdraw that amendment in (a) and instead have the one in 4(2) (a), which has been re-drafted. I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

DR BITEKYEREZO: Clause 5 is on functions of the committee. We want to rephrase clause 5(2)(a) to read as follows: “(a)implement the objectives of this Act in accordance with the World Health Organisation’s Framework Convention on Tobacco Control and its implementing guidelines and protocols.” The justification is: for specificity.

In clause 5(2) (c), we propose to re-phrase the paragraph to read as follows: “(c) advise the Minister on policies and legislative measures relating to tobacco control.” The justification is that the committee’s function in this regard can only be advisory.

In clause 5(2) (f), we propose to re-phrase the paragraph to read as follows: “(f) advise the minister on the administration and of this Act.” The justification is: for specificity.

In clause 5(2) (g) we propose to substitute the words “Prime Minister” – No, I will withdraw that because we have now gone back to the Prime Minister. The justification is that this one is consequential. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You do not need to propose it.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Yes, Mr Chairman. Okay in clause 6, we propose to insert a new clause, immediately after clause 6, to provide for the national -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, no, let us first deal with clause 5.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Okay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, those are the amendments proposed by the committee.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have no objection but rather an amendment. The amendment is in respect to (d) about mobilising resources for tobacco control.

The function of mobilising resources lies with the Ministry of Finance. So this committee has no mandate to tax anybody in order to raise money; that is the mandate of the Ministry of Finance. Since we even have the Certificate of Financial Implications, they will have money in the budget to deal with that function. Any money that will come in respect of tobacco must go to the Ministry of Finance. So (d) is irrelevant and must be deleted. It also follows the Public Finance and Accountability Act.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chair, I can still concede to hon. Nandala’s suggestion.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is to delete paragraph 5(2) (d) in the Bill. I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I now put the question to the amendments proposed by the committee in respect of clause 5(2)(c) and 5(2)(f)? Okay, I put the question to those amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairman of the committee, you wanted to propose a new clause 6?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, we want to insert a new clause immediately after clause 6 to provide for the national focal point person for tobacco control as follows:

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, let us first deal with clause 6. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, clause 6 is referring to a schedule but how are we sure that the schedule will remain? I would propose that we stand over clause 6 until we have dealt with the Fifth Schedule they are talking about.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, that is stood over. Committee chair, please propose your amendment; clause 6 is stood over.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Yes. Mr Chairman, I propose that we stand over clause 6 – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, that one is stood over already; just proceed with your amendment.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, we wanted to insert a new clause immediately after clause 6 to provide for the national focal point person for tobacco control as follows-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You are proposing to insert a new clause 7?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Yes, Mr Chairman. The new clause 7 is proposed to read follows: “The National Focal Point Person for Tobacco Control 
(1) 	The Minister shall designate a person within the ministry to be the national focal point person for tobacco control. 
(2) 	A person designated under subsection (1) shall not be below the rank of principal. 
(3) 	The National Focal Point Person for Tobacco Control shall be the secretary to the committee. 
(4) 	The secretary to the committee shall be responsible for taking all the minutes of the meetings of the committee. 
(5) 	The secretary to the committee shall perform all other duties and functions that the committee or the minister may assign him or her.” The justification is that this is for clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the proposal to bring in a new clause 7 as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause 7, inserted.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, we propose, in clause 8(b), to substitute the words “tobacco control interventions within the ministry and other sectors” appearing in lines two and three, with the words “this Act.” The justification is: for specificity since the law related to tobacco control is being enacted for that purpose.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11

DR BITEKYEREZO: This clause handles prohibition of smoking in public places, work places and means of public transport. We propose to rephrase clause 11 (2) (a) to read as follows: “(a)within 50 metres of any public place, workplace, public transport terminal or any other place that provides services primarily to a child.” 

The justifications are: 
    a) the reduction from 100 metres to 50 metres is meant to achieve reasonable and practical distance because Kampala is very squeezed and you rarely find 100 metres between houses; 
    b) the insertion of the word “terminal” is to avoid ambiguity; 
    c) the substitution of the word “minor” with the word “child” is to ensure consistency with its usage in the existing laws.

In clause 11 (2) (b) and (c) we propose that the we substitute the words “100 metres” with the words “50 metres.” The justification is: to make the distance reasonable and practical.

In clause 11 (6) we propose to replace the phrase, “two months imprisonment” with the phrase, “five months.” The justification is that this is a consequential amendment arising from the amendment under clause 11 (2) (a).

In clause 11 (7), the committee proposes to delete sub clause (7) and the justification is that the enforceability of the provision is not practical.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: I would like to reinstate clause 11 (7).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is still there as nothing has happened to it yet. He is just proposing that we delete it. So, what is your response?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: I would wish to reinstate it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But it has not been deleted. Do you oppose the deletion?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then oppose it. (Laughter)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: The justification is that the owner or agent shall be held responsible for – Okay, it reads as follows: “A person responsible for the premises and the managing agent of the person who continuously contravenes subsections (2) and (3) shall have his or her licence for the premise revoked by the issuing authority and the premise shall be closed for a period of not less than six months.” I wish to propose that the House retains this clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, what is your justification for deleting?

DR BITEKYEREZO: We contacted stakeholders at some hotel and this is why I am opposed to what hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro is talking about. The reasons I am seeking the support of this House on what I have suggested are: while we were seated at a place near Lweza and there was a nearby wall belonging to a different person, we thought to ourselves that trying to find the owner of a premise where a person, for example, Dr Medard Bitekyerezo, could be smoking from would be problematic. So, we agreed that we should not start punishing owners of the premises but go for the people who actually commit this crime. That is why we are trying to make a law that is practical and enforceable. I opposed what hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro is talking about because it is practically impossible.

MR SSASAGA: As far as I know, this is an inconveniencing Bill. The purpose of this Bill is to inconvenience the smokers. I very well know that if one fails to smoke for one or two days, they cannot die. Muslims fast for over 40 days. Christians also do fast for some good time – (Interjections) - Yes, 40 days. So if the premises in that case do not have the 100-metre radius, I go in and spend a night or two and for that reason, the smoker has been unable to smoke because of lack of a facility in that radius. I do not see any harm in that. 

Therefore, I do not buy into what the chairperson is saying about substituting the 100 metres with 50 metres especially if the purpose of the Bill is to inconvenience smokers.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We have already adopted that one. I thought you were talking about this other one. What is the implication of the revocation of a licence? I thought that would mean a public place that has been given a licence.

DR BITEKYEREZO: I wanted us to delete it. Look at the owner of a hotel where somebody comes to stay; this person comes out and smokes and you come to revoke the licence of the hotel for six months because of that? Are you not just crippling the business? Why don’t we get hold of the person smoking instead of closing the premises of the owner? Let us be realistic on this.  

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, many members in this House have been going to bury their voters who have died of cancer; that is the background to this. In this provision, we are creating smoke free environments so as not to allow people smoke in public places. That is why we are providing a distance where the smokers should go and smoke to protect the others who use the same facilities.

The import of the new clause 7 is that the owner of the premises should have the responsibility of ensuring they comply with this provision. If the law says that nobody should smoke within this Parliament and a distance of 50 or 100 meters is provided for such an activity, then the owner of these premises should ensure such a provision is effected. The new clause 7 is really saying that in addition to the smoker taking responsibility, the owner of the premises should as well take responsibility of ensuring the law is enforced. 

We would also like to propose – I think (2) (d) is there by error and it should be deleted. It says that a person shall not smoke in any outdoor space that is designated a non-smoking area. It is by error because this provision is creating a smoke-free environment and not designated places; so, it should be deleted.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if we say that one should not smoke within a radius of 50 to 100 metres from a public area, it means in the whole of Kampala, one will not smoke.  I would like to tell my brother from Budadiri who is saying that it is to inconvenience, I do not know whether they will go to Mabira Forest or somewhere there to do the smoking.

What we should be saying is that public areas where smoking is supposed to take place must have designated areas for smoking. It is very unfair that we are talking as if we have not been around or travelled. I can give an example of Nairobi because many members have been there.  At places like bus parks, the authorities created smoking zones. Even when you go to the airport, you find a designated smoking room. They even keep announcing the closure of the smoking room, say in the next 10 minutes, for cleaning. This is intended to inform those who might want to go to smoke to hurry up.

What we should be doing is to say that people should not smoke in public but in designated smoking areas. Let me give a hotel as an example. One time I travelled with my brother for our issues of Bugisu. We slept near one another but between there was a room for smokers. It was clearly indicated, “This is a non-smoking room” and there are another indication “this is a smoking room” but the distance between our rooms could not even make a metre. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, we will not make this a Budadiri affair. 

MR SSASAGA: The information I want to give hon. Nandala is that much as we slept in those rooms and the middle room between us was a smoking room, the next day I changed the room because I could not bear the burden of smoke. I had to relocate to another floor for non-smokers. That is why 100 metres would be better than the 20 or 50 metres.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The whole building was not more than 50 metres, so I do not know where you went. (Laughter) Mr Chairman, we need to make a law that is practical. If it is a public area, designate it. In fact, I was trying to download the Canadian law – (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the Secretary-General of FDC, I want to inform you that by stating the law as it would be that smoking is allowed 100 or 50 metres away from a public area, you are actually protecting none but exposing everybody. 

The rationale of allowing smoking 50 metres - If I knew this was coming today I would have carried my tape measure and demonstrated from the gate of Parliament 50 metres west, south, east or north, you are allowed to smoke. You are actually exposing somebody else who is a member of the public who is not aware that actually he is approaching your smoking area of 50 or 100 metres. So, if you want to protect people from secondary smoking, you must designate. I thought so and that is the information I wanted to give.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We need to help the minister. That is why I was worried that if we give this law to the current Minister of Health who has a lot of interests, he will kill people who smoke. We must designate areas where people smoke in public places. If we come with the rule of 50 metres then that is impossible. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, there is a trend in terms of legislating for tobacco control. The framework I referred to is an evidence-based framework, in that there is sufficient evidence that designated smoking areas do not offer any protection against the effects of tobacco. 

What this provision is trying to do is to protect individuals from second-hand and third-hand smoking, which is even much more dangerous. It is not true that designated smoking areas protect, because even studies show that even recent technology in ventilation systems cannot stop the fumes from tobacco from crossing from one room to the other. The current scientific guidance is that we should create smoke-free environments. 

When you check countries that are legislating on creating these 100 per cent smoke-free zones, that is the trend. If permitted, I would read for you the list of countries that actually have enacted such laws including Burkina Faso, Chad, Mauritius, Namibia and very many others. This is the right trend for us to take. 

Mr Chairman, the problem here is that we are protecting non-smokers. We are saying that, for example, people who come to this Parliament should not be exposed to the effects of smoking.

In addition to second-hand smoke, which is visible, we also have what we call third-hand smoke. If I smoke from this Chamber, the chemicals from the tobacco smoke get absorbed onto the walls and even for the next two or three months they can still be inhaled and affect people. They are even more dangerous because of the chemical reactions which do occur. So, we now advise that the further away from the public place one smokes, the better in terms of protection. 

There is a scientific formula which is even used to arrive at 100 metres because we are trying to protect those who use those public places. Therefore, it is not correct to say that the designated smoking areas are the way to go or are a reflection of the current science. The current science is that we should have 100 per cent smoke-free environment and take away the smoker as far away as possible. The compromise we had come up with, based on scientific calculations, was 100 metres from a public building.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I was just trying to figure out why you were proposing to delete 11(2) (d). If you read from (2) and come to (d) -

DR BARYOMUNSI: Clause 11(2) (d) presupposes that there will be areas designated as non-smoking areas, which is a contradiction to what we are bringing in this provision. We are saying we should have 100 per cent smoke-free environments, doing away with designated areas. So it was just there in error.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So how do you determine that this place is smoke-free? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: As long as it is a public place that has been defined in the second schedule - we have listed those kinds of places. “Smoke-free” will mean that within that building or structure and 100 metres within the precincts of that structure, nobody is supposed to smoke from there. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So it is designated?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Well, you can as well say it is designated.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: How else is it defined?

DR BARYOMUNSI: But designation in this sense usually refers to creating rooms.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, this one is designated as a non-smoking place. It is shown that one cannot smoke from here and there.

DR BARYOMUNSI: You cannot smoke there and 100 metres around.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chair, this debate should not be viewed as that between the sympathisers of the tobacco industry versus the non-sympathisers. It should be reduced to practicability on how to implement this law. 

I do not smoke and I do not know anybody in my family that smokes but to get a law such as the one we are making here, in effect this law would mean no smoking in urban areas. Even in the villages, one has to smoke from the nearby forest but even that forest could be a public place because from the definition, which I have seen here and in other places, the definition of a public place is not exhaustive. Who determines what else you can think is public? Even forest reserves can be a public place. So, practicability of this - I want to see the law enforcers chasing people 100 metres –(Interjection)- The Minister of State for Primary HealthCare wants to give me information; let her educate me. (Interruption)

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I want colleagues to appreciate the purpose of that particular clause. It is to protect the non-smokers who are exposed to second-hand smoke. If the entire Kampala is a public place because there are people everywhere, then it is okay and people should not smoke from there. Yesterday, I gave you information about the global adult tobacco survey which we had here and the findings therein and we were only focusing on those people who go to bars, hotels, night clubs and so on. But when you go to schools and other places, you find people smoking anyhow and we need to control this. If the forest that you are talking about is a public place where so many people are digging, as is the case in West Budama South now, there are actually no forests, then let it be.

Mr Chairperson, this particular clause is intended to protect the non-smokers and therefore, I want to appeal to colleagues that please let us support it. If it is 100 metres, let it be so. If there are hotels then they must –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Thank you for the information. Addition from professor - I hope it will be useful. (Laughter)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Actually, the logic presented by hon. Sarah Opendi is even to protect the smoker because the moment the smoker finds it impossible to smoke, they will be protected. (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: That means that we are legislating for a dual protection? We want to protect the smokers but they can smoke 100 metres away from public places and in our estimation, within 100 metres away from any public place is a smoking-free area. Are we also designating that?

Secondly, we have heard from the minister that as long as in Kampala one cannot find 100 metres away from the public place, so there will be no smoking. I want to be guided on how you are going to implement that law. I want to see where you are going to get the policemen –(Interjection)– just hold on. I just want to conclude and you will definitely give me information. This is what I am looking for. If the honourable colleague here does not keep quiet, I might bring a Private Members’ Bill to ban coffee –(Laughter)– from Budadiri. Of course, what I said I about coffee is just a joke; I am too promoting coffee growing in West Budama South. (Laughter) 

I do not want us to be seen defeating the very purpose of this law. We also need to note that a law made in a vacuum is a law difficult to implement. We have benchmarked a bit probably from the Kenya and other areas; I want my hon. Minister –(Mr Wadri rose_) Yes, information from Terego; are you a smoker yourself? (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson and hon. Jacob Oboth. I am not a smoker, much as I may be a product of the tobacco industry because my fees were paid out of cultivation of tobacco. 

The information I want to give my colleague is that if we towed this line in as far as making it impossible for anybody to smoke, the implementation of this law may be like that of the Enguli Act where you find a policeman is a customer, –(Laughter)– the thing is being sold in the boys quarters of the magistrate and then even some of the children are the ones who go out to drink the kapiriri, which is a small tot for the same. Therefore, who will arrest who; who will prosecute; who and who will preside over which court? So, it becomes very difficult. We must come up with a realistic law that can be implemented. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, and I want to give opportunity to Dr Baryomunsi to give me information on whether you are actually not endangering the families - the spouses of these people who have failed to smoke from anywhere else but they can come and smoke from where they have authority, which can be in their bedrooms.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, before I was appointed a minister, I was a member of the Committee on Health and I participated in the consultations. We interacted with the Uganda Human Rights Commission and put a question to the commission as to whether smoking is a right in the meaning of our Constitution. The answer was “no”.

Secondly, those of you who have travelled, if you travel from here to Entebbe via Heathrow to Washington or New York, you will not smoke though you will be travelling for over 15 hours; no smoker has ever died because of that. (Laughter)

Mr Chairman, first of all, this provision is not coming from the blue. It is not the first one. Like I said yesterday, Beijing as a city has just enacted a smoke-free law for Beijing as a town and they are going forward to have a similar strong law for the whole country because they are realising very many deaths due to tobacco. Countries like Bhutan have actually legislated tobacco out of their country. Abuja has also enacted a smoke-free law for the whole town including New York and many others; I could go on and on. 

I just want to briefly list the countries that have actually adopted a similar legislation in the recent years: Burkina Faso, 2010; Chad, 2010; Mauritius, 2008; Namibia, 2010; Seychelles, 2009; Argentina, 2011; Australia, 2005; Barbados, 2010; Brazil, 2011. The list goes up to around 43 countries. I could go on and on. That is 100 per cent smoke-free environment within public places.

Therefore, an impression should not be created that we are doing this for the first time or Uganda is an isolated country having this kind of law. This is a progressive way of legislating tobacco control, if we are going to protect the population against the harmful effects of tobacco smoke.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, minister and Mr Chairman. You are right in saying that those countries have made such laws. Even in Canada - and I was trying to look for it - it is five metres from a door of a public place but they still smoke though they have also designated areas where to smoke.

The information I am raising is that one time I was troubled –(Interjection)– I have seen the list of designated area under Schedule 2. Anyway, the moment we try to do things differently, we will cause a problem. One time I was on a plane and on the plane it is written, “No smoking” but what the person did was to chew the cigarettes. (Laughter) That is more dangerous. If he knew that in seven hours he would stop somewhere, he would tolerate; it is a serious matter.

The second one was in Iran. There was a time when they banned alcohol, but now they have allowed it. On this plane, there was a man travelling from London to Iraq. When he saw beer, he swallowed more than enough. By the time we reached Dubai, the man had to go to the hospital. He was trying to compensate.

Therefore, we do not want to make a law where people will want to compensate and in the end we lose them. Let us make a fair law. The distance we are talking about – Recently, Mr Chairman, I lost my uncle. He had smoked a pipe since he was 16 years. We thought he had a problem with the lungs. So, we took him to Nairobi; the man was perfect. We took him to London; he was found perfect. He had smoked but he was not affected. Sometimes maybe we say that smoking causes cancer but maybe it only causes some cancers because there are other cancers like breast cancer, cervical cancer, etc.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Let me terminate your information and conclude my submission by clarifying that the law in Canada does not allow designated smoking areas. It was enacted in 2007. You could have read an older law. Otherwise, the most current law in Canada creates 100 per cent smoke-free environment.

Two, you cannot refer to your uncle who died as an example. This is because in public health, we have what is called “odds ratio” – not everybody who is beaten by a mosquito will get malaria although malaria is caused by mosquito bites. Similarly, not all those who smoke or consume tobacco products get cancer although it is true tobacco causes cancer. On that one, we could go into the science of it if we had time.

If I could get your information, you are now advocating that planes should allow smoking because somebody was inconvenienced? I would like to still insist that smoking is not a right and smoking harms people’s health; so, it is our duty to provide legislations that protect human beings from such. Even if you are inconvenienced in Kampala, it is still better for your health.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Yesterday, I was sharing some information with some members of staff of Parliament. They said that previously, this Parliament was like a chimney because there were many smokers. However, when NEMA enacted that law that stopped people from smoking from public places, all smokers quit smoking because they found it inconveniencing to smoke within the premises of Parliament. That means we are actually helping our people to transit from smoking to being non-smokers. 

When you move around, nobody among the members of staff of Parliament and Members of Parliament smokes and they are healthier. So, why do you want to kill your voters by allowing them to smoke freely everywhere, even in the Chamber? I thought 100 metres from public places would actually help our people to transit from smoking to being non-smokers.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we do not seem to be making progress. Can you consult on this matter? You have failed to agree. I will not put the question. We need to consult on this and find some areas of agreement and see how to move forward. 

The idea of introducing a law is that – In drafting, we say laws are made to pass just like razors are made to sell. A law that cannot pass is not a good law. In the back of our minds, we should be looking at this - will it pass? If it cannot pass, then you will have a problem with it. You will stay with it at the committee stage for years and it will not pass. 

Therefore, think about that and see how we can make this law passable so that if there are areas where we need to change in future, we can cause amendments to improve them. We would have seen how the implementation is going to be and cause changes to the law based on the experiences in implementing them. That would be the counsel that I will give to the movers of this Bill, the chair and the minister - laws are made to pass just like razors are made to sell.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.51
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.52
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “the Tobacco Control Bill, 2014” and passed clauses 3,4,5,7,8,9 and 10 with amendments and stood over clauses 2 and 3. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.52
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I need the people moving this Bill forward to have a consultation because the amendments, as I said earlier, are almost the same as the number of clauses in the Bill. So, you need to have discussions so that we can move faster when matters are resolved. All of those who have amendments and would like to propose should share them so that we can move quickly. Otherwise, we will not be able to move at any good pace. 

Let us share whatever amendments we have to any of these clauses so that we look at them in advance. I will be able to look at them myself so that when we come here, we move quicker than we have been able to do today. We have covered some ground and that is good. I thank you, Members, for sitting and having this debate. This House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.54 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 16 July 2015 at 2.00 p.m.) 
