
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Official Report of The Proceedings of Parliament

FIFTH SESSION – 24TH SITTING - FIRST MEETING

________________________

Friday, 15 July 2005

Parliament met at 11.50 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I regret that we could not start on time as we had agreed yesterday. This was for a good cause, because in the Parliamentary gardens, there is a function for our Ugandan children and members were requested to attend this function. I was there and therefore we took most of the time attending to that. I want to thank those of you who have been able to witness it. You have honoured the occasion and the children are happy that you care about them.

In view of this, because we have lost two hours and our agreed time for Fridays is 10.00 am to 1.00 pm, I appeal to you to put in more time so we may end at 3.00 p.m. I think we have even had our lunch in the garden, which is still there even now. You can have a break and go if you must, but let us see how much we can do. I hope you understand why we could not start on time.

11.51
MS. AANIMU ANGUPALE (Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I am standing on a matter of National importance. I remember some years back, the Government of Uganda allocated some funds to relocate the street children in rehabilitation centres and right now there is another increasing problem on the streets of Kampala City.  

We are finding a specific tribe; when I try to interact though I do not know the language, it seems to be the Karimojong. They are floating the streets of the city with their children and I am getting a little bit worried that even the smaller girls may fall into trouble.  Sometimes, you find a woman with over 7 to 8 children.

I would like to inquire from the Minister for Disaster Preparedness whether there is a critical issue in the Karimojong region, which is causing the influx of these people in the streets of the town.  

11.54
MS OKOT SANTA (Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I am raising this also as a matter of urgency for Government to take action.  At the beginning of this year, World Food Program contracted the supply of food to Pader District to World vision.  Yesterday, when I left the House I got a call from the district of Pader, because this is an issue of violation of human rights, World Vision who have got the contract from World Food Program are not distributing food as they should in Pader District. 

I got a call from Pura Sub County where the Camp Commander gave me a complaint that when World Vision took food to Pura Sub County, they made him to sign for it and those people already know the tons that is always given to their sub county.  After signing for the food, they drove off with the food back to Lira.  In the evening, I called the CAO of Pader District and he just told me that he was fed up of the issue of food, which is being distributed by the World Vision.  He even told me that there was a Camp Commander in Rachikoko in his office who took off because people wanted to stone him.

World Vision took food and 700 households missed the food so the Camp Commander was at the district. He also gave me another statistics that the same group took food to Patong and 1,950 people missed their ration.  He went ahead to say that when people learnt that World Vision was now giving less food to the people, the sub county of Lokore, Wal and Kalong started rejecting the food.  

In Kalongo they came back with food, in Lukole, and Wal Lapono, they drove the food back to Lira. This I am sure is going to cause many problems.  As you know, we have been encouraging our people to grow some little food around the camps and as they go to the gardens, they meet many atrocities including being killed and abducted. 

World Food Programme had already tried to adjust themselves by giving cards to every household member and even designing different colours for people with disabilities and the aged. Those people were supposed to get food.  However, I wonder why they contracted the World Vision.  Even our people who were displaced into other districts like Lira and Masindi have gone back home only to be denied the food. 

So, I request Government to take charge immediately because as they brought back the food, I am sure they might take it again in August or September which might lead to the death of my people.  

12.01
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Erute county North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I am raising two issues of concern.  On July 13 2005, a bound Kampala Felister bus from Lira reached Karuma roadblock and then one military officer who was supposed to check the passengers was wearing the NRMO card.  He ordered people to show their NRMO cards, without which the bus would not be allowed to continue to Kampala. It caused a lot of commotion in the bus but good enough some people had the NRMO cards and this saved the rest of the passengers in the bus.

We who do not have these cards when we are travelling and we are worried about what might happen to us. People in Lira are in great fear now. Is that NRMO card now a National Identity card? 

 Secondly, in my Constituency there is a T-shirt labelled “Amuka Boys” being distributed to Amuka Boys at a forced rate Shs 10,000. Yet, these boys do not have their salaries for the last seven months.  I wonder what kind of business is going on in Uganda.  It is causing many problems in my Constituency.  Maybe the honourable minister of Defense will clarify this and that military officer who was instead of identifying people, went with the ideology of the NRMO yellow card.  

MR MAO: Mr Speaker, like my two previous colleagues I also raise on a matter of great National importance to announce that the Democratic Party is registered. (Applause)  

Mr Speaker, many people were afraid that the party would die, and we Members of the Parliamentary caucus received the news with a lot joy.  This was a result of a lot of reconciliation.  I thought I should put on record what happened two days ago. I invite all serious Political Parties to join hands with us to make our multi-party system viable.  We congratulate the leadership of the Party and in particular, we wish to congratulate Prof. Sempebwa who helped in the reconciliation of the Party.  

The Party, born in 1954, has been born again, and it has demonstrated a lot of resilience by staying in power, based on the pillars of truth and justice.   We still have a lot of work because many people seem not to know how Political Parties operate. 

We are entering multi-partism and people think they can sit in their compounds and pronounce party policy.  So we wish to urge all political parties, because a multi-party system depends on a commitment to a set of values by all players.

Mr Speaker, as Members of the party in Parliament, we wish to assure all Ugandans that the future of the Party is bright. We have no doubt that in future; DP will demonstrate to all Ugandans that it is the Party that represents their best interests, and of non-violence, peace freedom and private enterprise. While others were nationalising assets, we were busy preaching private enterprise.  

Mr Speaker, with your permission, may I lay a copy of the Certificate of Registration on the Table?

THE SPEAKER:  No, it is not necessary.

MR AACHILLA:  Mr Speaker, I rise to give information to my honourable colleague for Arua on a point she mentioned related to the crisis in Karamoja.  It is indeed important to let the House know that the basic reason we have this Karimojong filled in most of the towns of Eastern Uganda and now in Kampala, is due to the fact that, for the last three years Karamoja has been disadvantaged. There has been crop failure for the last three years. We all know the impact of famine; right now as we talk, the region is in need of food.  Although there is a promising harvest this year, the fact is that, people cannot contain the situation.

The other fact, which is bringing about all these matters, is internal conflicts.  You should bear with me that all the regimes have left Karamoja undeveloped in all social, economic and political activities.  Therefore, we must agree that, the suffering the people of Karamoja are are undergoing is just because of the historical factors. 

Mr Speaker, on the issue of famine, some food has been taken to the region of Karamoja, but the problem remains; the World Food Programme still insists to carry assessment on a famine impact on the population.  There is a lot of food in Kotido, Moroto and Nakapiripirit but people have not been able to access it because the World Food Officers are still assessing whether there is famine or not.  The fact is that people are already dying of famine.

I call upon Government to wake up to the need of the people of Karamoja. I also call upon all Members of Parliament, to take the Karamoja issue as a Ugandan issue other than making it a tribal concern. 
       
THE SPEAKER:  Let us get the response from the minister.

MS ANGUPALE:  Mr Speaker, I want to put the record right. I rose up on a matter of National concern and I was not tribalistic.

THE SPEAKER:  Nobody thought so.

MS ANGUPALE:  I want to put the record right because my honourable colleague is requesting Parliament not to take the issue of Karamoja as a tribal matter. I am rising to correct my colleague.  When I rose up, I was trying to draw the attention of the minister in charge of the sector about the influx of a specific race into the cities of this country. I wanted a solution to the problem of the Karimojong people. Is my colleague in order to tribalise my speech?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, nobody took it that way. The point was well taken.

12.10
MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENSE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa):  Mr Speaker I would like to inform hon. Angiro that we have taken note but what we have to find out is whether the person he talked about was a UPDF officer. You have to help us find out because we should know why you thought that person was a UPDF officer.  Whether you know him personally, or because he was in a uniform similar to that of UPDF officer, that person who was with the NRMO card you talked about, we still have to find out.

Secondly Sir, -(Interruption)

MS SANTA: Thank you very much, honourable minister.  It is already a propaganda, which is not only moving in Lira, but everywhere in Gulu and Pader. I am informing the public that NRMO members are intimidating the public to even go and pick their forms.  They even confuse them that if they do not have NRM cards, they will not get any food rations.  I do not think this is right because you cannot really -Interruption)

MS AMONGI: Point of order.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us handle it this way -(Interruption)

MS AMONGI:  No, but she is generalising.

THE SPEAKER:  Hold on please.  Let this issue be addressed this way. Whether they were army or civilians, the issue which needs to be investigated is whether some people are taking advantage of the exercise which is going on to infringe on the rights of others.  It should be broader that way rather than whether it was Army or Police.  But let us examine whether this issue is being used to intimidate others as he said. (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to get clarification.  This issue came to this House three to four weeks back. I remember the first time it was raised by hon. Wacha, the Prime Minister did undertake to carry out an investigation. As we talk now this outcry is coming literally from every corner.  Some of us from the Teso region are also sitting on similar issues thinking that in the course of the Prime Minister’s submission, may be he will come up and allay our concerns.  It would be prudent for this House to hear from the Prime Minister when is reporting to this House and sort out this thing once and for all.

THE SPEAKER: I have said let us take this as a wider issue rather than concentrating on soldiers or policemen.   Is it ok?  I think the inquiry should be directed. Is it true that some people are infringing on the rights of others by using the issue of NRM cards?  

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, what I was saying is that the Prime Minister promised the House that he would come with the report.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  First of all, I never promised that I would personally do it.  What I said was that I would cause someone to handle the matter. I did write to the NPC who handles our politics and who is a great nationalist to handle this matter. But of course when you are investigating it takes a bit of time.  I want to assure you that the NPC is handling this matter and he will be reporting to Parliament when he is ready.  Let us not rush this matter; it is intricate.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Has the Minister finished what she wanted to say?

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, the second issue was on the Amuka T-shirts being printed and being sold to the Amuka auxiliary force at Ugshs 10,000 by force.  Still we have to investigate this.  We do not accept that. Somebody sometime ago started it within the UPDF regular force, we came in and we stopped it.  Therefore, if there is somebody who wants to okulembeka, to raise money from the auxiliary force by printing T-shirts and selling them by force at Ugshs 10,000, that is not acceptable, Sir.

MS KULANY: I wanted to make some clarification on Karimojong coming to Kampala. I think why the Karimojong have to travel all the way from Karamoja to Kampala is because of the harassment by the neighbours.  If they were friendly to the neighbours, the question of starving would not be there.  Most of the neighbours have enough food to feed the Karimojong if they were not harassing them.  So, I would request their leaders to sensitise their people to stop harassing their neighbours and food will be available to them.  Thank you.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I am sorry I came in a bit late. As you know, Sir, we were with you attending the Parliamentary Children’s Forum down in the Parliamentary Garden. Therefore, it is probably appropriate that the honourable member raised the issue of street children.  It is not only Parliament that is concerned about children, but even the Government of Uganda is concerned about children.  Therefore, it is probably not correct for honourable members to isolate one community among Ugandans and identify them as the problem. Children on the streets are not all from Kampala, some come from other towns.  

Government recognises that we have a social problem that is contributed by a variety of factors, including those honourable members you have mentioned.  I really do not know whether relationship with neighbours is a very, very important factor in this.  I do not think so.  In fact if we go on behaving like this, we will be making wrong diagnosis of the social problems of the country.  I want to be allowed to make my own contribution; members have been allowed to make their contribution.

Now as far as the problem of food shortage in Karamoja is concerned, we do agree with the honourable Members of Parliament from the region that there has been a problem of rain in that region over the last three years, and indeed Government is responding.  

The only problem we have, Mr Speaker and honourable members, is the issue of bureaucratic response to serious problems.  There is food, Mr Speaker, provided by Government. We know that it is the bureaucracy that is delaying the distribution of this food and it will be addressed.  I do not want honourable members of this House to speak with the imagination that their country is a perfect system when they themselves know that on their part, they are not.

So, we will respond appropriately and I am sure the Minister in charge of youth, who is still busy with children down there. Mr Speaker, oh, he has already come.  We were there; most of you were not.  Hon. Lukyamuzi came very late when we were about to finish.

Mr Speaker, regarding the  –(Interruptions)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of order on very serious note.  The dynamics of attendance over the function, which we have collectively attended were obvious.  I arrived after the Speaker by mistake. But Prof. Kagonyera arrived almost after we were about to finish the function, and he should not talk. He is the whole Minister in charge of General Duties, working in an important office of the Prime Minister, who should not have come very late. He has shown a very bad example to the children.  

So, is he in order to report wrongly that I came late when he is the one who came late? Mr Speaker, you physically saw him coming very late, should he be given audience to deceive people?

THE SPEAKER: It is high time we started on business listed on the Order Paper.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, let me finish with the concerns raised by hon. Santa, regarding the distribution of food in that part of the country. We realized that there might have been some problems regarding the sub-contracting of the distribution of food in the region by the World Food Programme to World Vision. We are going to pay serious attention to this.  

Like in Karamoja, Mr Speaker, it is again bureaucratic problems. I am going to inform the ministers in charge immediately and they will work together with the area Members of Parliament and other leaders to take remedial steps on this matter.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.23
MR NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, on Tuesday our friends from Karamoja came to Sironko in Bulambuli and killed a Mugisu.  As I am talking now, the Bagisu are determined to wait for Karimojong who are going that side and kill them.  It is a very serious matter, even the Minister in charge of Karamoja and cattle rustling knows about it.  It is a serious matter –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us end this general debate and go to the business because now it is escalating.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) (NO. 3) BILL, 2005

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, as you appreciate we have a number of visitors. These are our children; they are here.  Shortly I will get the details and introduce them formally, but you are welcome!  (Applause)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I need your guidance because we are tackling a very important chapter in the history of our country, namely, constitutional amendment.  Yesterday several clauses impacting on Local Government were passed.  Although I am quite aware that we cannot pass a law in anticipation, I see a problem.  

The law we are about to enact, namely, the one related to the regional tier, some of the provisions in that law equally impact on the law we are deliberating on right now.  What advice are you giving me?

THE CHAIRMAN: Should a problem arise in future, we shall see how to reconcile; we are capable of reconciling these differences.


Clause 69

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, Clause 69 of the bill proposes to amend Article 211 of the Constitution on the Uganda Police Force. The committee recommends that this clause be deleted; the amendment is not necessary at this time.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, Government accepts the committee’s recommendation.

THE CHAIRMAN: That being the position, honourable members, let us vote on the proposed amendment of deletion.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on the proposed amendment by deletion of Clause 69 is as follows: abstentions- 0, against- 0 and for- 96.

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 69 deleted.

Clause 70

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, Clause 70 proposes to amend Article 212 in relation to the Uganda Police Force.  It is proposing that the President may give to the Uganda Police Force directions on matters of policing. It is also intended to reorganise and prepare for the repeal of Article 213.  

Mr Chairman, the committee examined this and found that it is not necessary because Article 213(4) of the Constitution already provides for direction on policy matters by the President.  So, there would be no need to bring in this amendment.  We propose strongly the deletion of Clause 70 of the bill.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, Government accepts the committee’s recommendation.

THE CHAIRMAN: The position is now to vote on the motion for deletion.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on the proposed amendment to delete clause 70 is as follows: no abstentions; no noes; and the ayes are 106. So the ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 70 deleted.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, before we go to Clause 71, today is a children’s day and in the public gallery we have children who have come to visit us. On this side we have pupils and teachers from Jack and Jill Nursery and Primary school of Makindye East, hon. Mabbike’s constituency. You are welcome. (Applause). On the other side we have pupils from Badambila Girls primary school of Busiro North, the Vice President’s constituency.  You are also welcome. (Applause)

Clause 71

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, having deleted clause 70; the amendment proposed by clause 71 becomes unnecessary we propose a deletion of 71. 

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, Government accepts the committee’s proposal.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Please, before you move out let us vote. 

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on the motion is: no abstentions; no noes; and the ayes are 104. So the ayes have it. 

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 71 deleted.

Clause 72

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, clause 72 proposes to give powers to Parliament to enact laws regulating the Police force.  This power is already in the Constitution, and Mr Chairman we already have the Police Act, which just needs to be improved.  We propose a deletion of this Act. 

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, Government accepts the committee’s recommendation.

(Question put_)

(The Members voted by a show of hands)

THE CHAIRMAN: The results on deletion of Clause 72 are as follows: 1 abstention; no noes; and the ayes are 105. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 72 deleted.

Clause 73

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, clause 73 proposes to amend Article 125, on the Uganda Prison Service.  The committee came to the conclusion that this amendment is not necessary the provision in the constitution is sufficient. 

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, Government accepts the committee’s recommendation. 

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on clause 73 is as follows: no abstentions; no noes; and the ayes are 102. So the ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 73 deleted.

Clause 74

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, having deleted clause 73, the amendment proposed in 74 becomes unnecessary. We propose a deletion of clause 74.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, Government accepts the committee’s recommendation.

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairman, I am getting a bit perturbed by the rate at which we are deleting, were these articles – of 105 or what? I need some clarification. 

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Honourable members, the position on the motion to delete Clause 74 is as follows; abstention – nil, against – nil, Aye is 105.  The Ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 74 deleted.

Clause 75

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, Clause 75 proposes to replace Article 217 on the Uganda Prisons Service.  The committee came to the conclusion that the formulation in the Constitution is sufficient.  This amendment is unnecessary; we propose a deletion of Clause 75.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, Government accepts the committee’s recommendation. (Laughter)

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Honourable members, the position on the motion to delete Clause 75 is as follows; abstentions – nil, against – nil, Aye - 105.  The Ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 75 deleted.

Clause 76

MR OULANYAH:  Mr Chairman, Clause 76 proposes to amend Article 218 on the Intelligence Service.  The Committee came to the conclusion that this amendment is not necessary at this time and if so desired can be done away in the future.  We beg to propose for the deletion of this clause.

MR MWESIGE:  Mr Chairman, Government accepts the committee’s recommendation (Laughter)

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on a motion to delete Clause 76 is as follows: Abstentions – nil, against – two, and Ayes - 100.  The Ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 76 deleted.

Clause 77

MR OULANYAH:  Mr Chairman, Clause 77 proposes to insert a new clause 222(a).  It proposes to introduce something called “special courts” relating to terrorism.  Mr Chairman, the committee received representation on this issue. The upsurge of terrorism in the world and in Uganda in the past and maybe – these are things we should not leave to chances. But the committee considered all this and said the operations of Article 129 would be sufficient for the creation of any court, either in the high court or in any other place to deal with situations of this nature.  

The committee also recognizes that even in other countries where there have been these problems, they have never created special courts to handle cases of corruption; instead they have strengthened departments and divisions of the court to deal with these issues expeditiously.  The committee therefore thinks that creating special courts to handle terrorism would be inappropriate and this particular clause should be deleted.

MR MWESIGE:  Mr Chairman, with all due respect, I oppose the committee’s recommendation.  Terrorism is and continues to be a threat to international peace. Uganda is a party to international covenants against terrorism, and Uganda has passed an Anti-terrorism law.  

The nature of terrorism in the world today is a special kind of terrorism; it is a sophisticated terrorism, which requires special measures to combat it.  A specialized court with specialized training and specialized equipment is therefore very necessary to address the problem of terrorism in Uganda and international terrorism.  I therefore, propose that this committee adopts the clause as it is in the bill.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR OLUM:  Point of clarification. Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to get clarification from the minister about these special courts.  Uganda has had the experience of special courts here before; we had the tribunals during Amin’s time and the people appointed to these tribunals are not necessary lawyers.  

I would like to find out from the minister whether this is going to be created under the Judiciary with specified provisions to safeguard individual rights during the trial and also the procedure for appeals.  We all know the damage that Amin’s courts did here and I am really worried if this is going to be a special court outside the judiciary?  I would like to get this clarification before I make my contribution.

MR MWESIGE: Well, Mr Chairman, first of all, Clause 77 enjoins this Parliament to make a law to establish the special courts on terrorism for trail of the offence of terrorism.  We expect this parliament to make clear provisions in that law, which provisions will govern the conduct of the special courts in their fight against terrorism. However, like any other court these courts will have to follow the same principles in administering justice; principles like everyone is innocent until proved guilty. What is more important is that these courts, their government and the principles they will follow, will be prescribed in an Act that will be made by this Parliament.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I rise to support the submission by the Minister of State for Justice. Honourable members will realize that the most sacred human right that anybody enjoys is their right to life. Terrorists, by the nature of their profanity, are always interested in taking innocent peoples’ rights and as the minister has said, the terrorists have become very sophisticated. Therefore, due notice must be given to them. As a matter of fact I would argue that all over the world such courts should be set up to deal with these terrorists.  

Very often human rights activists are interested in the rights of criminals but you hardly ever hear them talk about the rights of the victims and their relatives. In fact the absence of such courts is more likely to lead to the abuse of human rights of these criminals. 

For example, during the Second World War because there were no such courts. All the Japanese on the West Coast and even in the whole of the United States of America were put in concentration camps and had their rights trampled upon. The same thing is happening at Guantanamo Bay. Therefore, in order to protect the rights of these suspected criminals until they are convicted, we have to establish these courts whose burden will be to expeditiously deal with cases against terrorists. I want to urge colleagues in this House to support the establishment of special courts. 

Hon. Olum alluded to the activities of Idi Amin. If that argument could be taken to a ridiculous level, one would even argue against the presence of any government whatsoever. Amin’s Government was not a government. There is no way you can imagine, and I dare to say, the abuse with which Amin handled all aspects of government authority and power. This abuse can easily be copied or emulated by a civilian government. These special courts will be relevant during the administration of the NRM and other organizations. Therefore, I would like to appeal to my colleagues to really support the position forwarded by the minister.

MR MAO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have been looking through a compendium supplied by the Government giving the Government position on these various amendments and the justification for the Government’s objection of the committee’s recommendation. The Government says that it is necessary to send a strong message that terrorism is not tolerated in Uganda and that is the main reason why the Government is opposing the committee’s position. I think we have sent that message in two ways:

We passed an anti-terrorism law, which is actually one of the toughest laws against terrorism. That, to me, sufficiently sends the message. Also, the intelligence services of Uganda have been re-organised and I believe our government has a very clear policy against terrorism. Everybody, including neighbouring governments that have allowed terrorism to sprout in their backyards, knows that the message has been sent and even our own Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces are delivering that message. Therefore, if you are now saying that you want to deliver that message by creating a special court, I stand to object. 

Let me revisit how the discussion went on in the committee because the Government must understand this. At first in the committee there were very strong leanings towards the Government position and members agreed that we needed to fight terrorism. Then the question was, “Is this the way to fight it?” The committee decided that the provisions of the Constitution create a judicial system.  

Then the other question in the committee was, “What has our experience been with regard to special courts?” Our experience has shown that usually special courts are inefficient and do not attract the best-qualified people because they have been mainly ad hoc in nature. Ultimately it is the normal court system, which will deal with all these cases and we must, therefore, have a system of justice.

Our special courts do not have a record of delivering the kind of justice that hon. Olum was talking about. I, therefore, urge the Government to reconsider its position and go with the committee’s report because in my opinion the current court system sufficiently caters for all offences while the Government’s proposal does not add any value. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think the committee’s reason is not sustainable because when you look at Article 129, which the chairman referred to, it is the one that talks about the Courts of Judicature. As we know, the Courts of Judicature are spelt out in that Article of the Constitution and Parliament is only empowered to make laws that may create subordinate courts. 

It appears to me, therefore, that the committee is proposing that if a court to handle terrorism was to be created it must be a subordinate court. We already have an Anti-Terrorism Act and I believe terrorism is a capital offence. When you look at the jurisdictions of our courts, a subordinate court cannot try an offence of a capital nature, so it would not fit there. 

Secondly, to echo the minister’s points, terrorism is something new. The kind of terrorism we are experiencing today is not your ordinary offence that we know and for which we have accumulated experience in handling. It keeps evolving and the terrorism we had ten years ago is not the same terrorism we have today and it may continue to change. Therefore, it is absolutely necessary that we do not rely on courts, which were established to handle traditional offences and -(Interruption)

MR OGWEL: Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank you hon. Minister Amama Mbabazi for giving way. I just want to seek clarification that when we get these special courts say at the grassroots, what powers will be given to the special courts by the Judiciary or a Supreme Court? And when they are taking decisions or deciding on penalties will these small courts charge and send people to prison? Also, which court is going to be supreme? Will it be the special courts or our national courts?

MS ALASO: Thank you, honourable minister. You have talked about a situation where terrorism is evolving and as a result we cannot simply put the mandate to the ordinary courts. What I want to find out from you is, where are you going to find new people who are different from the ordinary Ugandans who man ordinary courts so that they will have that special ability that cannot be imparted into ordinary courts to handle terrorism?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Hon. Minister of Defence, if terrorism is as serious as any other capital offence including murder, are you suggesting that the judges we have to date do not have capacity to measure up with terrorism in terms of judgment? What are you talking about?

MR MIKE SEBALU: Thank you very much. Terrorism is a crime that is taking on a very dynamic dimension and it is classified amongst dangerous crimes like those against humanity. The challenge internationally is to build capacity and to be able to handle terrorism in such a manner that the criminals are brought to book. I think that as a country we are under obligation to also build that capacity. We have to create an initiative in order to create that capacity of being able to handle terrorism using special arrangements. It is a challenge and we must begin within our law. 

MR RUHINDI: My contribution is a small one, Mr Chairman. The provision reads, “Parliament may by law establish special courts for the trial of the offence of terrorism and other offences, which threaten national security.” These “other offences, which threaten national security” need definition. How do you concretely come up with these other offences, which threaten national security in juxtaposition to the Penal Code?  

MR MBABAZI: I thank all my friends and I will begin with hon. Lukyamuzi. I must say that hon. Lukyamuzi clearly did not understand what I was talking about. I was saying –(Interruption)- I am answering you because that is exactly the question you asked. I was saying that under our system, courts have jurisdictions. There are courts, which can try capital offences and there are others, which cannot. For instance, a magistrate’s court cannot try someone who is charged with murder especially if the sentence may be a death punishment.

Under the Article, which was cited by the committee, all the courts from the Supreme Court down to the High Court have that capacity. However, a subordinate court may not have that jurisdiction. What I was saying was that by the formulation the committee has proposed if created under 129, this court would not have the ability to do what we are proposing.

Hon. Alaso and hon. Ogwel also raised the question of terrorism and we are saying that it should be Parliament to create that law. The idea that Parliament should create the law is to give Parliament flexibility so that as terrorism evolves and changes, Parliament can also change the law easily to suite the circumstances of the day. Obviously, we will have to build capacity even for special courts and as the minister said, the usual principles that apply in the administration of justice such as the standard of proof and the presumption of innocence will be preserved even for special courts.  

The idea is that with terrorism and the kind of things that have been going on, I will tell you that those of us who handle security have a problem because we have had many cases. Hon. Alaso, you may or may not know of people who have been charged with terrorism, which is a serious offence and have gone through the process of our present day arrangement of administration of justice only to have very many of them recycled back into terrorism. It is obvious, therefore, that the system has not been able to adequately handle this problem as it is. So -(Interruption)

MR MAO: Mr Chairman, permit me to inform the honourable minister that he has correctly diagnosed the disease, namely the inefficiency, delays and incompetence of our court system but is this the solution? If Parliament became a House where things are delayed and one, which is incompetent, will you for instance create a special Parliament for children to handle children’s issues? I think the committee acknowledged the problem.

Furthermore, none of the countries that you have cited has also set up specialised courts.

Thirdly, may I inform you that you have not allayed the fears of abuse; especially the way the Article is drafted. It is a cut branch, which can be abused and the committee is saying, if the time has come to create specialised courts, it has not yet arrived here in Uganda because your arguments are talking about the nature of terrorism, and terrorism is actually a very old offence, it is not a new offence. It is its globalised nature, which is the new phenomenon and if those who are on the cutting edge of fighting terrorism have not thought it necessary to create specialised courts, which can be abused, then in which fold are you? I think you should reconsider and withdraw this position honourable minister.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Sir. The information I want to give to the minister is that the offences referred to here are already catered for by appropriate courts. Right from the Chief Magistrate’s court, anything to do with a capital offence including terrorism is always sent or referred to higher courts. You have jumped that and you should take me seriously these days. I am reading law so –(Laughter) 

MR MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I thank hon. Ken Lukyamuzi and I am happy to hear that he is reading law. Obviously he has a long way to go -(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, thank you. The clarification I want to seek from the minister is an attribute of a good law that the minister should have a capacity of empathy of putting yourself in somebody’s shoes or somebody’s perspective and see how you would feel. The danger with this law is for the minister to think he is legislating for others without realising that this law is double-edged. It bites both ways: it is for those you think you are legislating against and for you who is legislating because the offence of terrorism is an offence, which threatens national security. 

The viewpoint of establishment tends to make a law, which goes contrary to the fundamental human rights you have enshrined in the Constitution. By putting special courts up – Mr Minister in a way I plead with you because we have seen ordinances against detention without trial here and the very people being victims of it. So, the clarification is, have empathy.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t we put a vote on the motion? Let us vote on the motion.

MR MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, let me conclude. The simple point I want to make is that all that this provision proposes to do is to give power to Parliament to pass a law to create a special court to fight terrorism.

When it comes to the creation of that law, this is in your hands. This is in the hands of Parliament obviously and as you can see from the argument, anyone who has been following the augment of the committee, they are saying it is not necessary to create this because this power already exists under Article 129. So those who are making another augment are talking about a different matter, not what is being proposed. What is being proposed now by government is dictated by the point I made that if it were a subordinate court, there are problems with it. Otherwise as the law stands now, this Parliament can create a special court to handle terrorism. We are saying it should be created to handle terrorism, as it is not a simple or minor offence. Thank you.  

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am looking at this provision relating to terrorism in the global context and the responses at a global level because if the argument -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But as you are going please, why don’t you also address us on Article 79? Is it not enough under this if circumstances warranted for the Parliament to make a law - can it not make it under that power? Because this provision says, “Subject to provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.” (Interjections)- I cannot do what –(Interruption)

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Besides the point you have already alluded to, if we look at the issue of responses of countries that have been hit by terrorism like the USA and the United Kingdom, their approach has not been to establish new courts. For example in the USA when 911 terrorists attacked, what they did was to strengthen what they call the homeland security and homeland security meant harmonising intelligence services, strengthening the Police, the CIA and all those other security services internally to make them efficient.  

If you look at the London issue, which took place three or four days ago, the issue has been left to the Police. So for terrorism really the approach cannot be creation of a special court. The approach is to first strengthen the capacity of police to investigate the intelligence services to make sure that they get deterrent services and to make sure that the tracking system is efficient - not even only in Uganda because if terrorists come here you need a tracking global force like Interpol and all that. So, the special courts will not help you. What we need is to strengthen the capacity of police intelligence services but not the new courts.

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to draw the attention of my colleagues to two problems that have been created in the debate. The chairman is saying that the Article in the Constitution is sufficient. Hon. Mbabazi is saying that the law that we have - and I am happy that hon. Mao now appreciates that the law should be there in that very law the offence that is created is capital. So, you cannot say that the courts that we are to create should be subordinate.

Furthermore, I would be happier that rather than dropping the whole idea of the Government - the Government is saying that let our courts - if you do not want special courts - we want to create capacity within our judicial system to handle the matter. But what we are saying, while that one is true, it is also true that because terrorism is a real threat, we should not leave it to chance. You should appreciate that. What if you have the leader of the Judicial system who does not think that terrorism is important in order to create a division within the normal system of government? I want the Minister of Defence and the Attorney-General to help me capture this and probably the chairman of the committee. This is a real threat. 

The country does not have the capacity and we cannot continue without this capacity and leave it to chance. Find a way of how you force the judicial system to create capacity within itself in a mandatory way, like we did with land and others. Because we have created the children’s division within the High Court and it is not being facilitated –(Interruptions)

MR ERESU: Mr Chairman, the subject in question is very elaborate and very much understood by all members. I beg that the question be put.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now I put the question to the motion by the committee that we delete Clause 77

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on the motion to delete Clause 77 is as follows: there are two abstentions, those against are 37, and those for are 70. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 77 deleted.

Clause 78

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, Clause 78 proposes to amend Article 224 on the Inspectorate of Government. The committee has examined these new proposals in the Bill and we think that the provisions of the Constitution are better than what is drafted in clause 78. We propose that it be deleted.  

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, the Government accepts the committee’s recommendation.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the motion to delete clause 78.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on the motion to delete Clause 78 is as follows: no abstentions, none against, and those for are 102. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 78 deleted.

Clause 79

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, Clause 79 proposes to replace Article 225 on the functions of the Inspectorate of Government (IGG). The formulation now in the Bill takes away the ombudsman’s function, which is the substance of the existence of this office. The amendment is, therefore, to even reduce the powers of the Inspectorate of Government. We think it is not desirable at all, and this Clause 79 should be deleted to give back the power to the IGG.  

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, the Government accepts the committee’s recommendation.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that we delete Clause 79.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honorable members, the position on the motion to delete clause 79 in the Bill is as follows: no abstentions, none against, and those for are 100. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 79 deleted.

Clause 80

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, Clause 80 proposes to replace Article 229. It is the opinion of the committee that the formulation of Article 229 as it is in the Constitution is better than what is now proposed. We propose that clause 80 be deleted.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, the Government accepts the committee’s recommendation.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the deletion of clause 80.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honorable members, the position on the deletion of Clause 80 of the Bill is as follows: no abstentions, none against, and those for are 101.

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 80 deleted.

Clause 81

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, Clause 81 proposes to amend Article 230 on the Inspectorate of Government (IGG). Parts of the proposal suggest that the Inspectorate of Government shall not hand over any prosecution commenced by it within its jurisdiction to the Directorate of Public Prosecutions. 

The committee came to the conclusion that this proposal would antagonize the relationship that now exists between the Inspectorate of Government and the Directorate of Public Prosecutions by imposing a no-handover clause in the Constitution and yet they have been doing it very well the way it is. We propose that this amendment is unnecessary, it will create confusion in the operations of these institutions, and we propose that Clause 81 be deleted.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, the Government accepts the committee’s recommendation.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the deletion of Clause 81.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on Clause 81 is as follows: no abstentions, none against, and those for are 89. This is below the required quorum but the decision has been taken. Can you move a motion for the House to resume?

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

1.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill, 2005 and decided to delete clauses 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 78, and 77; and has stood over clause 78. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Report of the Committee of the whole be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, since I have said we were lacking a quorum when we reached that stage, even the House cannot take a decision. I will put the question when we resume. I understand you have functions on Monday; some people have indicated to me not only one or two of you. Maybe we should adjourn to Tuesday -(Interjections)- no, they have indicated in writing. There are problems and then I may also face the same problem, it being a Monday. So, I adjourn the House until Tuesday at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 1.40 p.m. and 
adjourned until Tuesday, 19 July 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)

