Thursday, 7 July 2011 

Parliament met at 3.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s sitting and do apologise for the delay. Yesterday, when we adjourned, the Minister of Trade and Industry had undertaken to bring a statement on the strikes in the city so that we dispose of it before we return to our other business. However, the latest information is that she has not been able to conclude her negotiations and so, we cannot have the statement. Therefore, we shall revert to our other business and I think I will not give her time until she really gives us the statement, so that we complete our State of the Nation Address debate. I really apologise. Thank you. 

3.08 
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When this issue came up on the Floor of the House, Members felt it was an issue that needed urgent attention and we believe that Government should give us a way forward on this matter. Even before conclusion of the discussions that the minister is holding with the traders, Government should give us a way forward in the meantime, so that we can possibly say something; so that we are able to tell our people what is happening.

3.09 
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we all know in this House and we are all informed that Government operates as a team. If the minister is not ready, then nobody else will be ready because there are many factors. Information given to you here must be collected from all affected areas. I do not understand how you can run a government, when one minister is not ready, and there is a mutongole here to come and say something. This is not how we run the government. I do not think it is fair. (Laughter)

3.11
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Whereas we have high regard for the Prime Minister and the proposal of the minister, sometimes Government uses excuses of not being ready to delay and to dodge Members’ concerns. For example, Madam Speaker, last week you directed the Minister of Finance to give us a statement on how they are handling the runaway inflation and the problem of the exchange rate. Instead of the responsible minister coming to the Floor to give statements, they have gone to the Media Centre. Should we all go to the Media Centre and tune our radios since we cannot officially explain to the voters? Now that we are approaching the weekend, tomorrow –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform my colleague and indeed this House that whatever the style of running of a government, it should be in the best interests of the people who have a contract with you in an election. What is happening in Kampala is a very serious matter - not only in Kampala, but it is spreading all over the country. We are going to pass the budget very soon but it has matters of money, revenue resources, agreements and contracts, and it has every financial and social implication you can think of. I would like to further inform my colleague that Government came here and said they were going to issue a statement to this House in partial reply to what has happened in Kampala, but up to now, they have not done anything; they have not come back to the House to explain what has happened to the dollar. By the way, issues of fuel and inflation started long ago; unless Government wants to admit on this Floor that they have gone to sleep, they are on holiday or the centre cannot hold and things have fallen apart in this country. Let Government admit that.  

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, as you may be aware, the same minister stated that she was not ready; but yesterday, she went to the Media Centre to inform the country of why she could not officially inform the Members of Parliament, who are people’s representatives. We do not even have a copy of what she told the country at the Media Centre. Should we read from the print or listen from electronic –(Interjections)– when the issue of Walk-to-Work started, traders complained. In a country where our currency is a shilling and you find that Government pegs paying taxes in dollars - and this has been going on for many years - and Government cannot come to the Floor of the House and say, “These are our proposals and we are negotiating for the whole week; give us this time.” -(Interruption) 

MS JUDITH FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, hon. Ekanya, for giving way. The information I am giving you is that by 8.00 p.m. yesterday, in Agago District, people were buying a kilo of sugar at Shs 7,500 and people from Lira are going to Agago to get bags of sugar to bring and sell in Lira because of the current situation in Uganda. 

Hon. Ekanya and Members, two power stations are already off. People are in darkness and we have been put on schedules for lighting. The issue of the Minister of Finance must be taken seriously; we want the minister to come here and not only explain, but also tell us the action you are taking to ensure that at least citizens are assured. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, these issues are disrupting the work of Parliament. Yesterday, we had to interfere with the State of the Nation Address to make room for the Minister of Trade and Industry, and by the way, I did it reluctantly because I thought it was important and I was hoping that she would bring the statement. The same issues are on the Table and I do not know whether to proceed with the State of the Nation Address or to wait. 

3.19
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (GEN. MOSES ALI): Madam Speaker, the hon. Member said we were contracted to the nation. We were committed- we were elected and given more mandate. Therefore, we are more concerned on this side because we got more votes. (Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect for the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business; I find it exceedingly insulting for a minister, at his level, to look at you and say, “That side is more concerned than this side.” We are here for Uganda not for the sides. I would have expected the Prime Minister to request the Speaker to give Members of Parliament sufficient time to debate this matter as the minister prepares herself to bring a statement. Is he, therefore, in order to turn this House into a campaign rally and divide it into two groups? Is he really in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think all the Members of this House are concerned about what is happening in the city of Kampala. So, can we forward a solution Prime Minister?

GEN. MOSES ALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What I said as reference to what a Member has said claiming – however, that is gone. What I am actually saying is that we cannot give a statement when we are not ready. Therefore, I said - even earlier - that Government will be ready when it is ready. (Laughter) So, one thing - I want to appeal to colleagues -

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I rarely rise up on points of order. It is unfortunate that I am rising up on a point of order when it is the Prime Minister holding the Floor. 

Madam Speaker, you made a ruling yesterday that Government should be prepared. Even today, you are making the same appeal and the Prime Minister is rising to undermine the ruling of the Speaker –(Interjections)- and says that Government is not ready –(Interjections)- and when it gets ready -(Interjections)- that is when it will be able -Interjections)

When should Parliament do its oversight role? We have a fully-fledged Committee on Government Assurances that is supposed to track the promises made by Government. The Prime Minister - the Leader of Government Business is saying Government will be ready when it feels ready.

Is he, therefore, in order, to defy the ruling of the Speaker and misdirect the House such that the assurance is not fully-tracked? Is the Prime Minister in order to misguide the House and disrespect your ruling?
(Gen. Moses Ali rose_) (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister and members of the Executive, I said this matter is disrupting the work of this House because Members want answers. The country wants answers. Can we have a definite commitment?  When are you bringing the statement so that we can do our other work and wait for you? 

GEN. MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I want to appeal to colleagues to help the government to solve these problems. These problems in the city -[Hon. Members: “The country.”]- I do not know; I am talking about Kampala. (Laughter) The problem here is being handled by different arms of the Government. There are negotiations at different levels which will comprise what we shall bring here so that it is detailed information to the Members rather than bringing half information to you.  

So, for that reason, I want colleagues to join hands with us so that we do not panic. We should stay firm about the situation. (Interjections) We shall try our best to come back on Tuesday. (Interjections) On Tuesday, Madam Speaker. (Interjections) On Tuesday, we shall try and bring a statement here.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As it appears, Members of this House are very uncomfortable with the situation that is prevailing in the country today because – Members are just paralysed. It is not only Kampala. It is not a Kampala issue and we would like to inform you Rt hon. Prime Minister that you should make an effort to be aware of what is happening in the country, not only Kampala.

I would like to propose that this being a very biting issue, which also touches a number of aspects that are in the State of the Nation Address – now that Government is not ready with the statement regarding the traders; we cannot continue a debate on the State of the Nation Address when the country is in paralysis. (Interjections) I would like to propose that we suspend debate on the State of the Nation Address until Government comes with a clear statement and position on the way forward in our economy. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if we were to operate in that manner, I think Parliament would close. Let us continue raising the issues until Government comes. If they are not ready on Tuesday, I will impose sanctions. Prime Minister, I will impose sanctions against you.

MR KYANJO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am thankful that you have been able to save that first phase of the situation; but outside, it is still rising. The implication of what the Prime Minister has stated and the promise that is due to be here on Tuesday is that there will be feelings within the business community if not carefully-handled, to close the business until that date.

Therefore, I request quite passionately that you save this situation because some of these things are done deliberately to blackmail you. They will go - these ministers just tune the radios in the evening - they will say, “We are not the people to handle business in Parliament. It is the Speaker and the clerks who parade the business.” They will disown you and how shall we feel? The people under your stewardship are being called on the streets and told, “You people in Parliament and your Speaker are conniving to save the ministers.” Therefore, I request that you allow debate on this issue and in conclusion, Parliament expresses itself and then we make an appeal either to Government or to the traders other than simply throwing them around. Thank you.

3.26
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I really take into account the difficult situation the Frontbench is placing on the Speaker of this House, particularly because there was an earlier ruling yesterday that today we would be having that statement. 

I was listening carefully and the Leader of Government Business was appealing for help and understanding from Members of Parliament. In which way will Parliament venture out to forward its views when a statement is not on the Floor of Parliament? We are not meant to go to the Media Centre to obtain information. What is at stake is that since yesterday and today - we are debating the State of the Nation Address, but how much revenue has been lost since? How many billions have we lost when businesses have closed? 

I do not want to be part of the group that says that we wait until Tuesday when we do not know what will happen tomorrow. The lifeline of this country depends on business and we cannot sit here pretending to be deliberating for the country. I find this not befitting our status as the legislative arm of Government. 

Madam Speaker, we represent all the constituencies in this country. It will be under looking this House for us to make a request and through you, you make a ruling and Government continues to buy time without being honest with us and the country at large. This is a matter of extreme national importance. We can even sit tomorrow. We can have a half-day sitting and receive a statement so that as we break off to our respective constituencies we have a message to take to the people. 

I will not be party to the situation where Government hides behind flimsy excuses. Whenever there is no Minister of Trade, it does not mean Government has ceased to exist. I know that there is a problem here and there, but there is a government; it has just been sworn in. Why are you tired as early as this? (Laughter) I have no kind words; if you alone are tired, let us proceed with the country.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, hon. Ssekikubo, for giving way. It is true that yesterday, I brought this to the attention of this honourable House. Like the honourable member from Agago stated, what is there for us to debate and discuss in pretence that everything is fine in this country when shops have closed down? Basic essentials, even upcountry, cannot be taken there if the centre of distribution, Kampala, is striking. And ministers continue to say that they are not ready. 

I am moving on to further inform hon. Ssekikubo that from what I have heard, even workers from other sectors might follow suit. Therefore, it is important that we, as Parliament get commitment and commit these ministers, compel them, as fast as possible, to present that statement tomorrow and we shall be here to serve this country. Thank you.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, hon. Ssekikubo. Under Article 79 of the Constitution, this House has the mandate under situations of crisis, like we have in Kampala, to make any law, address any crisis or state of disorder, for the good of the people of Uganda. We cannot run away from the responsibility of addressing what is in Kampala today. (Applause) 

If the government, headed by His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, has failed to fulfil its duties, let the Opposition come. (Laughter)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I do not think we have reached that stage where Government has totally collapsed. But it is in such challenges that a government is defined. I would feel shy to be defined as a government that has shunned its responsibility. 

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, hon. Ssekikubo, for giving way. I would like to give hon. Ssekikubo information that these traders went on strike because the government was dilly-dallying. They have had several meetings with the government but because of its dilly-dallying, they opted to go on strike. So, as Parliament, we should not also be put in this trap of dilly-dallying by Government. It is as if the government is a system of its own. What is in town touches the nerve of Government, but the insensitivity the government is portraying needs to be addressed so that this House comes up with solutions. Hon. Ssekikubo, you are right that this honourable House must do something about what is happening in town. (Members rose_)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Allow me wind up, but I think hon. Sanjay –(Interruption)

MR TANNA: I thank hon. Ssekikubo for giving way. Madam Speaker and hon. Members, we do not live in isolation of these traders. We are part and parcel of this business community either as people who purchase from them, supply or contribute to the manufacturing chain.

I have seen many colleagues remaining quiet for the last half an hour and I see some Members laughing. It pains to see the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister come and laugh on the Floor. It gives me pain. 

Yesterday, fuel pump prices rose to Shs 3,700 a litre. From the 1st of this month, URA declared the mean exchange rate for declaring taxes from Shs 2,454 to Shs 2,604, an increment of Shs 150 per dollar.

The issues that these traders have raised have been going on for the last three to four years. We used to buy fuel at Shs 1,800 a litre exactly five years ago. Today it is at Shs 3,700. We need time; many of these issues are complex. Like the President rightly said, there is imported inflation in this country and many of the factors, for example the fuel prices, are way beyond the control of Government. 

I would like to request that we take the suggestion of hon. Ssekikubo and we come back tomorrow. We give the Members time - like the Prime Minister has said, there are various departments involved; there is the Ministry of Trade; the Ministry of Finance and the various arms of Government and they come and report to us tomorrow. 

The piece of information that I wanted to give is that the economy is actually bleeding. It is in crisis. We cannot wait for four days. Let us act quickly and try to salvage the little we can. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I would like to end my contribution by saying that even the issues that Government is grappling with are well known; the issue of traders being made to pay in dollars - can you imagine? You move a vote-of-no-confidence in your own currency and you force traders to pay in dollars? Government departments - URA forcing traders and businessmen to pay their dues and taxes in dollars. They do not want the shilling and yet the shilling is our Ugandan currency - (Interjections)

Secondly, big people in Government, including ministers, own property in town and they demand rent in dollars. These big people you see. They are demanding rent in dollars. In other words they have discarded the shilling. You have discarded the shilling, Government, I want to tell you. Those are the issues that are known.

And another one is the exorbitant licences. Can’t we have a statement on the exorbitant licences; the licences that have gone high? 

And lastly, I know that as regards inflation - from my elementary economics, when there is excess money chasing very few goods, then you have inflation. But I want to ask Government, what do we as Government export outside so that we get the foreign exchange? (Laughter)  Because as we treat the current impasse now, that will be treating the symptom, but as Government, what concrete plans do we have to boost our exports so that we can in –(Interruption)

MS NAJJEMBA: The guidance I would like to give my colleagues is that it looks like we are already debating the State of the Nation Address. Why don’t we, Madam Speaker, continue with the State of the Nation Address - (Interjections) - after all the issues that we are talking about concern the economy and that is what we are discussing? (Interjections) So, I think -

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I end by requesting that in times of emergencies like now, let us all put our heads together. It is important that we stop the partisanship and showing which side is winning. Let us all be Ugandans in this. Let the Opposition not take advantage of the situation to project themselves as being on -(Interjections)- but I would also not like Government to be insensitive in such moments and times. 

Madam Speaker, I move that we re-adjust and meet tomorrow to get a comprehensive statement and then we see how together we can get out of this crisis. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday I had a lot of trouble restraining Members from discussing the issue of the strike of the traders because I had business which I wanted us to handle. But I am also aware that last week we required a statement on the depreciation of the shilling from the Minister of Finance. He disappeared. (Laughter) Yesterday the Minister of Trade was almost ready. (Laughter) She actually started to give some statements here then she said she was going to add information and come back. Now she has also disappeared. (Laughter) 

So, Prime Minister, I think it is incumbent upon us to show our concern for the country. Please, require the Minister of Trade and the Minister of Finance to come tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. to answer those questions so that we can move on with our business. 

So, House is adjourned to 10 O’clock tomorrow. (Applause)

(The House rose at 3.42 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 8 July 2011 at 10.00 a.m.)
