Wednesday, 3 July 2013

Parliament met at 2.23 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. We had a long day yesterday and we did quite a lot of work. I hope that same spirit continues today. My target - and I am sure that it is your target too - is that we should roll out that Bill and finish it today so that it clears the way for other Bills to be processed. 

Hon. Members, I need to urge the ministers to address the question of the ministerial policy statements, which have to be coming in. They should be laid on Table as I have ruled in the past so that we know exactly when a particular minister has complied with the laws that govern that budgetary process here. 

Ministers’ response to Questions for Oral Answer has led to a complete block of that line of access of business of this Parliament. All questions asked by hon. Members do not get responses and two years down the line, some questions have not been answered and yet our Rules of Procedure only give three days within which you should give a response. Those questions should be submitted to the Office of the Clerk and transmitted to the responsible minister and those rules should be complied with. 

The problem that that has been created is that Members have given up on Questions for Oral Answer, which would have been a more elaborate way of handling a particular issue. They have now resorted to the issue of urgent public importance and that is why this issue is coming up. That is why every day when we start our sitting, Members have lists of things that they want to raise as matters of urgent public importance. Even matters that were here a year ago all of a sudden, they want to find a way to make it urgent so that the issues can be addressed. If only the ministers could respond to these questions, that would be an avenue where a lot of business could be transacted arising from private Members. So, I urge you, hon. Ministers, to respond to those questions. We want to list all of them and finish with them so that we activate that line of dealing with the parliamentary business. 

I have a question that has come and it has been served on the Speaker from the hon. Member for Mukono Municipality. All questions should be addressed to and channeled through the Clerk’s Office and not through the Speaker’s Office and the due process will take off. And it is on the question of cultural leaders. I remember that yesterday, we had a discussion on this and the matter was referred to the minister responsible to make a statement. I do not see the minister here but I am hoping that at an appropriate time, she will make the undertaking that a comprehensive statement on this subject will be brought before Parliament, which will also capture the questions raised by the hon. Member for Mukono Municipality – and she has just walked in. 

So, I need you, hon. Minister, to give us the undertaking of when you will give this statement on the exercise of cultural right by cultural leaders, which will capture some other questions that have been raised by Members so that all these matters are dealt with in a comprehensive way. I need you to assure me when you are going to do that, so that I do not have to prematurely put it on the order paper.

2.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND CULTURE (Ms Lukia Nakadama): I thank you, Mr Speaker. We are going to do this next week on Tuesday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Next week on Tuesday, we expect a statement on the exercise of cultural rights by cultural leaders. Actually, it was already on the order paper. 

So, we will now defer this to next week, on Tuesday, when we have a comprehensive statement from the minister in charge of the sector. Yes, we are ready for business. 

2.29
MR EDWARD BALIDDAWA (NRM, Kigulu County North, Iganga): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent importance and this is a national issue. Hon. Speaker, I seek your leave to present a matter that touches on the tourism sector.

On 13June 2013, the Minister for Finance presented to this Parliament the National Budget for 2013/14, in which she announced the introduction of VAT on accommodation.

Although this Parliament has not yet debated and pronounced itself on the pronouncements contained in that Budget, the Minister of Finance basing on the provisions of The Taxes and Duties (Provisional Collection) Act of 1963, has already started administering this tax starting from 1July. The effect of this impromptu collection of this tax has raised deep concern by the stakeholders and unrest in the tourism sector. The tax is not only causing anxiety in the sector, but also is bound to hurt the very industry that the country is currently relying on for its contribution to the GDP.

During the Budget speech in the East African countries, it was only Uganda and Tanzania, which imposed VAT on accommodation, but our partner Tanzania has since rescinded this tax after reconsidering its potential adverse effect on their tourism sector. So, it leaves only Uganda in the East African Community with VAT on accommodation.

Mr Speaker, I want to present to you the effects of this tax:
    1. The sector is witnessing cancellations in bookings due to this impromptu increase in pricing of accommodation;
    2. All bookings that had been made in advance are going to be affected;
    3. All contracts that have been made with agencies abroad are at risk of termination;
    4. Uganda is going to be even less competitive than our EAC partners;
    5. Jobs are going to be lost and thus increasing the unemployment inertia in the country.

I want to present to you the facts regarding the tourism sector. Tourism is now the leading foreign exchange earner for this country. Last year, it was reported that it brought into the country $830 million. It was followed by the remittance from the Diaspora which amounted to $767 million.

Uganda gets the least number of tourists annually compared to Kenya and Tanzania. Kenya has 29national parks and it gets 2.4 million tourists annually. Tanzania has 31 national parks and it gets 760,000 tourists, Uganda has 23 national parks and we get 80,000 tourists annually.

The entire East African Community has atotal number 100,000 beds of which Kenya has 80 percent while Tanzania, Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi share the remaining 20 percent. Uganda has the least budget allocation for marketing the country’s tourism potential – and here I want to present to you the comparative marketing budgets for East African countries. 

Kenya puts in $ 23 million in the tourism sector, of which $12 million goes to direct marketing. Uganda puts Shs 1.4 billion of which Shs 240 million, equivalent to $90,000, goes to direct marketing. And this figure is right from the policy statement of the ministry on page 59. Tanzania puts in $10 million, which goes to direct marketing; Rwanda $5 million and; Burundi $1 million. And remember this in comparison to Uganda’s $90,000.

An increase of the annual number of tourists to Uganda from the current 80,000 to 100,000 will correspondingly increase the country’s GDP by one percent – that is according to the World Bank’s survey. Now, in order to achieve the above, Government must do the following among others:

    1. Government should rescind the VAT on accommodation in order to make our industry competitive. 
    2. Government must start investing at least one percent of the total earnings from tourism annually in the promotion of marketing tourism. If we take one percent of $860 million, that will be about $8 million as compared to the current $90,000.

I am reliably informed that the Ministry of Finance is considering exempting payment of VAT on contracts pre-dating 1st July. But my contention is that that will not solve the problem because tourism contracts are not the same as those of trade of goods. Contracts in tourism are made a year or two years ahead and there is no way you can go back to the prospective tourists and tell them that you have now slapped an impromptu 18 percent tax on them. We are dealing with a very sophisticated and sensitive industry and yet, we are not yet competitive enough.

Mr Speaker, through you, I request the honourable members to join me in requiring the Minister of Finance to rescind the VAT that was slapped on the accommodation so as to make our budding industry competitive. So, I pray.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That has made the Minister of Tourism very happy. Hon. Minister, do you want to respond? Okay, let us hear from the Government Chief Whip. 

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable member for raising this issue. But this was a decision that was taken by Cabinet and so, his proposal will be taken back to Cabinet and the response made. Thank you.

MR BALIDDAWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the Government Chief Whip’s response but I would love to have a time-frame; not leaving it wide open and yet, they are going to start working with effect from 1st July.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ministers, you remember when they launched Vision 2040, one of the opportunities listed for this country to achieve those goals was investment in tourism. And so, the Member is raising something important.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question being raised here is a budget issue and a taxation matter for that matter. And the Budget Act is very clear on how the budgeting is handled; once the Budget is read, it is presented to Parliament and discussed. All these issues raised by the honourable member are going to be discussed when we are discussing the Budget. 

So, if we adopt this kind of methodology, with the tax measures that we have proposed, there is likelihood that for every tax measure that has been proposed, this methodology will be adopted. Why don’t we follow the procedure of Parliament that is relayed and known? So, is it procedurally right to begin discussing tax procedural matters in this kind of manner?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Member has sought the Speaker’s advice. He informed the Speaker that the matter is urgent. And it is urgent because the Minister of Finance, having read the Budget, immediately imposed those taxes under the Taxation and Duties (Provisional Collection) Act, which means those taxes are being collected right now and they are affecting people whose hotels have been booked. The tourists are making cancellations because all of a sudden, they are being notified that they have to top up what they had previously paid. 

And that is the issue he briefed me on. I then told him that in those circumstances, you could raise it and we see how it will go. Those are the circumstances surrounding that matter. So, procedurally, the Member is in order to point that out – that there is a crisis in the tourism sector, arising from this situation. The discussions will come and eventually, a decision will be taken by Parliament on this issue. But all the same, Parliament needed to be informed that there is a problem and the minister has to take note of it and take remedial measures. So, there is no procedural mishap in this situation.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to find out; from the submission made, it seems these taxes are being collected illegally.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they are not. They are being collected under the authority of the Taxation and Duties (Provisional Collection) Act. Once the minister announces, that Act comes into force immediately. That is why they say, “It will be effective from midnight today.” So, there is no illegality in this issue.

2.40
MR PETER MUGEMA (NRM, Iganga Municipality, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am standing on a matter of national importance. In my constituency, there is an on-going strike by the taxi drivers of the PSV vehicles. There was an increase in the express tax penalty fees, which is being paid by those people. But it was abnormal compared to what they used to pay. For example, now, if someone carried an excess passenger, instead of paying Shs 60,000 as a fine, they are required to pay Shs 200,000. 

Initially, if someone was caught over-speeding, they would be fined Shs 100,000 but now it is Shs 200,000. If someone had not filled the boot carrying cargo properly, they would be fined Shs 40,000 but now, it is Shs 200,000. Mathematically, it is totally unfair because if it was a 50 percent increase, it would have come to Shs 90,000; if it was 100 percent, it would have come to Shs 120,000. We do not know what kind of percentage increase it was.

The drivers’ plight has not been given the attention it deserves because recently, when the traders went on strike, the Minister of Trade came out and defended them. But now, people’s children are not going to school and the business from Iganga to Kampala has been paralysed -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRANSPORT (Dr Stephen Chebrot): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Member of Parliament for Iganga Municipality. It is true that my ministry, through the Ministry of Works and Transport, issued changes in the Statutory Instrument to amend the Traffic and Road Safety Act. The importance of those changes was to reduce on the number of accidents that occur on our roads today. As you all know, today, you find many young men driving vehicles without driving permits. Two, you find many driving under the influence of alcohol. You also find many taxis carrying passengers in excess, way beyond the number that is required by law. They also over-speed. 

The regulations are supposed to act as a deterrent to this type of drivers. If they obey the law and drive in accordance with the law; they will not be charged. In the regulations, we have stated that if there is a charge to be paid, they will immediately pay from the point of commission of the traffic offence. Those regulations are not only for drivers in the East; they are for all drivers in Uganda. I want to ask people in the East to know that we shall not make any changes to those regulations. Why are people in the East and Jinja specifically, preventing people from moving to their destinations like Kapchorwa, Mbale and so on? There are thugs stoning vehicles, which is not good.

MR MUGEMA: Mr Speaker, I do not think that information is worth. It was just misinformation. I think the minister has taken almost 20 years without using public means. So, he does not know what is obtaining on the ground.

As we talk, people’s vehicles are being stoned. Yesterday, there was a police commissioner from the Police Traffic Department, Ms Kibwika, who addressed taxi drivers from Eastern Uganda. In her address, she insinuated that it is Parliament that came out with those regulations and that they had to enforce them. 

I want to say that the onus is now on Government to come out with a statement. Otherwise, traders are being affected – some of our children who use public transport cannot go to school because of these strikes. If you move to Eastern Uganda and I think even other parts of Uganda, you realise that taxis are not working –(Interruption)

MR KYEYUNE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What I know is that a fine is another form of punishment for committing a crime. So, is the hon. Member for Iganga Municipality in order to debate by convincing this House that we must prepare our people to commit crimes? Is he in order to mislead this House when he knows drivers should respect the law?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, to the extent that the honourable member is raising an issue about strikes, lack of public transport and stranded citizens on the roads without public transport, he is right. But to the extent that he is challenging the fines imposed in violation; to the extent that he is challenging the fines, which are only kicked in when one violates a law, he is completely out of order.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I think the Member from Iganga has a point because as I speak, there is no public transport running from Mbale to Iganga, Jinja and Kampala. The taxi drivers are on strike. The issues that the Member is raising are pertinent because they affect the movement of our people and their businesses as well. I would like to call upon the Ministry of Works and Transport to look into these issues so that we get to have communication within the country. Thank you.

DR CHEBROT: Mr Speaker, I want to assure Members that tomorrow, I will be going to Jinja to have a meeting with leaders of taxi operators. The meeting will take place at 10 O’clock. But I also wish to thank you for advising the Member of Parliament on the penalties – the regulations will only apply to those who break the law. No penalty will be charged on those who do not break such laws. We cannot sit, as Parliament, to just aid people to break the law through over speeding.

As I have said, come tomorrow at 10 O’clock, I will be in Jinja and I wish to assure Ugandans that by the end of the week, public transport will have been restored.

2.48
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms JustineKasule Lumumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to urge Members that when you are not in the House and something is debated, endeavour to read, so you get to know. I am saying this because during the Road Safety Week, which was well observed by Parliament, I recall hon. Alaso moving a motion. I also recall that one of the resolutions that were passed by Parliament was to ensure traffic laws are observed. We even requested the Executive to bring up more stringent laws. So, how do we take blame with the Executive, yet, the resolutions were passed by this Parliament?

It is on this basis that I want to request you to recall that issues of traffic are about life and death. The people who are killed in these accidents are equally our voters, sisters or brothers. We should strictly follow what we have already agreed on –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have ruled to the extent that hon. Mugema is right, as far as the plight of our people is concerned and in as far as the compliance of the law is concerned. But I now see my honourable colleague raising this issue again. As leaders, we cannot just shy away when there is a problem, unless there is no Government to take action.

So, is the Government Chief Whip in order to insinuate that Members of this House, even when matters have been discussed, do not take the trouble to read what has been debated and that they come here to raise issues in total disregard of what was actually concluded? I am saying this because she is trying to insinuate that my colleague is speaking out of lack of information. So, is she in order, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I had made a ruling on this subject and distinguished the two issues of dealing with the concerns of the people as being right and issues of compliance as not being discussable and that the Member was out of order on that. The Government Chief Whip attempted to comment on the Speaker’s ruling and as you know, the rules forbid that. So, she is not in order. (Applause)

Please, let us move on to the next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON VICTIMS OF THE ACCIDENT THAT OCCURRED ON NORTHERN BYPASS (NAMUNGOONA) ON 29TH JUNE 2013

2.52
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr RuhakanaRugunda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The statement that I am giving is to inform honourable members of Parliament on the status of the victims of the Northern Bypass motor vehicle accident and inferno that occurred at Namungoona, Kampala on Saturday, 29 June 2013. 

At around 9.30 p.m., on June 29 2013, a fuel truck travelling towards Busega exit on the Northern Bypass was involved in an accident at Namungoona, around 20 metres from the round-about where vehicles exit to join Hoima Road. 

It is reported that the fuel truck was hit from the rear by a van, causing leakage of fuel from the tank of the truck. Many members of the community in the surrounding area especially “boda-boda” riders converged at the area and they scrambled to siphon the leaking fuel. The truck, however, caught fire, exploded and in the process, many people were severely burnt. 

The emergency service, especially the Uganda Police Fire Brigade and ambulances rushed to the area to rescue the accident victims. The Police succeeded in putting off the fire but it was after a concerted effort. It is reported that it took some time to put off the inferno. 

The injured victims were transported by Police to Mulago National Referral Hospital. The victims started arriving at the hospital at about 11 p.m. The total number of patients received was 24; three were discharged after resuscitation but one was re-admitted. Twenty one of the victims admitted had critical burn injuries and the majority of them had more than 50 percent of their body surface area burnt. 

Almost all of the patients inhaled some smoke and dry heat leading to injury to the lungs. At Mulago Hospital, ten of the most injured victims passed on and 11 are still in hospital. 

Hon. Members, I would like to thank Mulago Hospital, Uganda Police and others for the swift response in dealing with this emergency. The hospital was able to mobilise resources, that is, additional human resource, medicines and medical supplies in response to the emergency that befell our people and our country. 

The response team mobilised additional beddings, blankets, bed sheets, mattresses and medical supplies from the National Medical Stores. The hospital was able to contain the situation satisfactorily. 

The team at the hospital worked with Police to monitor and identify any other cases that could have been admitted in some of the hospitals in Kampala. They, however, did not find any other patient admitted in other health facilities in Kampala.

In addition, the team continuously worked with Police to ensure that the list of victims on the Police list and that of the hospital tallied well; both those who had passed on and those who were alive. 

On the issue of post-mortem examination; following the tragedy, the Police brought in 28 dead bodies from the accident scene, ten more victims died in the hospital making the total number of the dead to be 38 and that is as of this morning at 10 a.m. Thirty one – 27 males and 4 females of the bodies have been identified and taken by relatives. The unidentified bodies are seven; six males and one female. Samples have been taken from the remaining bodies and claimants for confirmatory DNA tests. These tests are being conducted at the Government Analytical Laboratory at Wandegeya. The results are expected in a week’s time.

Mr Speaker, a disaster site is a very dangerous area. It must never be accessed by anyone without the clearance of the fire brigade or the police. I would, therefore, like to urge the general public to restrain themselves from entering an accident area especially one which involves a truck carrying dangerous or inflammable material like petroleum products. 

In conclusion, despite the big numbers of critically injured patients, the medical and other emergency staff managed to contain the situation through prompt response, mobilisation of additional human resources and medical supplies. The remaining bodies will be identified using DNA tests. 

I wish to request honourable members to note the content of this statement and appreciate the support of honourable Members of Parliament, our partners like the Uganda Red Cross and the Uganda Burns Institute chaired by our own hon. Tim Lwanga and indeed, members of the general public as we continue to manage the victims of the tragic accident. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, we will limit the comments on this report to 30 minutes. I will start with the shadow minister of health. 

3.00
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Michael Bayiga Lulume): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the Minister of Health, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda for the statement well-made. 

The Leader of the Opposition and his team also visited the hospital yesterday. The statement runs short of appreciating the contribution of the Opposition to the families. We should have been a sticking point, that as leaders, we made a good expression of support to the victims of the fire. 

We went to express our support to the hospital and also to make our own observations about how we can make the victims survive and also to advise Government accordingly. To choose Mulago Hospital, I think, was the right decision because the National Referral Hospital is the only hospital in Uganda with what is known as a Burns Unit. This Burns Unit is supposed to have 40 beds but definitely, because of demand, it is congested with only 80 beds and we want to salute the doctors for the good work well done, including the support, especially the nurses who are doing a very good job. 

For the information of this Parliament, statistics will reveal that in a lifetime, one person in 100 will get a burn and it is also recommended internationally, that at least, for every 10 million people at least, there should be a burns unit of around 200 beds and each of the burns unit, which I am trying to describe has certain characteristics. It should be having decent beds which should be separated from each other at least by three metres. It should be having monitors for each of the patients for the vital signs and should be equipped with ECG machines to monitor the heart function.

It should also be able to have a sterile area where patients can be bathed. It should also be equipped with oxygen. It should have human resource, which should include at least three consultants, five medical doctors and at least three to four nurses to man each of the beds. It should have a theatre with three operating rooms very ready to receive any patient for surgical intervention.

You should have a 24 hour functioning laboratory to monitor gas, electrolytes and bacterial infection. You should have a fridge which should also be equipped with blood just in case they need to resuscitate patients with transfusion. They should have limitless access to sterile sundries such as cotton wool, gloves, goose, silver based dressing etcetera.

You should have a skin bank just in case they need skin grafting, they should not hurry to just get people from home to get skin grafts. You should have a physiotherapy unit, catering services, space for relaxation and needless to mention, intense infection control mechanism. 

Mr Speaker, in contrast, our burns unit despite the fact that the doctors and nurses are doing a good job, it falls short of the characteristics of a burns unit with 80 beds, which are congested in a 40 bedroom space. Unfortunately, what should be a sterile bath is a bathtub which does not drain and it is extensively rusty. 

Therefore, Mulago Hospital Burns Unit does not really qualify for a true burns unit. It is an isolation area for burns patients despite the fact that the medical experts have done a great job to ensure that patients survive. The cost of treating each of the patients of burns is not less than Shs 100 million and when you multiply you know what it means and with our low investment in health care, it should be able to inform our kind of actions in future.

Certainly, and to cut the story short, it should be recommended that each of the regional referral hospitals should at least have a burns unit of 20 beds given the statistics that we have put up. Such a burn unit should be equipped to have characteristics of a true burns unit. Otherwise, we shall continue to lose patients who would have been saved.

A number of people have been trained to handle burns patients and many of them, according to the medical experts that we interacted with, remained outside the country for obvious reasons of motivation of health workers. We have some recommendations that we had made and we would want hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, who is the new Minister of Health, to take them very seriously. We take you in high esteem and I hope with this rude awakening of Ugandans especially the NRM Government, which you are serving, you should be able to lead us somewhere in terms of healthcare.

We propose that the Mulago burns isolation centre be modernised to a true burns unit. Let us have enough doctors and motivate them. Each of the beds can be manned by at least four nurses. The burns unit in Mulago Hospital, which should be having 320 nurses manning itis only manned by 14. Fourteen others are being distributed in other areas within the theatres. So, this is a very important piece of information. 

Secondly, let us have in each of the regional referral hospitals including Moroto Hospital, which I visited recently - the Minister of Health needs to visit the people and see a regional referral hospital, which is now at the level of Health Centre III or less. Even that one should have a burns unit. Let the people access healthcare.We should be in position to train those posted in care for burns because it is observed. 

Protect me, Mr Speaker, from somebody who would like to cross the Floor because of my speech. 

The doctors in Mulago Hospital implore this Government to recruit more doctors and nurses and have them trained to ensure that the health workforce not only in Mulago Hospital but allover the country is well trained and motivated to stay at work to save our population.

The rude awakening of our country on the accident is a very bad incident but we should be able to awaken ourselves especially those in Government to ensure that health care is given priority and to ensure that the only burns unit we claim to have should be upgraded. Let us have those monitors, let us have oxygen, let us have a sterile area where people can get sterile bath and so on. These are basic things, which can be put in what we call a national referral hospital like Mulago. 

With those few words, Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for giving us this opportunity to make our response to the Minister for Health.

3.05 
MR SSEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the minister for the statement. I also thank the shadow minister of health. The issue cuts across all the ministries because we are looking at the tail end of what has happened. We are sorry about what happened and about our people who continually get burnt because this is not the first time. Very many of these accidents have happened but the situation is; should we ask ourselves; is it poverty, is it lack of the ministries coming out to warn our people about the dangers of confronting such hazardous phenomena, what is behind all this? What is the situation?  

Therefore, apart from the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Works and Transport should also come out, the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Gender and all these ministries. Why? Hon. Members, you know what happens when you have got these grid locks. I am always worried whenever I drive near a lorry or tanker in the jam. Most of these tankers find us in the grid lock and if you find somebody with a bad heart, he can do anything in such a situation. 

I can give you an example; there is a petrol station called Gaz around Kanyanya, where every evening, there are around three tankers of fuel trying to park and unload. But imagine a situation, if there is a fire and there are many houses surrounding this petrol station. That is why I say that it is cutting across all ministries. How many petrol stations do we have? And this is just the people of - imagine what would happen in Kampala if such a situation arose.

Therefore, the Ministry of Transport should come out, Internal Affairs and Health will come in later, after the hazards have occurred but we must nip this in the bud before it happens. Yes, we can talk about the referral hospitals and it is good but we must prevent what would happen in Uganda when something of such a magnitude takes place.

I bring in ministries like that of Information because they must be in the statement - it is not reflected. They should come out with information and play jingles on radio about such incidences that it is wrong just like we did with AIDS. That is equally wrong for our youth or anybody to go near such accidents. It should be periodically aired out on TV and all media and that is why the ministry of information should also come in –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: I thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the Member is giving and passing on useful information to everybody here. Really, when it comes to the issue of accidents, there should not be any leader who should be left out - and he mentioned ministries that should be doing that job and what have you. I think we are all leaders, including members of Parliament. We have got that responsibility to protect our people. [Hon. Member: “Order.”] Don’t you think that members of Parliament should also play a vital role in sensitising these people on the way they should behave on our roads? As much as I agree that it is our responsibility to lead, I believe that every Member, including the citizens themselves have a right and responsibility to protect the lives of Ugandans through sensitisation.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, I was waiting for the clarification but I have not got it and do not know what I am going to respond to. It was a clarification and – (Interjections) - protect me from the minister, Mr Speaker. But any way in good spirit, if you have visited the Northern Bypass, which falls under the docket of the minister who has been holding the Floor giving me clarification, the road is narrow and they are supposed to put there signs and at the same time, every week, many people die there.  
What is there that they have put as a ministry to limit the “boda-bodas” using the highway that are every week killing people? This is a highway and these are some of the things that are cross-cutting. It is true that even we, must come in but what have we put in the process to eliminate the death and carnage on that road? It is a highway and people should not just access it. 

When we come to the oil tankers, we should all work in tandem but the ministry – you wait for our Government when it comes into power. Maybe that is when we can show the example but the bottom line is we should all, with you taking the lead, limit the transportation of fuel, the number of petrol stations and even the hours of transportation of this fuel because some day somebody like the tourists we have are going to create havoc. 

This is equivalent to a missile if you look at those tankers. Somebody with a bad heart will come and harm the entire city, unless we all wake up in good spirit and we stem that. Otherwise, it is going to be bad. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

3.17
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister and the Government for the quick response and the aid that they have given to the victims of the accident. The offer of Shs 5 million by the President was the right move for these families. I thank His Excellency, the President, for this.  

Secondly, I would also wish to also thank the Government for the construction of the Northern Bypass because if this incident had happened in the middle of the city, it was going to cause more havoc. I would like to inform the minister that the trailer did not get the problem from where the accident occurred. We got in touch with the turn-boy of the trailer. This trailer was leaking from Jinja Road and they branched off to the Northern Bypass and the driver was just looking for a place to park. 

When they reached that point, the driver went and approached a traffic officer at the roundabout and when he talked to the traffic officer, he did not respond positively. So, the driver and the turn-boy moved away from this vehicle and went far because the traffic officer advised them to go to the police station and report that the truck was leaking. So, the “boda-boda” boys began siphoning the fuel. It took about 20 or 30 minutes before this other vehicle hit the truck from the rear. 
When this other vehicle hit the truck from the rear, the hole on the fuel tanker expanded and more fuel was now coming out. It took close to another 20 minutes and that is why the driver and the turn-boy of this particular truck are all safe. This is because they had detected this problem and if there was quick response, they would have saved these lives. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, my request is that Police should tell us the right thing because the driver is there, the turn-boy is there. They should give us this information because if we do not get the right information, we cannot get the right cure for this. 

My other point is that the Northern Bypass has become a death trap for our people. Leave alone this particular accident but robberies and very many other forms of havoc happen along this road. We do not have any police posts from point one to where it ends and so, something should be done on the Northern Bypass. We should also have control over the fuel trucks. At what time should they move? Because if they move in the middle of a traffic jam at 7.30 or 8p.m. when we are picking the kids from school - because if this truck had just burst, we were going to see many deaths of even more innocent people. 

So, I would urge Government to get the right information from the people who were on the scene other than this because what people are actually telling us is different from what the minister has informed us.

3.21
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am the Member of Parliament for Namungoona, where this incident happened. Because of that, I got time in the wee hours of that very night to visit the scene. I would like the minister to understand that there are three elements of what happened in Namungoona; one was the actual accident that involved a fuel tank. The second one is the outbreak of fire that has so far – as it is claimed – killed about 40 people. Then the third element is the Police response to the actual accident.

Mr Speaker, in between the actual accident and the incident of fire, there was an interval of about one hour. Police could not come to cordon off the accident scene and that is why – and this truck was carrying petrol, which is dangerous. The accident happened at a round-about which for about a whole year, just up to last December, was a police station, with a tear gas truck and about 40 police officers –(Interruption)

MR KATOOTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. By the time the accident happened, I was awake. I was sober. It took a little time for the Police to cordon off the place and the whole Northern Bypass was closed off and no one could have access to it. Is the Member, therefore, in order to lie that the Police did not act swiftly? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I was not in Namungoona and I was nowhere near the Northern Bypass. So, I cannot rule on a matter of facts of that nature. 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. No wonder, my colleague from Katerera – like I mentioned in the beginning, I am the area Member of Parliament. It was not until after one hour that Police arrived and it was not after the fire outbreak that Police came. So, there had not been any response to the actual accident involving a fuel tank. Police could only respond to the outbreak of fire, actually, after about 30 minutes. We wonder what happened to the police post that had existed there for about one year. 

Mr Speaker, as a Member of Parliament representing most of the bereaving families, allow me say this. His Excellency, the President made a pledge of Shs 5 million for each of the bereaved families when he visited the accident scene. This morning, I spoke to three families and they told me that whoever goes to claim for the money is told that somebody else took it. Here I am talking about the real bereaved families and we are wondering if this is not a political gimmick because you cannot ascertain that there were other people who were given that money. Thank you.

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure because when you look at the purpose of the minister’s statement, it is quite clear that it is to inform Parliament on the status of the victims. But there are issues hooked up in this; Ministry of Works – worthiness of the truck moving on the road – because if a truck can just be knocked and the fuel tank bursts open, that is a question that requires an answer from the Ministry of Works.

Secondly, you have heard the concern about the Police, their response and so on. And I thought that the Ministry of Health have played their part. But the Ministry of Internal Affairs should be able to let us know – because every time I travel all the way from the North to Kampala, I find trucks loaded with charcoal and yet, there are very many traffic police officers on the road negotiating to the extent that many accidents are caused because of that. 

So, the point of procedure I am raising is whether it is not right for us to listen to the works and internal affairs ministers so that we are informed in order to debate this fully instead of talking about the status – which we do appreciate that the Ministry of Health have done their best in the circumstances. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I was going to ask the chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee after which I was going to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs. But now that you have also advised, I will ask the Minister of Works. And I had allotted 30 minutes for this discussion; we have two minutes left.

3.29
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. Our sympathies and condolences go to the families that lost their loved ones in the accident. In the same vein, I would like to thank the health workers who were involved in saving the lives of the few people that were able to make it through. 

I would also like to say that last week, I had a patient in Mulago and I learnt through experience that in spite of what we talk about health workers – in spite of the inefficiency on the part of some of them, when you go down there, particularly the Uganda Heart Institute, where I was for some time - I got to learn that many health workers are very dedicated and work 24 hours to save lives. (Applause) To that extent, I would like to thank them for the work they are doing for this country.  

But, Mr Speaker, out of what has been reported, I have seen how disasters are managed in some countries. I am a board member of Uganda Red Cross and through that organisation, I have learnt that in many countries, they have disaster-monitoring units located somewhere so that if accidents of this nature happen, they are able to coordinate activities in a very short time. Honestly, for an accident of this magnitude to take place and we get patients who have been burnt being taken to hospital after one and a half hours, it is possible that even those that could have been saved may have died because of the time lapse. May I propose that Government thinks about having some sort of units to specifically monitor disaster-prone areas so as to reinforce the institutions that we have.

And lastly, this Parliament has passed motions to thank the Uganda Red Cross for the work it has done in complementing the work of Government, particularly, in times of disasters. When you talk about the floods in Teso, the disasters in Buduuda, Ebola and even this very disaster, the role of the Uganda Red Cross is mentioned.

However, Mr Speaker, this is an institution that gets more or less no support from Government. May I now call upon Government to look at the presidential pledge of the Shs 2.9 billion to Uganda Red Cross? This money will help it build capacity. Yes, we keep talking about blankets, basins, food, but you realise that this institution is only surviving on the mercy of the people who are very kind to us.

In that regard, may I also propose that Government strictly looks at a way of urgently addressing the matters of Uganda Red Cross? I am saying this because, if for example, you talk about blood, you still realise that the Uganda Red Cross plays a very big role in its collection, but with no money. I thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity.

3.32
MR TIMOTHY LWANGA (NRM, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. While I thank Government for having swung in action and the Minister of Health for what he has done and while he said the hospital was able to contain the situation satisfactorily, I want to ask him to add the phrase, “under the circumstances.” I am saying this because we are in a big mess. 

As Dr Lulume said, this burns institute is run by the hospital but it is like a privately funded unit because the budget of about Shs 500 million usually comes from our friends, the Interplast in Holland. But you need to realise that aid has been cut off. That means we are in a mess.

Currently, we need surgical knives and other medicines plus dressing materials worth Shs 39 million. We also need two ICU ventilators at Shs 94 million. The other things we need are: eight monitors at Shs 40 million, one warmer at Shs 51 million, and funding for 50 members of staff who are looking after these people. That totals to Shs 224 million.

Although for the last few days, we have been able to feed the patients, we have now run out of money. As of now, we need at least Shs 21 million to ably look after these people for the next six weeks. 

Mr Speaker, my plea to this House is that we should find a way of getting money so that we can save more lives. It is very sad for anyone to go to hospital and you see a young man at the verge of dying and when you go back, Dr Ssentongo tells you, “Tim, he has gone.” That is very bad. Let us forget about the roads; we can do that later. Let us get these there. Each one of us is a candidate. Let us get money – even if it is Shs 1 billion, let us give it to the burns unit, to make it perfect. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, when this accident happened, it was the Police that arrived at the scene first. And when NTV captured footage in which the reporters interviewed some of the witnesses, many said, “Aba police baduse amangune’mbiro.” That was a confirmation that the Police was the first to arrive –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, what have you just said? (Laughter)

MR JAMES BABA: I was saying people said the Police rescued the situation very fast by responding urgently. Actually, Mr Speaker, eight fire trucks, including ambulances got to that scene in a very short time. So, for anyone to say that the Police were not there is just not being honest with ourselves.

I want to thank the Minister of Health, Hon. Dr Ruhaka Rugunda for acknowledging the role of the Police and –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. I want to seek some clarification. The time between the time the accident occurred – when you drive along Entebbe Road, you come across stationed police cars almost between 100 to 200 metres. I want to think that the Northern Bypass could not have been an exception to such police surveillance.

So, could it be that by omission, there was no police presence along Namungoona-Hoima Road at that time? Is that the reason they took about 30 minutes to get to the scene, as you want to say?

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, for that kind of tragedy, you do not need the ordinary police; you need the fire trucks that were at Kawempe and other police stations. One didn’t need the ordinary police with no equipment. Even common sense will tell you that. (Laughter)

Secondly, hon. Members said something about Police work along the highways and the way vehicles move without lights but overloaded with charcoal. I would like to say that since the launch of the Road Safety Week – and I actually compliment hon. Alice Alaso, on the Floor of Parliament, for the work she is doing as the leader of that team – we are tightening our regulations. We are going to be tough and let nobody scream when the Police begin to operationalise the strict regulations. I thank you.

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRANSPORT (Dr Stephen Chebrot): Mr Speaker, I wish to state that accidents usually occur. But the other thing is that accidents can be prevented from occurring. On this particular incident, the information we have is that one of the vehicles that was coming from behind rammed into the trailer loaded with fuel. Under normal circumstances, if the two vehicles were still there, we would send a team to go and carry out some investigations to establish the mechanical conditions of both vehicles. But in these circumstances, both vehicles were burnt beyond recognition. So, we are merely waiting for the investigations, which the Police will carry out so we can inform the House on what exactly happened –(Interruption)

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister on whether we have a policy on the transportation of inflammable material like it was the case. I also would like to find out, if that is in place, then what happened and how are these trucks guided - because they usually move in the middle of town? How do you monitor the movement of such materials? It is good the accident happened at night. Had it happened during the day, when there is normally traffic jam along that highway or if it had happened in the middle of town, where we have buildings and a lot of traffic – I need to get that clarification from you, hon. Minister.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I come from Masaka and I know what happens along Masaka Road. I want to know from the minister whether in Uganda, buses have speed governors. Two, when constructing roads - I know the Northern Bypass is one of the modern roads in Uganda. The minister is a well-travelled man and in most parts of the world, where I have gone, such roads like the Northern Bypass have water sources which help fire brigade to refill when they run out of water. So, let him tell us the major areas in Kampala where we have fire hydrants. 

Even with buildings, modern technology demands that every modern building should have hydrants. So, tell us whether the Ministry of works has such an arrangement in place. 

Lastly, when you talk to Police, they complain about you, that you have failed them by not placing road signs along roads. So, tell us how far you have gone with that. On Masaka Road, there is a company, which uses cardboards – manila paper- for signs, to alert the users about road construction. 

DR CHEBROT: I would like to thank the two hon. Members for the issues they have raised. The whole concept of creating the Northern Bypass was to decongest the city and also to allow flammable trucks to bypass the city so that they do not come inside the city. 

The second issue was whether there is a policy regarding flammable substances. I wish to inform you that if you had read the regulations, which we have already put in place, there is a provision on how flammable goods like petroleum products are supposed to be moved through the city. That policy is within the new regulations we have in place. 

On the issue of road signs, Ugandans have developed a very bad habit. When we construct a road, we put up all road signs on those roads. Then some crafty Ugandans steal the signs. Let me give you an example of Kisoro Road; they stole the signs and even the road lights; even things of no value. They use them to make charcoal stoves. So, please, Ugandans, do not remove those road signs.

MR KAWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I believe this statement was made in the spirit of making post-mortem and also to avoid future occurrence of similar problems. 

Hon. Ssewungu has raised the issue of water hydrants. That is the problem we have in Kampala Central. Actually, I wanted to engage the Minister in charge of Kampala on this matter. Most of the water hydrants in Kampala were destroyed. And the question to the Minister of Works is, did the design on the Northern Bypass provide for water hydrants? 

Is it procedurally right, therefore, for the minister to resume his sit without clarifying on the issue of water hydrants?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the issues that have arisen as a result of the discussion of the ministerial statement from the Minister of Health are wider than the statement and we cannot have time enough to exhaust all the issues that are arising right now. Can I propose that since it is inter-ministerial now, I task the Leader of Government Business to consult with the respective ministries that this matter touches – the fire and water hydrants and come back with a statement to the House at an appropriate time, so that this matter is debated comprehensively and all the issues are resolved? 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will be following up on this because this matter is important and then, we see how this can be resolved. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTON THE SUPERVISION OF TELECOMMUNICATION COMPANIES

3.48
THE MINISTER OF COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to make a clarification on this ministerial statement, which arose out of the statement that was made yesterday by hon. Winifred Kiiza. (Interjections) Let me clarify, then you can ask whether there are copies or not. (Interjections) I am not making a ministerial statement. I said I am rising to make clarification on a ministerial statement. 

The requirement for this statement arose from a statement by hon. Winifred Kiiza about telephone messages where people sent messages in Kasese that water in Kasese had been poisoned –(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I had no intentions of disturbing the honourable member, save for making sure that we observe the Rules of Procedure. In an instance where the minister who was supposed to make a statement does not have that statement, is it necessary for him to come and narrate stories, which are totally un-understandable as if he does not know what he is supposed to do? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please continue.

MR NASASIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will leave my friend, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, in peace. The statement is not there because the issue arose from SMSs threatening people in Kasese about poisoned water. Under such circumstances, we carryout investigations; we go backwards and face the culprits. 

The investigations are going on and I think what this House is interested in is what action has been taken rather than just coming here to make a statement without content. 

So, I beg that this House gives me time; say, by this time next week, we shall have got all the information and then I shall make a substantive statement with results. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Minister, the statement should not only be restricted to Kasese, because there are complaints about all these bulk messages and they are wondering whether it is a regulated affair. So, it should include that as well.

MR NASASIRA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

LAYING OF PAPERS

BUDGET SPEECH FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you remember that in my communication, I dealt with that item on the cultural rights and the exercise of that by cultural leaders. I gave a communication on that subject. It is coming back later tomorrow. (Members rose_) You were not here when we started the House. (Laughter)

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr MatiaKasaija): Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on Table the Budget Speech, Financial Year 2013/2014 made by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 13 June 2013. I wish to lay.

TH DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the Budget Speech.

LAYING OF PAPERS

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

3.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr MatiaKasaija): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Vote 008 and Vote 130.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee.

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER

3.54
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence that I come later for that - that is tomorrow.

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF PUBLIC SERVICE

3.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Ms Sezi Mbaguta): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay the ministerial policy statement for Vote 005, Ministry of Public Service, and Vote 146, Public Service Commission dated June 2013. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee.

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR MINISTRY OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES

5.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INDUSTRY (Mr James Mutende): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, for votes 015, 110 and 154.  I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee.

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER (Ms Betty Bigombe): Mr Speaker, Sir –(Laughter)-please, do not distract me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From the Hansard, it will read “Mr Speaker, sir, please, do not distract me.”

MS BIGOMBE: Mr Speaker, Sir, I dare not say that. Could I please, bring it tomorrow?

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE PRESIDENCY

5.57
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the ministerial policy statement for the Presidency containing vote 001, Office of the President, Vote 002, State House, Vote 107, Uganda AIDS Commission, Vote 112, Ethics and Integrity, Vote 159, External Security Organisation, for the financial year 2013/2014.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee.

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOER KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY

5.58
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on Table the ministerial policy statement for the Financial Year 2013/2014 for KCCA, vote 122. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee.

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES

3.59
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM AND WILD LIFE (Ms Maria Mutagamba): Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on Table a ministerial policy statement for the 	Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, Vote 022 and Vote 117, Uganda Tourism Board, for the year 2013/2014.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is committed to the appropriate committee.

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
4.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND CULTURE (MsLukiaNakadama): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the ministerial policy statement for Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for Financial Year 2013/14, Vote 018.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is committed to the appropriate committee. 

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Can I ask the minister to bring it in tomorrow?

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS

4.01
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is committed to the appropriate committee. 

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRANSPORT (Dr Stephen Chebrot): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Works for the financial year 2013/2014, Votes 016, Ministry of Works and Transport; Vote 113, Uganda National Roads Authority; Vote 118, Uganda Road Fund and Vote 500, Local Governments. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is committed to the appropriate committee.

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT

4.03
THE MINISTER OF ETHICS AND INTERGRITY (Fr Simon Lokodo): I request that I present it tomorrow.

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF DEFENSE

4.04
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the Ministry of Defence ministerial policy statement, Vote 004, for financial year 2013/14. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is committed to the appropriate committee.

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

4.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (Dr Zerubabel Nyiira): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries policy statement, Votes 010, 121, 125, 142, 152, 155, 160 and 501 to 852 for the financial year 2013/2014. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee. (Applause)

4.06
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Local Government for Vote 001, Ministry of Local Government, Vote 147, Local Government Finance Commission and votes 501 to 778 for all local governments in Uganda, for the financial year 2013/2014. I beg to lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee. 

STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (ELECTION OF REPRESENTATIVES OF PROFESSIONAL BODIES), REGULATIONS, 2012

4.07
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table –(Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a procedural matter, aware that the Minister for Kampala has made amendments to present a statutory instrument, attempting to circumvent the process of court, which he is aware of. 

Parliament received a petition about Kampala and attendant matters, which, of course, was never disposed of as you are all aware. Instead, a report was forged but that is a matter for another day. 

Mr Speaker, I remember, in your position that time, you actually guided and went through a process of constituting a select committee of this House to further investigate into these matters and I understand the committee was given 21 days and to-date, it has never taken off to further investigate these matters. 
I am also aware that this particular instrument the minister is attempting to bring to the House contains issues that concern election of councillors representing professional bodies, yet, it was one of the issues for investigation by the select committee.

In addition, the honourable Minister for Kampala, against the advice of the Attorney-General, went ahead to constitute a tribunal to investigate these matters. I am also aware that the Lord Mayor of Kampala petitioned court seeking judicial review about the manner in which this tribunal was constituted. I am aware that Justice Zehurikize - I think in the next 14 days – [Hon. Members: “Nine days”] - nine days, I am advised - is about to deliver judgment on these matters. 

The honourable Minister for Kampala, aware of all these issues obtaining and aware of his various attempts to circumvent court and of recent, Mr Speaker, you are aware that the same minister defied a court order relating to the issue of taxes and he went ahead using what he termed as powers vested in him by a particular law other than the Constitution –(Interjections)–

I am trying to deliver my point and I know the reason Members are agitated is because they prefer that the due process of the law is circumvented to achieve particular aims.

My procedural matter is that the minister, by coming up with this instrument, is trying to variously circumvent the process of court by trying to act as though he has actually done what court is investigating and about to make judgment about.

Mr Speaker, can we be guided as to whether the minister can proceed, yet, he is aware of these issues? Is he procedurally right to proceed, aware of these issues?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let me deal with this.  A statutory instrument arising from the authority of an Act of Parliament or Acts of Parliament has been issued. Those instruments were issued in circumstances that require Parliamentary approval. The bringing of the statutory instruments that have now been gazetted is for purposes of laying on Table, for it to be transmitted to the appropriate committees for handling and coming back to the House for Parliament to approve. 

If it is not approved by Parliament, the instrument will not take effect. The process the minister is engaged in is to lay the instrument on Table and I will thereby ask for it to be sent to the appropriate committee for handling, where all those issues and objections can be raised and the committee can come back and say that this matter is “dead” on arrival and we will not proceed with it. That will be for the committee. 

But for the laying on Table, there is no violation of any order on that. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: I thank you very much for your guidance, which I respect very much and hold in high esteem. I do not intend to question it in anyway because the discretion may remain with the committee of Parliament to advise the whole House. 

But, Mr Speaker, where I seek your guidance, is on the conduct of the Minister of the Presidency because the Attorney-General is the official legal advisor for all the arms of Government in Uganda, including Parliament. Are we in order as this august House to proceed listening for even a minute to the Minister of the Presidency who has total disregard for the official legal advisor to the Government of Uganda, the Attorney-General? He has publicly defied written advice from the learned Attorney-General.  

Mr Speaker, with your guidance, don’t you think it would be prudent to have the conduct of the Minister of the Presidency investigated –(Laughter)- (Applause)- so that we can see if we can give him proper audience in this House? I seek your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the matter before me is to receive a statutory instrument enacted by the authority of an Act of Parliament and transmit it to the committee. The issue of whether the minister has acted in one way or another in violation or in conformity with certain things is not before me. I have not received any complaint from the Attorney-General before this House to invoke my authority to begin going into those matters. My issue is just to receive those instruments and transmit them to the appropriate committee. 

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the same vein, you have said that your work is to receive and this Parliament is receiving policy statements. The same minister has just laid on Table the policy statement for Kampala Capital City Authority and yet, we know that there was no budget. Secondly, one of the reasons they are accusing the Lord Mayor is that the council is not sitting. So, how did they get the policy statement when the council is not sitting? I am asking whether this Parliament should receive the policy statement, which the minister has just laid on Table. Is it a true policy statement for Kampala Capital City Authority?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am sure we should set aside two weeks to discuss issues of Kampala City. But that is in the future. For now, we have received ministerial policy statements; they are going to the committees – for the votes that take money from the Consolidated Fund. Hon. Members, we have received those and now, we are in the process of having some instruments laid on the Table for onward transmission to the committees. 

Hon. Minister, proceed.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I beg to lay on Table statutory instruments for the Kampala Capital City (Election of Representatives of Professional Bodies), Regulations, 2012. I hereby lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the instrument and it is transmitted to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling because it requires parliamentary approval before that instrument can work.

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (MODIFICATION OF THE LAND ACT IN ITS APPLICATION TO THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY), 2013

4.15
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me take the point of procedure and then point of order. (Laughter)

MR SSEGGONA LUBEGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure to inquire as to whether the minister responsible for Kampala Capital City Authority is proceeding well, by assuming the power not invested in him. When I look at the order paper under item 4(b) and the instrument the minister seeks to bring here – and therefore, to use Parliament as a medium of transmission – it reads: “(b)	The Kampala Capital City (Modification of the Land Act in its Application to the Kampala Capital City Authority), 2013”. 

First and foremost, the Minister responsible for Kampala Capital City Authority has no powers under the Act to modify it because the modification, as I understand it, is actually an amendment. And the procedures for amending an Act of Parliament are basic to everyone who has come to Parliament.

Secondly, the issues of amending or modifying the Land Act are not provided for in the KCCA Act, which is the basis upon which the minister is seeking audience. Are we proceeding in the right way by even attempting to receive this proposed statutory instrument, in the first place, to the extent that it is brought by a minister who has no powers under that Act? And I do not want to be accused of discourtesy – if I were outside Parliament, I would say “masquerading” but being here and governed by the rules of this House, I am constrained not to. (Laughter) Guide me, Mr Speaker, on that procedural point. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, instruments that are for the approval of Parliament are made by the authority of an Act of this Parliament. It has been raised that this particular instrument has been enacted without the authority of an Act of Parliament. Is that correct, Deputy Attorney-General? 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, my understanding and basis of the proposed statutory instrument derives its mandate from section 78 of the Kampala Capital City Act (Application of other Enactments). That is the marginal note. The minister – that is the responsible minister, hon. Frank Tumwebaze, may, with the approval of Parliament and by statutory instrument, modify the provisions of any enactment in its application to the Authority or the entities existing under the Authority. I rest my case.

MR SSEGGONA LUBEGA: Mr Speaker, how I wish – and for the Minister of Works, this is your time to listen. How I wish the learned Deputy Attorney-General could read this section together with section 82 (1) and (2) of the same KCCA Act – I do not need to read; I am only reciting because I know it – which empowers – at least for the content, just listen, hon. Minister of Works. 

You see, Mr Speaker, these are serious matters and I want to help the minister. So, this is the provision which empowers – (Interruption)

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, the item on the order paper currently before us is “Laying of Papers”. (Interjections) Yes, “Laying of Papers; (i) Policy Statements (ii) Statutory Instruments”. That is the order paper item. Now, this House has approved its own Rules of Procedure to guide it in the order of business in this House. I want to refer to Rule 30(2): Laying of Papers, which reads: “As soon as the clerk announces papers for laying, the papers shall be laid on the Table without question put.” Sub-rule (5) says: “A paper laid on Table may be referred to the relevant committee.”

Mr Speaker, is it order for Members to continue interfering with the process of laying of papers by putting up questions when the rules are very clear, which rules were also made by us? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is true that the item on the agenda is “Laying of Papers” and a statutory instrument has been captured as such for a paper to be laid on the Table for analysis by the respective committee. But a question has arisen as to whether that paper is properly brought before the House for laying. That is the matter I am investigating so that we can have – because for a paper to be laid before the House, it must be competent for that purpose. 

That is why we always inquire what date appears on a particular letter? What is its reference and who has authored it? That information usually helps us to understand what the document is all about. But you will also recall that we have rejected some documents from being laid on Table on account of all those things. So, these are procedurally correct issues and we are dealing with them properly.

However, on the issues that I have now heard under the section cited by the Attorney-General, I would like to say that it is indeed true that the minister in charge of that sector can prepare a statutory instrument, which can only come into effect upon approval by Parliament.

So, the only part of the process for Parliament to participate in its being in place is when it is laid and channeled to the appropriate committee. Should the committee report to the House saying the instrument holds no water, Parliament cannot approve it. Otherwise, we cannot reject it at this stage because it is made under the authority of an Act of this Parliament.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker for that wise guidance. I beg to lay on Table, the Kampala City (Modification of the Land Act in its application to the Kampala Capital City Authority)Instrument, 2013. I hereby lay it on Table.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. With me, is a judgment from the Court of Appeal in regard to Constitutional Application No.28 of 2011, arising out of Constructional Petition No.34.

Mr Speaker, I am not trying to serve you on the Floor of the House because I still recall what happened to hon. Jack Sabiiti who attempted to do the same. But in this case, where the applicants were Mr Nasser Kiyingi and a one Winnie – the first respondent was the Attorney-General and the second respondent was Kampala Capital City Authority.

The court, in its ruling ordered – with your permission, I beg to read page 22 of the ruling verbatim – that the second respondent, which is represented by that minister who has just fled the Frontbench, “… be and is hereby restrained in the interim, whether by itself, its agents, servants or employee, from acting on the advice of the Solicitor General contained in annexure F to the affidavit in support of this application and from its own motion, taking steps to disband Kampala District Land Board and from transferring its powers to Uganda Land Commission and also from creating a new board and from whether by itself, its agents or offices …” It is extensive.

Anyway, what I am saying is that the court has restrained the minister from doing what he is attempting to do. So, the point of order I am raising is: is it in order for the minister to try to involve Parliament in an activity that would be interpreted by the Judiciary as undermining - even Rule 64 of our Rules of Procedure? Is it also in order for the Minister in Charge of the Presidency to continually be irrelevant to this House unlike other ministers? I now beg to lay a copy of this court order that restrains the minister from doing what he has just done, on Table. Can I move a motion that he no longer be heard in this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are not yet at a stage where we can get into hearing evidence in regard to this subject. For as long as a document can be competently laid within the confines of our rules and the person has the authority under an Act of Parliament to do so - our committee will advise us on what to do with it.

Let the records capture that statutory instrument. It stands committed to the appropriate committee to handle it within the framework and report to the House for decision.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE STATUS OF THE OPERATIONS OF THE PRIVATE HEALTH SERVICES SUB-SECTOR IN UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you will recall that in yesterday’s sitting, at the point of matters of urgent public importance, arising from the death of Ms Remmy Wamala, leave was sought from the Speaker for a motion to be brought to the House, covering this subject. It is that motion that is coming up for debate. Hon. Member, can you please present the motion.

Excuse me, hon. Members, my attention has been drawn to which committee should receive this instrument. The Rules of Procedure are silent on issues of statutory instruments. The rules that I served under as the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs between 2004 and 2006, specifically stated, under Rule 23, that the responsibility of assessing the propriety of instruments issued under the authority of an Act of Parliament would rest with the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs committee of Parliament. 

However, that provision has since disappeared from our rules and there has been nothing in its place. But on the guidance by that precedent, I now refer this instrument, which is seeking approval by Parliament by way of assessing its legal validity and propriety and conformity with the provisions of the Act that gave the minister the authority – therefore, I refer both instruments to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

4.30
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to present this motion. This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament on the status of the operations of the private health services sub-sector in Uganda. Under rule 43 of the Rules of Procedure, the motion reads: 

“WHEREAS on 28th day of June 2013, Parliament was shocked to learn of the untimely death of Mrs Remmy Wamala, the Coordinator of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children arising from maternal health complications;

AND WHEREAS the circumstances surrounding Remmy’s death bring to light a matter of grave concern to all the people of Uganda to which the alarming maternal mortality rate in Uganda and the state of the private health services sub-sector

FURTHER, WHEREAS the International Hospital of Kampala, IHK, is famed among the professionally advanced private health service providers in Uganda; Remmy’s death calls into question the nature, the standard, quality and cost of private health services provided in Uganda;

AWARE THAT the national objective and directive principles of state policy have obligated the Government of Uganda to among others take cognisance of the significant role that women play in society; take all practical measures to ensure the provision of basic medical services to the populace; 

COGNISANT of the fact that since the early 1990s, Uganda recognised the importance of the private sector in the delivery of health services and that the private sector shoulders 50 to 60 percent of the burden of health services delivery in the health sector; 

FURTHER COGNISANT of the fact that as people’s representatives, the Parliament of Uganda is obliged to ensure its constituents’ among others;
    a) The standard of health services accessible to the majority of the population;
    b) The required level of professionalism in matters of the life and health;
    c) The accessibility and adequacy of health facilities in Uganda; 

Now, therefore, be it resolved by this Parliament that;
    1. Parliament collectively mourns the untimely death of Ms Remmy Wamala and extends its sympathies to the bereaved family and friends of the deceased. 
    2. Parliament condemns the gross professional negligence that was exhibited in the handling of Remmy’s case and occasioned her untimely and unfortunate death. 
    3. The Minister of Health commissions a study on the status of maternal health in the country for purposes of addressing the current challenge of maternal mortality in Uganda and to report his findings to Parliament within two months.
    4. An Ad hoc committee of Parliament be established to inquire into the status of the operations of private health service providers with HIK and one other private health service provider as case studies.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded; okay it is seconded by Member for Mityana, Member for Bukooli, Member for Kyegegwa – those secondments are enough – and the whole House. Would you like to speak to your motion in five minutes? 

But before that, please, allow me; I have detained children here. In the Public Gallery, this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Top Care Primary Education Centre, which is represented by hon. Betty Nambooze, Mukono Municipality. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them.(Applause)

MS MUTYABULE: The late Remmy Wamala started working with the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children in 2007. She has been a dedicated servant and she has been advocating for maternal and infant health all the time she has been with us. 

Wamala drove to International Hospital Kampala on 24 June 2013 and while there, she started feeling labour pains. She was admitted and she progressed during the labour up to 4 centimetres. In the morning of the 28 June 2013, the labour pains disappeared and also the contractions. She requested to be taken to the theatre for operation but the doctors declined. 

Remmy, as a fighter of maternal and infant health wanted to save her life so that she can be able to look after her children and also continue advocating for the health of women but she was not given the chance. 

What issues really arise from the death of Remmy? We are all aware that maternal mortality is a big challenge, more so in the Uganda health sector. Data available indicates that 16 women die every day giving birth and all this has been reflected also in Government hospitals. Nobody has been thinking about such things happening in private hospitals. But on the 28th, we learnt as Parliament that these issues happen in private hospitals and more so in such an international hospital. 

Remmy’s death also shows that there is lack of professionalism in the private health sector. This lady struggled from the 27th and progressed up to 4centimetres  and she saw that she could no longer go on because the contractions had stopped; the labour pains had disappeared. So, she requested the doctor to take her to the theatre – “Bring the papers, I want to sign them”, but the health workers declined. 

I am told that if a woman is in labour and she has progressed up to 4centimetres, and then the contractions stop, it means that there is something wrong with the uterus. If the people who were handling Remmy were professional enough, they would have known that there is a problem with Remmy’s uterus and rushed her to theatre –(Interruption)

DR CHEBROT: Mr Speaker, I wish to let the House know that I am a professional gynaecologist and obstetrician as well. (Applause) I worked in this field for over 15 years in Nairobi. 

The point I am raising is, listening to what my colleague has said, I am really saddened that this could happened. This is because the practice is that when somebody has reached 4 centimetres, it means that she is in active labour but what happened to this lady is uterine inertia, which means the uterus is not contracting and what do you do? Simple thing, you rapture the membranes and sweep around the cervix to activate the uterus to contract.

If it fails, the first thing that you do is to set up a drip and put up what we call sintocinonoxytocine, this will contract the uterus. If she fails to go into active phase of labour, you must immediately rush her for a caesarean section. I would like to appeal to the relatives of the late, I do not have the notes with me but they should be advised to seek legal opinion. I will be willing to testify as an obstetrician about the mismanagement which occurred.
This is a serious issue; this is the only way by which we can teach doctors to behave themselves.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you, my sister, for allowing me to give this information. Personally, I do support the motion and I join my colleagues to share in the sorrow with the family for the loss of Remmy Wamala. The information I would like to give this House and specifically, to my brother Dr Chebrot who has offered to come as a witness, is that FIDA Uganda has taken on this case. They have collected a team of lawyers who are looking forward to receiving volunteers like you who are ready to testify in this case and they are taking IHK to Court. That is the information that I wanted to give.

Possibly, for purposes of this House, they are sending a message to all of us here in this House and to Uganda at large, that anybody with a similar matter, if you have evidence, you are free from any institution whether for Government or not, where you think there was negligence of some sort in a matter regarding deliveries of women, FIDA Uganda will be ready to avail free legal services to any Ugandan in such circumstances.

MR MEDARD SSEGGONA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First, I must make a declaration that I am a member of this forum, number two, that I have known Remmy since, both of us were young and our families are close, and I definitely grieve with the family that I know very well.

However, in my capacity as Shadow Minister of Justice and of course, applying a legal mind, I want to seek your procedural guidance, particularly on prayer number two.

That is at page 2, number two, is specifically for Parliament to condemn the gross professional negligence that was exhibited in the handling of Remmy’s death and occasioned her untimely and unfortunate death. Of course, it was untimely and unfortunate. But if we also go in to proceed like I will support with your permission later the establishment of an ad hoc committee of Parliament to inquire into those matters, I think we may not be proceeding well if we debated along the lines in number two because I believe if we establish this committee, the hospitals representatives will be invited to give their side.

But if we condemn in the plenary, where they have no audience, in future, we may incur some legal complications. I know the matters that touch the lives of our women, our wives - I am a married man, our mothers - I am somebody’s son, our children, our daughters, I am a father to daughters and our sisters - are very sensitive. 

I just invite the understanding of my colleagues when I raise this point and also having declared that I am close to this family that we need to exercise caution not only in adopting plea number two, but also in debating along those lines. Mr Speaker, that is why I am seeking your procedural guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, what has happened is serious and I am sure everybody knows that it is serious. The hospital knows that it is serious; Parliament knows that it is serious; the whole country knows that it is a serious matter when it happens at this level. It certainly raises some fundamental questions but if the House is going to be moved towards supporting the establishment of an ad hoc committee under plea four, then maybe, we should just consider that and deal with it so that issues that we do not have much evidence of do not go on our official records as evidence.

Therefore, if this is agreeable to the House, we could unanimously agree to just adopt those resolutions proposed that will facilitate the work of an ad hoc committee if it is to be established. That is what will be correct; in which case, we would go to specifically deal with what we want to pronounce ourselves on as Parliament, on the prayers that have been made by these people so that we selectively deal with the issues we can.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree with your guidance. I just want to say that I had thought of an amendment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We would then come to that if we agreed that we should adopt it that way. Then, we would go to the specific resolutions and do the amendments. (Members rose_) – she had not finished.

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true she was continuing with her submission and it is true that there are matters raised, whereby, one of them is to establish an ad hoc committee but you find that there are very many issues regarding especially private hospitals and clinics. If we went ahead to set up an ad hoc committee, this one would be particularly looking at Remmy’s death.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not correct.

MS KWAGALA: Thank you. Let me complete my procedural question, as to whether it would not be procedurally right for us to bring out all the pertinent issues regarding the treatment in private hospitals so that we come out with issues which we can target as Parliament. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think procedurally we are still on the right track. You are proposing that we enlarge resolution No.4 to capture all other private providers.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I thank you so much for your wise ruling. I want to thank my name mate but not my professional mate, the lawyer, hon. Sseggona.

Mr Speaker, I believe and I agree to your wise counseling and ruling. I did internship specifically in internal medicine and obstetrics and gynecology -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure. 

MS KABAKUMBA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am at a loss as to what we are debating. Hon. Mutyabule was still presenting and speaking to her motion and Dr Bitekyerezo raised on a point of information and yet she had not finished her submission.

Procedurally, we normally wait for the mover to finish and it is seconded and then we debate and give information and any other issues. So, is it procedurally correct for us to start debating and Members are really submitting notes instead of giving the mover the opportunity to conclude her motion and then we discuss or even amend the motion?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, one of the rules or principles is that, every motion eventually must have a decision on it. So you can take a week discussing a motion, or you can even take a month. But if a motion is agreed to and it leads to another comprehensive discussion to finalise that process, then you do not have to spend a lot of time at that stage. What was left was for the honourable mover of the motion to conclude, but when she was speaking a procedural point was raised that it might be proper if the House is of the opinion that this matter requires further investigation to establish more concrete evidence so that we can have an elaborate debate on the subject when it finally comes back.  

So, we were in the process of allowing her to conclude and then we would review the agreements and move on.  So can she conclude and then we see how to move? Yes, Mbarara?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, this time I wanted to give a professional submission similar or which is related to the one of Dr Chebrot for purposes of being very clear as Parliament and we do not go into problems. Yesterday, when we were here, one of us had a picture of the late Remmy – hon. Harriet Ntabazi had it and I am very sure if she has that picture, other people have got pictures. So these things are going to go to court as you have heard.

Now as a professional doctor, I saw on the body of late Remmy bruises on the face and the mouth was bleeding, which means the person had actually bitten her tongue. Now that to me clinically indicates that there was convulsion either secondary to hypoxia because of blood loss or there could have been eclampsia, which is convulsions and serious blood pressure rise during pregnancy. Now you may come here and start debating and you say that there was a rapture resulting from negligence when postmortem results are revealing something different; we shall look a bit unprofessional. So, I was of the view that we do not over debate, we conclude and follow your wise ruling. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you like to conclude? 

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, you can now see that the House is supporting your motion. So conclude.

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have really seen that the House is supporting the motion and hon. Bitekyerezo talked about the postmortem report. I have a partial copy of the postmortem examination from International Hospital, Kampala and I beg to lay it on Table.  

It is in the names of Mrs Wamala Remmy Nakintu dated, 29 June 2013 and the postmortem was carried out at 10.30 a.m. by Dr Mariam Kinene, Dr Kabu and Dr Onzivua – (Interjections) –I also beg to lay on Table the medical certificate of cause of death from IHK dated, 29 June 2013 and it is signed by Dr Onzivua. I beg to lay.

MR ODONGA OTTO: From IHK?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are those the two documents you wish to lay?

MS MUTYABULE: Yes. Mr Speaker, can I lay the motion?
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Do you wish to – are those the two documents you wish to lay? 

MS MUTYABULE: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How did you – because I see they are copies. Were you there? How did you get the copies? 

MS MUTYABULE: Mr Speaker, I got these copies from the husband to Remmy, Mr Wamala Godfrey.  

I wish to conclude because you are aware that it is a serious case that should be looked at. I have also got other two cases: there is one of Mrs Harriet Musana who delivered in the same IHK on 18 April 2012 and she went through a similar experience and she is ready to come and testify if the committee is put in place. We also have our own here working with the Parliamentary Press called Alice Lubwama. She was also almost dying from IHK –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you conclude?

MS MUTYABULE: And she is also ready to testify. Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up. Let us conclude this.

MS MUTYABULE: Okay. I want to take this opportunity –(Interruption)

MS ACHENG: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the Chairperson of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children for giving me the opportunity to share my information with you.   

I want to share with you, Mr Speaker and honourable members my painful experience which I went through when I gave birth to my last girl, who is now three years, at IHK. When I was in labour, I was treated in an unusual way; I was put to lie on back and wait for the time of delivering. I waited for three hours in that position. After giving birth, I also bled almost to death.  I was left in that position for two more hours unattended to and unstitched because I had some tears. In those two hours, I felt very cold wind entering me and I felt cold for three consecutive days. I was discharged and went back home. After one week, I developed a very terrible heart condition; my pressure went up and my heart was in bad shape. I went back to IHK and as I speak now, I am a heart patient – from that experience! I went to a lady who took me through a midwife – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, this is – 

MS ACHENG: I went back and registered my complaint to the midwife and the doctor but they denied; they said it was a postnatal disorder. But I believe I got the postnatal disorder as a result of mismanagement. I was handled in a very improper way and up to now I suffer from a heart problem and high blood pressure. I am not happy about – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member moving the motion, I would like you to conclude. All those issues are evidential issues that will be handled by the committee – if we agree to establish it; all of you will go to this committee and give these testimonies. But at this stage, we are not competent to receive this evidence. So, please, conclude.

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to conclude by thanking – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members!

MS MUTYABULE: I want to conclude by thanking all the MPs who rushed to IHK Hospital after the Remmy’s demise; those who stood by the grieving family; those who attended the burial and those who contributed condolences. I want to specifically thank the Government Chief Whip and the Opposition Chief Whip, who led the group that went to bury Remmy Wamala. I would also like to appreciate the staff of Parliament and her workmates, who stood by us. I also thank the development partners and Save the Children, who gave support towards the funeral arrangements. The staff of Parliament were led by Madam Helen Kawesa.

I also wish to appreciate the members of the family, especially her husband, parents and others who really did all they could to ensure that Remmy was sent off appropriately. I wish to call upon the MPs and staff who may not have had the opportunity to bury, that they could still condole since there is a paper going around. Remmy has left a baby who is still in IHK hospital struggling for his life, and on oxygen at the intensive care unit. And I know that the costs are going to be too much for the husband to handle alone. So, thank you, ladies and gentlemen, Members of Parliament and, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to present this motion and also for supporting it. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the spirit of the motion is that it should be taken to the next level, after which, possibly when the report comes back, there will be a more comprehensive debate. The House has agreed on how we are going to proceed. So, I am now going to go to the specifics of the prayers of the motion and we see which ones to adopt. There is prayer No.1 – I think we all agreed that it should be adopted. I put the question to that one.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For prayer No. 2, the House had agreed that it should be struck out because at this stage, we are not sufficiently informed to make that decision. Yes, honourable member for Mityana.

MS SSINABULYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yes, I agree that we cannot condemn IHK at this particular time. But what we can resolve as Parliament – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, it is not even talking about IHK; it is talking about gross professional negligence without mentioning anybody.

MS SSINABULYA: Okay. Mr Speaker, what we can resolve as Parliament – because we cannot establish the actual cause of death unless a maternal death audit is carried out. So I would wish that this motion resolve that the Ministry of Health constitutes a maternal death audit of this particular case so that we can establish the cause of death. This is what I want to add as one of the issues to resolve this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that agreeable? [Hon. Members: “Yes.”] So how is it going to be framed? Is that agreeable, hon. Minister? I put the question to the amendment proposed by the Member for Mityana for the establishment of the maternal death audit. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now we come to prayer No.3: “The Minister of Health to carry out a study on the status of maternal health in the country for purposes of addressing the current challenge and maternal mortality in Uganda and to report its findings to Parliament within two months.” Do we agree to that? 

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not know how better we should formulate prayer No. 3 because we have a 2001 Uganda Demographic and Health Survey by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics, which already gives statistics on maternal health. We also have the Partnership for Maternal Health, New Born and Child Health in partnership with IPU and Parliament of Uganda. The report is entitled “Maternal and Child Health Uganda”. It also gives statistics on the status of maternal health. So my point here is that the issue is not the study; the issue is actually the implementation of all the studies that Government has already done. So, I would wish that this be re-focused to ensure implementation rather than a study because – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So why don’t you re-formulate it so that we move forward?

MR ATIKU: Thank you, honourable colleague for giving way. The information I want to give you is that arising from those pronouncements, the Ministry of Health actually moved ahead to put in pace what we call “Maternal Mortality Audits”. Every day at every hospital that delivers, cases of mortality are documented with all the reasons and circumstances under which the mortality has occurred. So, Ministry of Health is in possession of a report that can guide this House on how to proceed on some of the challenges that have been raised. Thank you.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Speaker, I would like to move that No.3 should read: ”The Ministry of Health should lay on Table the report, within two months, on the implementation of the maternal road map, which was signed by H.E the President.” 

Two, we also passed here funding, in the last financial year, for recruitment of qualified staff. Three, the actual funding in respect to all the studies and the resource allocation on maternal health issues in the country -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that agreeable, members? Can we now take a decision on that particular resolution? Yes, Member for Workers.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Health and the various stakeholders have done a lot of work on this matter. The point really is action. But I would like to think that if we provided a motion - the resolution would cater for most of the issues in that direction. If we, for example, said that Government presents to this House, within a month, urgent measures to address maternal mortality in Uganda, it would be more appropriate. I think that would work for us because there are a lot of issues that cut across. 

The committee, which I chaired, did a lot of work on some of these matters. So, if Government presents measures, we can be able to refer them to the committee or something like that, before it can report to the House for the main debate. Otherwise, the point here is really actually action. Those issues of research and so forth are not vital for now because many actors have done this. The matter is already clear and what should be done is the case now. We only need Government to present to us a report that spells out the urgent measures to improve on that situation.

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As women, we are not interested in those statistics that continue to show how many of us die every day. We would like a statement that will assure us of the clinical quality; the outcomes management on these facilities; patients’ safety; the accreditation to show us how they determine their basic requirements and minimum standards; the compliance and professionalism in these facilities. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, how would that be structured? Wouldn’t it be captured the way hon. Dr Lyomoki has stated? Will that be different? I thought those would get into the details of the format that hon. Dr Lyomoki has proposed.

DR OMONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I buy the idea proposed by hon. Betty Amongi, together with what has been presented by hon. Dr Lyomoki. A lot has been done and research and data collection goes on every day. What this House wants to know is what is taking place now. But the House would also want to know the performance of those innovations that were aimed at addressing the issues of maternal health.

So, I would like to propose that prayer No.3 would read as follows: “That Government tables the performance of the road map on maternal health together with the recent innovations aimed at addressing the current challenges on maternal mortality in Uganda within one month”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I suggest that we list what is being discussed now as part of the terms of reference for the ad hoc committee to carry out inquiries into all those issues and compile a comprehensive report. That way, we will not take a decision on No.3 but to task the ad hoc committee to capture this particular resolution.

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If we include what they have been proposing in the terms of reference for the ad hoc committee, we might lose sight of what we want. In No.4, the prayer is that the ad hoc committee should inquire into the status of the operations of the private health service providers. 

So, if you include the issues on how Government is going about improving on the services geared at reducing maternal mortality – if you widen it so much, we might lose sight of this issue of inquiring into the operations of the private health service providers. The reason this was put in – it was triggered by this very serious case where people felt that the services being offered by the private health service providers may not be up to the required standards.

In the circumstances, I would prefer to leave this prayer alone. Maybe the other role could be assigned to the Government itself through the Minister of Health.

DR LULUME: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to believe in what the pre-current speaker has submitted that we would not want to lose what we want to achieve. There is a strategic plan on the acceleration of maternal health and we want to look at its implementation. This information can be provided to this Parliament by the Minister of Health, which I think hon. Ruhakana Rugunda can ably do. And from that, we can then question the extent of its implementation and the perfections or imperfections therein.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, but can we then get the best formulation?

DR LULUME: Mr Speaker, I have some issues on prayer No.4. But I have consulted with the Minister of Health and agreed that there are professional bodies like the Uganda Medical Council, which is doing its job today. A number of clinics have been visited. A number of fake documents have been found with reports being fed to the Ministry of Health from which the minister can provide us with answers to some of these questions.

Therefore, Parliament wants to constitute an ad hoc committee to take over the role of the professional bodies that are mandated to do that kind of work. However, if the minister can assure this House that these professional bodies have failed to do their work, then Parliament can take over their role.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are still handling prayer No.3. There are discussions that should be reformulated; I want a re-formulation not a debate. 

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My formulation will not be far from the submission of Dr Lyomoki. I request that he gives me information so that he formulates this for me. 

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree with you that we want a process over which we have parliamentary control because we have initiated this whole process. So we must reformulate them in such a way that it comes back to us. To that extent, Mr Speaker, I agree with you. 

But No.3 must fit within the terms of reference for which we are setting up the committee in No.4. We would therefore find it difficult to reformulate it before No.4. My proposal is that we bring No.4 to establish this ad hoc committee and in giving it terms of reference. Then we bring a reformulated No.3 to fit into this. 

I make my proposals in good faith, for people who may misunderstand me. I do not want us to spoil our game whereby every report which comes out of the committee is adopted and then somebody looks at it as unfair. So I moved conscious of the professional implications. 

In summary, I propose that first we deal with resolution No.4 and establish the committee by giving it terms of reference. We reformulate resolution No.3 into a term of reference for the ad hoc committee, in which case we avoid multiplicity of committees doing the same work.  If we ask the Ministry of Health to put up a committee to study the status, then that will be doing parallel investigations yet they can feed into our committee whatever they could be having. 

Finally, when we go to resolution No.4, I intend to move that we do not limit ourselves to the private sector; we go to the public as well. There is a case in point in Mityana – we have talked about this - where a mother died in the hands of medical professionals and the reason for them is that they did not have gloves. So these things are not only happening in private health providers, but also in public hospitals. We need to look at it comprehensively; that is the only way we are going to come up with recommendations that are beneficial to the country –(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you honourable member for giving way. I want to agree with the honourable member because just very few people go to private clinics. We also know that such cases happen in public hospitals. I have got an experience; I lost my niece in Mbale Hospital. She went to deliver and she bled to death. And that is not the only case; we lost a teacher in Mbale, the new Member of Parliament knows about it. She went to deliver and then she bled and died. Then I lost two people from Budadiri; they went to Mbale Hospital to deliver and they left them to die just like that. So we should also investigate public hospitals; they should be included in the investigation so that we get a report. 

MR SSEGGONA: I receive that information with gratitude. Mr Speaker, we must also find out why people opt for these private health facilities. Before we even go to condemn somebody who complements our effort as Government, we must also check ourselves. For that reason, I suggest that we include the public and No.2, draft the terms of reference as widely as possible so as to capture all the issues we want captured in resolution No.3.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, my submission is to the effect that these two proposals stay separate. I think so because the proposal on the ad hoc committee if adopted would have the specific mandate to look at what is going on in the private health facilities. For the five or six years I sat in the Committee on Social Services, the private health facilities  submitted to us a desire that we look at issues specific to them. We kept telling them that our mandate was the public facilities. So, they have issues even beyond what we are asking for now. That is why it would be helpful for the ad hoc committee to be set up specifically to look at that. 

The other reason why I propose that this stays separate and, therefore, we reformulate resolution No.3 is so that this House is specifically accorded opportunity to follow on commitment that Government has made here and we all know; unless we have forgotten. Government came to this Parliament about five years ago, for those who were here, and presented what they called “Maternal Health Road Map”. When we asked them for the funding, the loan and plans to accomplish this, they said, “Do not worry, we will bring you a loan”. They formulated that road map long ago. So this is the opportunity for us to call on them and say, “Come back to the House and show us what you have done with the road map”. 

So if you let me propose a reformulation, it will read like this: “Government presents to Parliament within a month a report detailing the implementation of -
    1. the Maternal Health Road Map;
    2. the Maternal Health Loan – this House passed a loan. I do not remember the figure – about Shs 24 billion. They told us they were going to buy ambulances and up to date we have not seen them. 

This House passed another loan to – Health Sector Support something – I wish my chairman, Hon. Lyomoki could remind me about this particular loan. So my re-formulation should capture the performance of the maternal health roadmap; the maternal health loan; and the health support loan. If that submission is made to this House within a month, we would have reviewed the entire commitment to fighting maternal deaths in this country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would it be captured if you said, “To report on the performance on the road map and the loans so far approved by Parliament?”

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, that is even better.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So that the road map and the loans that arose from the road map can be reported on within one month. Instead of listing the loans, you might miss out some - government knows the loans that were approved by this House. Can we take that now? If you access the microphone -

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Of course, the formulation is somehow good but some of us think that we need more than the maternal health road map to sort out the issues of maternal mortality. So if we limit ourselves to those two then we are going to miss the point and that is why in my initial formulation I had said “measures” - so we can say measures including those two, but maternal mortality road map is not the only thing we need, we need more than that. So if we just wait for that then we shall not be assisting the mothers in this country. We can use that formulation but also request Government to come up with measures which includes what we have suggested. Otherwise that maternal –
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So the formulation would be, “Government should report within a month on all measures including the maternal road map, all the loans and other interventions” so that it is all taken care of. 

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek your guidance at this particular juncture where our senior colleagues have guided - I have heard of a loan which was passed five years and a road map which this House considered. My guidance is on whether we should still consider the prayer by the honourable colleague for an ad hoc committee because Dr Sam Lyomoki and hon. Alaso, my Secretary General for FDC, are senior colleagues who handled social services committee at that time and now we have got the health committee.

My considered view would be that since there is a history, it would rather be good for us to entrust the committee to handle this matter so that it is within our legal ambit of our Rules of Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please we need to move on. The proposal is that Government reports on some of those issues. Another proposal is that an ad hoc committee should be established to deal with the issue of private health providers.
That came from hon. Alaso that over the years they have only been dealing with public issues, public health, public facilities and they have left out private health facilities and they have been asking for them to be brought on board, and this is the opportunity. I think you heard the submission from the honourable member for Serere.

So, she is praying that we retain the specificity of resolution No.4 in relation to private providers but in resolution No.3, we impose an obligation on the minister to report on all measures, including the roadmap and all loans and other interventions that we have evolved in the last few years and report within one month. I think that is clear enough. So, can I put the question on resolution No.3 as reformulated? I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On four, “An ad hoc committee of Parliament be established to inquire into the status of operations of private health service providers with IHK and one other private health service provider as a case study.” The proposal was that this should be enlarged instead of restricting it to these two; they should just give a general survey of all private service providers.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just wanted us to remind ourselves on the issue that we are really debating because we do not want to lose the reason why we are talking about this. This number four would really include the circumstances under which the late Remmy Wamala died. So, I want to reformulate this one - have we captured it?   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Didn’t we do it in number two. Maternal deaths, I think that issue was captured. Can we move on to four and take a decision on this. The proposal arising from this was that they inquire into private health services including IHK and one other. That is what is proposed here.

MR BIRAARO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On prayer No.4, I want to rephrase it like this: “An ad hoc committee of Parliament be established to inquire into the status of operations of those private and public health service providers with IHK as one of the case studies.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are taking us back   to the issue of public facilities, which has been explained in this particular issue. That is what the committee has been doing all its life but nothing has been done on private service providers. So, this is the window of opportunity that this parliament has to peep into the affairs of the private health providers; so do not overburden the issue, it will explode.

MR BIRAARO: Can I now propose this? “An ad hoc committee of Parliament be established to inquire into the status of the operations of all private health service providers.”

MS AKELLO: Mr Speaker, I want to support that we say “...all private health service providers.” It does not necessarily mean you will have to move in all the private service providers country wide - if it were possible it would be okay, but the committee might decide to sample the major ones, of course, including IHK.

MR OLANYA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I really feel if you include the words, “...all private service providers”, that is too wide and therefore if you want to talk of all private service providers then I feel we should give the task to the health committee. The ad hoc committee shall become unnecessarily tasked; we give the task to the Committee on Health; let them investigate and report to the House since the area is extremely wide. But if we are narrowing ourselves on this particular matter, on International Hospital Kampala, then the ad hoc committee may be tasked to do so. That is my submission.

MS ROSE AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am proposing an amendment to Resolution No. 4, to also include looking into the aspects of an entity providing both health insurance and also providing the health service because I believe there is a conflict of interest.

As a health insurer, the motive is to make a surplus or a profit for that matter. But as a health provider, the motive is to give the best treatment at whatever cost. Now the two are conflicting and I believe this is the reason when you walk into some of these entities which provide both, they will look into your statement and the drugs that will be given to you will be in accordance with the balance on your statement and that is not what you deserve as the best treatment. 

So, I would like the committee in No.4 to include, “…in addition, the issue of an entity providing both health insurance and health care.” I thank you -(Interjection)-Yes, information, I can take it.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I own a 22-bed capacity hospital in Mbarara and I work with some of these insurance companies. They have instructed me not to give expensive drugs to my patients and not exceed the budget line. So, I have struggled with my doctors to give patients treatment that is very adequate to a patient because when you are swearing the Hippocratic Oath, they say that if you find that the drug is not fit to be taken by your mother, do not give it to somebody’s mother and that is the principle. 

Hon. Dr Ndugu Rugunda and hon. Dr Crispus Kiyonga know these things. But the insurance companies for the purposes of making money are compelling the people providing services in giving inadequate and bad treatment. That is the information I wanted to give.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, we should be drawing to a close on this. Yes because when I see all of you again rising, I get worried. So, we agree to the establishment of the ad hoc committee. Do we? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We agree that the ad hoc committee will look at the status of operations of private health service providers including IHK and others. Okay. Is that correct? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So we agree to that? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The new issue that is being proposed is also to inquire into the issue of one entity providing both health services and insurance services. So can we agree on the first bit first? Okay. We agree on the first bit and then we see whether it will include the next bit – that: “An ad hoc committee of Parliament be established to inquire into the status of the operations of private health service providers with IHK and other private health service providers.” Okay? So is that what we agreed?
  
HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you see, the whole purpose – 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Clarification, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just hold on please. The whole purpose of this motion has come because of IHK.

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why this motion is here. Now I have asked for proposals and you are asking me for clarifications. I have asked for formulations that can take care of this and nobody is giving it.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, I am up on the fourth. If we are talking of “private health providers”, we are forgetting the public –(Interjections)- yes. The public does not go to private health providers. They go to public and so the issue of talking about IHK and other private health providers is not helping our people because our people do not go to these private health providers.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Motion.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, basing on what we have talked about and basing on the time we have spent here and what is happening, I am moving the motion that the question be put.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that let the motion be put. I put the question to that motion that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will put the question and the formulation is this: “An ad hoc committee of Parliament be established to inquire into the status of the operations of private health service providers with IHK and other private health providers as case studies.” I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR OMONA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I think that the spirit that was raised here concerning the health insurance providers needs to be captured. I want to inform the House that it is important to look into both. There are those health facilities that do also provide insurance and there are those that are purely health insurance operators. Mr Speaker, the concern here is that we are beginning to see that the clinical practice is being compromised by some of these health insurance providers. For example, some of the providers are given instructions not to give treatment beyond – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is already in. Please bring something new. That is already captured. 

DR OMONA: Mr Speaker, I am only reminding you that you had proposed that you will see how to add this on to –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Formulate, hon. Member.

DR OMONA: Okay. I do not know whether to call it (b) because you have already passed - (Interruption)
 
MR KABAJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would say that along the lines he was bringing that in the terms of reference for No.4, that the ad hoc committee will look at the problem of the possible conflict of interest whereby a company is providing both medical insurance services and the same company has a health facility also providing services. So that could be in the terms of references of No.4 for the committee. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good. Because when you establish the ad hoc committee, it has to do something and that something has to be spelt out properly so that it can be captured. Is it captured now?  

MR BAKA: Mr Speaker, I appreciate the amendment by hon. Kabajo but the guidance I wanted to seek much earlier was that we have a problem because for some of us, our health insurance is with IAA and their biggest facility is International Hospital Kampala and by October, most of us will be required to renew our insurance for another year. So, I am wondering if this ad hoc committee will be able to bring a report to this House to inform us on our decision on whether to renew or withdraw from IAA. 

In that case, Mr Speaker, I am wondering if we should not task the Parliamentary Commission which advised us to insure with those people - because they brought a list of service providers and one of them was IAA. So, I am wondering if the Parliamentary Commission should not be directed to review – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, no. This will come – we have already agreed; we will see from the debate what the ad hoc committee will do. And for the time frame, any parliamentary committee has a time frame – 45 days; but we will be handling this through that timeframe. So that matter is concluded and we are moving to the next item. (Applause)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING BILL, 2009

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you will recall that we moved up to Clause 79 and we had discussions on Clause 80 but because we could not tie some loose ends of this provision, we stood over this clause and adjourned. So we are starting from Clause 80.

Clause 80

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, we had a few issues to resolve on Clause 80. First, there was an amendment proposed by the committee which I think was sustained. Then there was concern on the time bar of one year. And from my own understanding – Mr Chairman, I am not assuming your powers; but I think there was more or less general consensus that that time bar was not prudent. 
The third issue was why shouldn’t these orders being sought, be part of the sentence. From careful analysis of this provision and particularly with the new inclusion of the committee – where a confiscation order has to be against property in which the person convicted has interest, this presupposes that that property is likely to be progressively discovered. So the idea is that there should be an application to look at all the circumstances; that the property that is likely to be tainted or is tainted; property in which the convicted person has interest for the decision of the court. One would argue that that is covered under sub clause (3) but that sub clause simply amplifies that principle – that even where you have filed that application, you are still at liberty, if you find other property that is tainted or in which the convicted person has interest, to amend your application. So, we think that we sustain this provision as amended by the committee and with the deletion of the time bar. Then we proceed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the Attorney-General is suggesting that by the time you are doing the conviction, you already have some property you know. Now, at the time of conviction and thereafter, you might get knowledge of other property that was not initially in your knowledge, and now, it is one year within which if the information comes to you that the man you took to jail actually has an interest in this property. So the Attorney-General says that if you limit the time within which this should be done, then whatever property will be discovered after the lapse of that period can no longer be liable for confiscation. That is his point. So in other words, he says, the time limitation would only act not in our interest of trying to look for whatever property, for as long as it takes, if we find it any time, we come back to court. That is what he is saying.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, that is okay. But our problem is, already this is tainted property in respect of a crime and a subject of court. Now, here the law is saying that we must apply to court to have authority to confiscate it; that is where our argument is. The moment it is a subject of court, you do not need to apply. The one you need to apply to are those which are coming to your knowledge later. If you leave it like this, it is going to be tricky because the officer may not apply. That is why we are saying that we should look at it in that context. 

So my proposal is that where a person is convicted of a crime, the court will issue an order – first to confiscate the property, which already is the subject of the crime and the penalty. Then this other one where the authorising officer gets information later, he can apply to court to include it among the ones to be confiscated through court. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think you are at par; there are only two issues here. One is that for the property that you already know, you do not need any application to court to confiscate it. But for the property that you may not know about, you should be given the opportunity to also capture it; and that means that it may call for the restructuring of Clause 80. 

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the Attorney-General about this interest – “the property in which a convict has an interest”. In the event that some people tend to register this property in others’ names when actually they belong to them, how then are we going to stretch this interest to only the one who owns the property? If the property is now registered in the name of a four-year child who has never earned a salary, shouldn’t we establish the source of the money that procured this property and therefore attach it? Can I get clarification?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Was it your amendment? This was to the Chair –

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Sebunya): Mr Chairman, where it talks about a person having interests, is it a matter of investigations? The property can change hands, but interests can be investigated and later it may be established whether the property changed hands from person X to person Y. That can be investigated.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, it is the right of every person to own property. So, when we leave it open, we may create loopholes in such circumstances. As hon. Kabahenda has put it, a child of five years cannot have property worth Shs 10 billion, when this child has never earned any single coin in terms of salary, or has never engaged in any productive activity to the extent that they could have genuinely accumulated that property. 

Therefore, it would be prudent for us to close that gap by saying interests stretch to the siblings or relatives of some of the people. Once we agree on that, it will give us momentum to proceed ahead. Otherwise, when we just leave it at the point of interests, we will have created a lot of loopholes. We might not achieve from this law.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I entirely concur with the honourable member from Busongora North because – I don’t want to mention names, but if the Minister of Public Service was here they would agree with me that they found the father to one of the people who stole pension money with 68 land titles yet the man was too old. When they asked him about how he had got all those titles, he said they were his.

In the circumstances, I am in agreement with the suggestion that we also include siblings and other relatives like the parents who own a lot of property yet they have never worked anywhere or who own buildings in Kampala yet they are peasants.

MR OLANYA: Mr Chairman, I see a big challenge on what the two honourable members are trying to bring up. The problem is that they assume that the person can only use relatives to register such property. This person may register this property in the name of a friend. But also a relative might have got such property in a proper way. How can you attach such property? We might punish some of the people innocently.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the issue here is the interest and specifically interests of a convicted person. So, when you convict a person, you cannot use that conviction to convict the children. The issue here is that after convicting the person, you discover that an infant holds a land title - such circumstances can lead you into doing an investigation to establish how much interests the convict has in that property.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, this actually starts from the interpretation because “tainted property” on page 11 is defined to mean property used in or in connection with the commission of a crime or constituting the proceeds of a crime. Like you rightly guided, Mr Chairman, there is only one convict and that is a particular person. Two, in a bid to curb the vice, we don’t want to create a matter with constitutional ramifications.
 
But also when it comes to this particular Clause 80 – yes, we are talking about the property being tainted but you realise that we haven’t included the word “interests.” Assuming the property is owned in partnership. For example, if I am in partnership with person X, their interest is a proceed of the crime envisaged under this. I thought we would be more specific.

Three, why should we even just restrict this to only “an authorized officer” because my view is that this is a matter of public interest litigation. If we discover that a person has stolen money and I am only supposed to tell an authorized officer, supposing they keep quiet?

It is the same thing when you report a crime to a public officer but they don’t take action. I thought this is one of the areas where any person would move court, first, to declare that tainted property because it is not tainted inherently; declaring it a tainted property must go through some process. 

So, anybody with evidence to the effect that that is a tainted property should have the locus to move court to lead it into being confiscated. Those are my two major concerns. One is to cater for the word “interest” and two, to allow anybody to move court rather than restricting it only to the authorized officer.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Have you looked at the amendment proposed by the committee in (c)? The amendment takes care of the issue of interests. And that (c) has been adopted; it talks about the confiscation order against property in which the person convicted has interests. Is that okay?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, that is okay. But there can be circumstances where the convict will have interest but those interests are not known properly just like my sister from Kyenjojo said. You know those circumstances where infants control property.
The only person who can clearly bring up such information must be a good citizen. I know that there are so many companies in Uganda where infants are shareholders and controlling property. So, we need to find a way of getting to know who has interests and where. There are those who conceal their property to the effect that to get to know it is very hard.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You know, honourable members, at this stage just propose the amendment to cure the defect you have cited.

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, at the beginning, the learned Attorney-General made some submissions. I also recall that the Leader of Opposition came out to state that after the court has convicted a person, it would be on the basis of that that the court would immediately – without having to wait for an application from an authorized officer – declare its interests in that tainted property. After wards, they can look at the other issues of property that they can discover later. 

But I can see that we have gone to talk about other things; we have not cleared that issue of whether the court immediately, on convicting the person, takes a decision on the tainted, which is already within the knowledge of the court, or should the court wait for an authorised officer to make an application? I think that issue needs to be taken out of the way.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I summarised that and said that this section needs restructuring to capture those - So I hope you are going to come up with suggestions on how to capture both; to capture the issue of the automatic confiscation of property upon conviction as one and then two when new information comes in on properties that were not known to the authorities. The proposal is that either the authorised officer or anybody should be able to move court that this property also has interest in these other properties. Those are the two issues that we need to separate.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I agree with the learned Attorney-General on his proposal that where a person is convicted of a crime the court shall, in addition to any other sentence imposed, order the confiscation of the tainted property. That is (a). Then, I think (b) remains the way it is. Then we add (c) that “Upon discovery of any such other tainted property, any person may apply to court for the confiscation of the said property”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You can say, “The authorised officer or any other -” so that the obligation first rests on the officer. 

MR SSEGGONA: Obliged, Mr Chairman. That “Upon discovery of any other such tainted property of interest, the authorised officer or any other person may apply to court for a confiscation order”.

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, generally, I agree with his formulation. But on part (c), “Upon discovery of any other such tainted property -”, my proposal is to make it No.2; instead of being (c), we make it No.2. 

MR SSEGGONA: I concede, Mr Chairman. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I always find it very difficult to draft on the microphone, but the principle is okay. It would help us if hon. Sseggona puts it in writing; even if it is hand written and reads it verbatim so that we are clear on it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, we start from one; what would one read like?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We should delete “Authorised officer” and the time and leave it to court. That would cover (a) and (b). Then in (c), you add on what the committee proposed.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have listened to the proposed amendment by the Leader of the Opposition. Court in itself is not a human being to make the move; it has to be an authorised officer acting on behalf of court and with the authority of court. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, the proposal is that among the orders on conviction in reading out the sentence, one of the extensions must include the issue of confiscation of property that is already known to court that it is tainted. So, there will be no need for anybody to move court to do that because it will be part of the order on conviction. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Let me help her and state that “authorised officer” here does not refer to court; it is defined under the interpretation. We know you came in late; that is why you are not following well – (Laughter). 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we now have a proper formulation of No.1. “Where a person is convicted of a crime, the court -”

MR SSEGGONA: “The court shall in addition to any sentence imposed make a confiscation order against property or interest that is tainted in respect of the crime”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So you want to do away with (a),(b),(c)?

MR SSEGGONA: I think (a),(b),(c) is better. But still we would have to go back to the definition and include “interest” in the definition of “tainted property” to modify the position of the committee. 

MR RUHINDI: We can break it up like this: “Where a person is convicted of a crime – then go to (a), which is the addition that he is making. And then (b) starts with, “An authorised officer may -”; in other words, (a) covers what he said and (b) covers what is already existing, including the amendment of the committee. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, how will it read then?

MR RUHINDI: “Where a person is convicted of a crime – (a) becomes what he is saying and then (b) becomes “An authorised officer -”, (b) will flow with the opening expression which says, “Where a person is convicted of a crime”, so (b) will say, “An authorised officer may, after the conviction, apply to the court for any or all of the following orders.”

Where there is discovery, you see there is two; there is three. Three is really an enabling provision that anytime even when you filed your application you can amend your pleadings in the application. It is just an enabling provision to enable you at any one time to amend your pleadings but the substantive of one can capture both. 

Mr Chairman, since we have agreed in principle, I am sure that the technical team has captured this; they can restructure it according to the principles we have agreed that, if you restructure it in 1(a), it should cover the proposal made by hon. Sseggona that the conviction should be part of the sentence and (b) on discovery of any other property that may be tainted or in which the convicted person has interest then an application will be made to court for any of these remedies that have been stipulated.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think that covers both aspects. Do not worry about (a), (b), and (c) because it is just being restructured.
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, when we leave these things to draftsmen, they always change it. We need to see this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, these are professional people. Hon. Mafabi respect other professionals. They are obliged to deal with what Parliament says, and the Clerk will issue a certificate based on the Hansard that is the correct record of what has been part of the Parliament - it is a process.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we have here laws if I can give an example of the National Audit Act. We did things here and they were deleted. Hon. Sebunya we are giving examples of what we know. What we are saying is that we get some formulation from the Attorney-General so that we can all agree and move on.

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, after listening to all the learned friends –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The learned people.

MR KABAJO: The learned men, the formulation I have got is as follows: “Where a person is convicted of crime under this Bill, court will in addition to any other sentence make the following orders”- and those orders will be as is written in (a) confiscation order against property in respect of the crime, b) pecuniary penalty and so forth. 

Part two, when at a subsequent time other tainted property or benefit is discovered, an authorised officer may apply to court for additional confiscation orders in respect of tainted property.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, he has brought it well except that he has not included “any other person”: “The authorised officer or any other person may apply to court.” That is the only correction. When I used to teach law, I would have given a sponsorship.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I also want to agree with him but what about the committee proposal (c)?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is already adopted.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So I want to tell honourable members that when you mention (a) and (b) there is (c) of the committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: (c) was adopted.

MR KABAJO: This is for your guidance; the title which we have at the moment also needs to change given the changes that we are making to the text. The title will need to change to something more appropriate. That court will make a decision and also further applications can be made.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, there is no contradiction. I put the question to the amendment in sub clause (1) and sub clause (2). I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, on sub clause (3), since we adopted the words “any person”-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Read it as sub clause (2) for clarity.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am saying sub clause (3), as it is. “Any authorised officer or any person who...”, we should put it there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Just say the applicant because if it is the applicant it takes both the authorised officer and any other private person instead of loading it. So you say, “The applicant may apply to amend” because the applicant is both the authorised officer and any other person.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, here, if we say “an applicant” the court may say no, the applicant here is the one who brought the first application.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That would have to be the person who brought the first application.
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But now in this case an ordinary person can say I have seen what you have done, I need to make an application to amend.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You cannot amend another person’s pleadings. Just like you cannot go and amend laws in Kenya.
 
MR ANYWARACH: I think having “an applicant” here would serve both for any “authorised officer” and also “any other person.” But if the application was originated by an authorised officer then any other person may not seek to amend it. If we say “an applicant”, it will mean that, yes, if it was originated by any other person other than the authorised officer that other person has been given a leeway here to amend his own application. But you cannot bypass that authorised officer applying to amend by another person or any other person bypassing the authorised officer to amend.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, if you have not made the initial application, you cannot be referred to as the applicant. So I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 80, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 81

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, of course, there will be an consequential amendment in view of what we have discussed but I think there is a typographical error in reference to Section 79;  it should be section 80(1)  and section 81 should be 82. The references should be 80 and 82. When you read (1) that says that, “Where an authorised officer makes an application” under sub-section (1) or (3) of Section 80 not 79 or under sub-section (1) of Section 82 –   

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, because there is no application under 79. 

MR RUHINDI: Yes.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: How do you jump to 82 now?

MR RUHINDI: It is a reference.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is a cross reference; you can see 81 there because it was referring to the same section. Clause 81 was referring to section 81.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we cannot change it to 81 unless this one really comes below 82 - (Interjections) - no, no, you cannot reference it because if you are going to reference with 82, you cannot reference to a clause in front. How sure are you that we are going to pass it?
  
DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I was actually rising on the same issue about Section 79 being referred to and yet it doesn’t - so we would change that 79 to 80 and then the next one should actually be deleted because if you read 82 which the Attorney-General is referring to, he is not talking about an application. He is actually talking about procedure for confiscation. You cannot start referring to it. I think you just delete and instead of 79 you make it 80 and stop there.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. That is correct.

DR EPETAIT: And subsequently that part one (a) consequential amendment would say “the applicant”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: “Where an applicant makes an application”- That is correct so that it captures the whole spirit. Okay, those are the amendments; to delete the phrase or sub-section (i) of Section 81. The proposal is that it should be deleted because it does not conform to the flow of the Bill and that the appearance of Section 79 should be Section 80. Is that clear?  I put the question to that amendment - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have no problem with that but, Mr Chairman – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can I put the question because it seems that you have no problem with that?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, no, just a simple clarification that I want to seek from you, Mr Chairman. You are aware of the Whistle Blower’s Act - now sometimes these people with this property are ‘loaded’ and a person may fear to deliver the application first of all - he may not manage to deliver the application to his gate and if he did it, he may not come back alive. So we must find a way of how to secure people who have information and may not be able to - but can adduce evidence. How do we help in this? May be I ask my chairman to be of help in that regard.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, Chairman?

MR SEBUNYA: I do not know how to help the LOP because you said “any other person”. So once you say any other person –(Interjections)- no, they said any other person. (a) reads, “An authorised officer shall give not less than” - is that the one? No. Is it (a) 82 – “Where the authorised officer shall not give less than 14 days written notice of the application to the person and to any other person who has an interest in the property “- So, your fear is somebody coming out to do it for fear of his life?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes. What we are trying to say is that, the authorised officer is okay but we here we have changed that anybody now can report. Now in 14 days, how will he deliver because he may have acted even as a whistle blower? Are you getting what we are saying?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But you see, if you are a whistle blower and you have applied to court, then you have really blown your cover. You have filed documents and you have filed them in court. Are you still being secret? You are not. You can just now face the music because you are no longer a secret witness. You have filed papers yourself in court and you have opened up. So, I put the question – yes, Bundibugyo?

MS NTABAZI: I thank you, Chair. My concern is the mode of notifying the person who has interest in the property because you may take the case to court but the mode of serving the notice to that person is not indicated anywhere yet they said the person or any other person who claims interest in the property may appear for hearing. But now, how is he going to be served and who is going to serve?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mode of service.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would propose that (a) if the person has made an application and he is in court, I think court should be the one to serve notice of application.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: How is it normally done? The Attorney-General.

MR SSEGGONA: Just some guidance before the Attorney-General comes in. As I was thinking aloud, there is something that tickled my mind. Are we looking at this as a civil application or a criminal application? Because if we distinguish the two, then the mode of service would have to differ. If it is a civil application, definitely the applicant has the burden to effect service. If it is a criminal application, normally except in private prosecutions, then that duty would rest on the Police to effect service of court papers.  I think we also need to clarify this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think it is clear enough. The person has already been convicted and sentenced and so whatever is going to arise after that is no longer a criminal case. The man is in jail or has paid - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Then here we do not need under sub-section (i) of 80 because that one, court will do it. I think here we shall only talk about sub-section (iii) because, Mr Chairman –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Court will do what?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We have said 80 (i), when a person is convicted, the court will issue the following orders and we have done that. Then here, it is saying “notice of application” – now this notice of application does not apply to where the court already has determined and you do not need an application because the court will do its work. I think the only way where an application has been passed here is 83, Mr Chairman. So, I would propose that where an applicant makes an application under section 80(iii), then – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: First wait. What would be the reference of that application? You would be saying this application is made arising from criminal case number whatever. Would that make a criminal application if it is arising from a criminal case?

MR SSEGGONA: You see, once it arises from a criminal case, it is of necessity a criminal miscellaneous application and therefore that makes it criminal in nature. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes.

MR SSEGGONA: But also to do a distinction between - because if the public prosecutor did his work up to a certain level and now he is not interested in any further public prosecution of subsequent applications and I am a private person prosecuting - those subsequent applications as we have already established here. The question of mode of service will definitely flow back to the private person who is pursuing the application. And I think we would have to leave it that way. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I do not want to disagree with my minister but what I want to find out is this: Under Clause 80(1), we say, “Where a person is convicted of a crime, court shall do confiscate property…” Now, I hear you talking of notice of application; what is the applicant applying for?

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, I think the Leader of the Opposition is forgetting that these things are going to be renumbered as per the changes we have made under Clause 80. So it will not be, “Where an authorised officer makes an application under subsection (1)…” because we have already amended Clause 80 and subsection (1) now refers to what the court will decide and it is under (2) or (3) where an application will be made. So when they are re-drafting, they will renumber and it may no longer be (1) but (2) or (3).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It has to be renumbered. (Laughter) There are very many new clauses and some will be moved. Therefore, I put the question to the amendment for the deletion of that part or under subsection (1) of section 82 and to the alteration of 79 to 80. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, I seek your clarification at this point; you are saying, “Where an authorised officer makes an application under subsection (1)…” but when you go to 79 – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We have changed that, honourable member.

MR LUBOGO: Much obliged, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 81 as amended stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 81, as amended, agreed to.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, there is a small typographical mistake that I want to correct: Where “(a) a person has been convicted of a crime and the person has died or absconded.” That expression “and the person has died or absconded” should be part of (b). And then the expression that covers (a) and (b) should start with “an authorised officer may apply to the court”. Are we together?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, can you now state it?

MR RUHINDI: It should read: “Where (a) a person has been charged with a commission of crime under this Act and the warrant for the arrest of the person has been issued in relation to that and the person has died or absconded or (b) a person has been convicted of a crime and the person has died or absconded.” The expression that covers both should start with: “An authorised officer may apply….”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that clear? In other words, take “and the person has died or absconded” and paste it on (b) after “crime”. And then the closing paragraph starts from “an authorised officer …”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, that is okay; what about the one who dies before he is charged? For example – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is in (a).

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, this one has been charged with a crime. Mr Chairman, a man or woman can die and after sometime you discover that all he or she had was out of money laundering. So we must also make a law to cater for those who die. He may be aware that he is about to be caught and he takes poison and dies like Maxwell. So, we must also make a law for that category.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no, no. Hon. Mafabi, you know when you throw in a lot of things, it ruins the flow. Let us first finish with what the Attorney-General has proposed. Is it okay? Since it is a typographical change, I think we can adopt that and then we come to your concern. I put the question to this amendment which is correcting the correction in (b).

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, for those who die before they are charged – (Interjection) – Yes, an issue comes to light after the person has died – (Interjection) – Even if he has died, those are his or her problems. (Laughter) Mr Chairman, what we are trying to cure is for someone to die and assume that they will go without liability. So we are saying that where a person dies and it is found out that what he owned while still alive –(Interruption) 

DR EPETAIT: I wanted to inform the Leader of the Opposition that I think his fears are captured under (a), where it says, “Where a person has been charged with a commission of a crime…” And then he has been charged but he has died – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, his case is that the person died before being charged – he was under investigation. Honourable members, we had a similar phrasing in one of the earlier clauses, where we said, “…is under investigation, is about to be charged or has been charged”. We had that kind of phraseology earlier in one of the clauses. Maybe it could take care of that.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, unless we read it and satisfy ourselves that we are on the right track – because when we go back to the object of the Bill, and I will specifically look at 2(b), “To respond to the threat posed by organised crime by providing law enforcement officials and authorities with the information they need to deprive criminals of the proceeds of their criminal activities while ensuring appropriate safeguards are put in place to protect the privacy of persons….” But I want to emphasise “…to deprive criminals of the proceeds of their criminal activities…” Ordinarily, once someone dies, then you cannot prosecute them – if you strictly look at prosecution. But we also have people who die and leave stolen property in the hands of their estates. And the only way of making this law effective is tracing that property wherever it is so that if you leave our property with your son, Government is able to trace it. I think that is what the LOP is coming from and he wants a provision to that effect. But I would be very happy, Mr Chairman, if you guided us as you did on the particular provision so that we move satisfied that we are on the right track to fulfil this objective. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We adopted that clause; can someone give me information on the one we adopted with similar – It was hon. Katuntu who wanted to amend it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, as we are looking for that – because the examples are many; you recall Maxwell –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no, no. This was in the Bill - (Laughter) In the Bill, we had a similar – yes, it was a proposal from the committee.

MR RUHINDI: It was the chairperson who presented the proposal by the committee –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What clause was it?

MR RUHINDI: Redrafting Clause 68. It reads: “Where a person has been charged with or is about to be charged or convicted of an offence or where a criminal investigation is ongoing, an authorized officer may apply to court for a restraining order in order to restrain the disposition of ….”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is the formulation we adopted. Once the red flag is raised on you, when you die they will still be able to - yes, Member for Mitooma.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Suppose this person dies before even investigations were instituted against him. I am actually talking with the examples of people like heads of state or some of these multibillionaires. Suppose such a person dies but you later discover that the owned stolen property say, in a foreign country, you may want to recover such property.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That would be handled outside this law.

MR KAMATEEKA: Are we saying this provision can cover all this? That person may have died from within the country when investigation hadn’t taken off. But after t death, it is discovered that was involved in money laundering or had stolen property. The property is not registered in anybody’s name; it is just lying there. How would such a property be recovered?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, that is where we are now. A person may be aware of what is going to take place and they decide to commit suicide using poison and I usually use the example of Mr Maxwell, the pension manager in the UK –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But why would you still hold that man for committing suicide? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, even this person in Uganda might say, they knew the law was about to catch up with them and they decide to commit suicide. How do we handle such situations? I think this will help us a lot especially in regard to those people who might be thinking about committing suicide after they have committed such crimes. They might not do after knowing there is a law that mandates or authorizes the state to confiscate property. We are trying to make a law that will tell such people that whether they die or not, what they leave on earth relating to such crimes will be confiscated. Such a provision will also help us protect a lot of resources.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, but I notice that we are beginning to go beyond. You see this Bill is about money laundering and not corruption. After they have stolen the money, they try to clear it up –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, when you read more about money laundering, you realise that it also involves taking money through corruption. It further talks about money obtained through illegal drugs – yes, Mr Chairman, even when this person takes money from government coffers and buys land – even if they die – (Interruption)

MS AKOL: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. Dealing with property of a dead person in an investigation is so challenging. You will realise that before an investigation starts, the family of that person is assumed to be innocent and now one maybe aware of the tainted property.

When the family decides to sell out the tainted property, the persons who buy such property become bonafide owners. So, how do we handle such situations? Mr Chairman, my suggestion is that we might create a complexity that may not be resolved via the law.

MS NTABAZI: Mr Chairman, I was trying to recite something in my mind. There is a building along Entebbe Road that was meant to be a hotel, but I was told that soon after an issue was raised about it, the owner died. I still ask myself who owns that property. Is it now owned by Government or relatives took it over? That property is around Bwebaja along Entebbe Road.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, of course, in the laws we make, there are some criminal principles that we normally apply. But I can assure you that laws must also address the challenges that emerge at any particular time. In international law, for instance, these days if you read judgments on some ad hoc tribunals in Yugoslavia, Rwanda and so forth – they had to abandon the principle of hearsay. This is because if you applied it to some of these cases, for instance, genocide and crimes against humanity; you can’t get anyone on the time when the crimes are committed; the peculiarities of the cases, the rate of deaths of persons and so forth.

The international tribunals have been so principled on these cases.  But is it that we are trying to address? The mischief at hand is great and we all know we are affected, particularly us the developing countries. And in any case, Mr Chairman, when you look at the expression that concludes this particular clause, you realise that it is not automatic that you will go to court and get permission to confiscate property. The court must prove on balance of probabilities, which is stated here.

To me, this law is in good faith, given the challenges that we have here and also at international levels. But these are some of the provisions that have also been incorporated in legislations of other countries and other jurisdictions. We are only trying to comply. The technical people have been referring to the Convection on Terrorism to which we are a signatory and so forth. So, on top of complying, we are also being mindful of our own challenges in this country.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, what is your view on Clause 82?

MR RUHINDI: As amended by me, I move that we have it adopted – (Interjections) - with the other qualifiers - about to be charged or under investigation. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to bring in a constitutional matter where we have reference under Article 164 of the Constitution. “Accountability: “Any person holding a political or a public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to the existing instructions shall be accountable for any lose arising from that use and shall be required to make good the lose even if he or she has ceased to hold that office”. That means that even if he has died – when you die, you cease to hold office – (Interjections) – yes, if a man has laundered money – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us first clear that principle; where a person is dead, can he criminally account? On death, there is no criminal responsibility; you are dead.

MR KASAIJA: I agree with the honourable members; if you commit a crime - and in this case we are talking about tainted property - you die, the beneficiary, maybe your wife or children, in my view, should not enjoy this property. Then it will create fear. I saw during Amini’s time; people would kill with impunity, confiscate property from somebody and pass that property to their children, and the children of that person who committed crime enjoy that property. 

Mr Chairman, we need to put a law that would frighten me from saying, “After all even if I die, my children will enjoy.”

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, matters are very technical for me, but I am just wondering whether the legal brains here can help me; is there something in the laws of the land that makes it illegal for anyone to initiate investigation and trace something that is criminal that happened? For instance, you have shot a robber dead whom you found robbing a bank. Does the matter end there or do the laws of the land allow the police to step back and ask, “The gun this robber was using is Government owned; so how could he have acquired it?” And by tracing that, we would be able to deal with elements of criminality even when the person has died. If there is nothing that stops us, I was looking at a framing that goes like this: “That nothing under the provisions of this Act shall prevent initiation of investigation and tracing of proceeds from money laundering when someone dies”. 

I do not know where to put that – we could even rest now if that is permissible; we would now rest our brains and draft that tomorrow. But I need to be educated whether it is illegal to think of going for somebody’s estate. If it is not illegal, then we can find the English tomorrow; we can also house that somewhere in this law. So help me, Mr Chairman.

MR AYOO: Mr Chairman, we are dealing with the procedures of confiscating property after somebody has been involved in money laundering or the interest of somebody has been involved and they have died, and have been charged. That therefore means nobody at that time knew whether they were involved and nobody reported; and we are thinking of instituting investigations after that person who would have been the key witness is dead, and we are now transferring it to the people who are in charge of the estate. 

Mr Chairman, I think it is the duty of the state and everybody to constantly monitor the activities of people and in the event that they die, and no case was brought against them, we would be entering into areas where investigating and confiscating such property would be very difficult for the state. That is why I would think, where a person has been charged – is about to be charged and the issue is known, and then he decides to behave like a suicide bomber or his friends decide to kill him in order to stop the case, then with that one, the prosecution would proceed because there are issues that would have arisen when the person was still arise. 

But in a situation where anybody can come up because you have died, you have left a few things for your children and maybe they had something against you; then they put up a case where even the siblings are not in position to defend the case and they can lose property that was not got out of money laundering or tainted property - So, I think going to those who are already dead, I would rather  suggest we leave that and bring it possibly under a different law; but in this particular case, we should proceed as it is under Section 82. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, those proposals can be housed elsewhere; because here it states: “Where a person is under investigations -”. You might want to think more serious on what the Member for Serere has proposed that there should be a notwithstanding close – creating the exception or covering situations where these discoveries are made when a person is dead. So that we deal with the existing one the way it is framed; to deal with a person where by the time of his death, there was already discovery; that is what is captured in (1). 

We can then create a new situation where a discovery is made after the person has already died – we would have made progress on (1) then we see (2) along the lines proposed by the Member for Serere and then we can conclude with (2). So can somebody formulate what the Member for Serere – I think she actually formulated it. If you still remember hon. Member – sometimes these things of drafting from the microphone, they go away as soon as you sit down. We need to formulate when we are awake. I have not seen any Member – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, it is about seven – I think this is a serious one and it is bringing in new ideas. I would suggest that we stop here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, why I was proposing that we conclude this is because it would enable us to stop at Clause 100 because there are no other contestations.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Mr Chairman, we have a lot of issues even with 83.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You have other issues?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But that is what you said and then we came back you had no issues.
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Mr Chairman, when we came we began where we stopped. I propose – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But how can we go back after only one clause. Honourable member for Serere, you might want to think about your draft, that is when we come back. In compensation can we start tomorrow at 10.00a.m?
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, tomorrow we have Business Committee meeting and all the chairpersons are Members.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So we stand over Clause 82.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the motion.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

(House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered clauses 80, 81 of the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Money Laundering Bill, 2009 and passed them with amendments and has stood over Clause 82. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much. We had a lot of business to do before we came to the Bill and that made us not to make a lot of progress. All other statements that were meant to be made tomorrow will be made next week to allow us proceed with this Bill tomorrow as the sole business for the House so that we can finish this Bill this week so that  we go into the new week with new matters.

Subject to the issue of Thursday, private members thing, I think in the interest of this Bill we might have to reconsider what we do tomorrow to allow us progress with this Bill. I will use my prerogative to deal with issues of private members in the circumstances. This House is adjourned to tomorrow 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7.17	p.m. and was adjourned to Thursday, 4 July 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)
