

PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Wednesday, 14 July 2021

Parliament met at 2.13 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. As I communicated yesterday, today, we shall have a statement from the Rt hon. Prime Minister on the status of the Government’s intervention amidst the COVID-19 pandemic. This exercise will take about 45 minutes. Thereafter, we shall debate for 20 minutes on that item. 

I congratulate all those that assumed various positions of responsibility yesterday. I urge you to hit the ground running in the service of this country and our people. 

Get to meet the staff that are running the service of the country and get support for execution of your mandate in those several offices. 

Also, please, study the Rules of Procedure and the laws of Uganda that relate to the various sectors in which you have been deployed. 

Honourable members, the Parliamentary Commission has finalised the processing of your Parliamentary Identity Cards (IDs). The issuing of these IDs will start on Thursday. I urge you, Members to go and get your IDs in the south wing lobby. Please, endeavour to pick your IDs so that you do not get disturbances along the way. 

I would wish to amend the Order Paper to allow the Leader of the Opposition to present the list of the shadow ministers. 

2.16
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition is on his way here. I request that you give him three minutes. I hope, by that time, he will have arrived.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As we wait for the Leader of the Opposition, I think hon. Betty Amongi has something to say. 

2.17
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Madam Speaker, the Order Paper shows that the Rt hon. Prime Minister is supposed to make a statement. She has requested that she is given 40 minutes before she can come. His Excellency the President was having a consultation with her on the matter she is supposed to present to Parliament. She has just left State House but she will be here. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Amongi, do you want to tell me that there is only one minister in the Prime Minister’s Office?

MS AMONGI: Madam Speaker, this was a harmonised paper with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Prime Minister had committed to presenting it herself. She is still committed and she has requested me to affirm to you that she will be here to present. I cannot now answer.  (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for work well done. The Order Paper came out yesterday. It would not be wise for the Prime Minister to inform a minister who is giving misleading information about what we are going to query here on the statement. 

Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister can inform you officially that she will not keep time or not come but when we get a statement on the Floor by a minister, that is misleading information. 

Is it be procedurally okay, in this august House, where we expect Members to be serious, that we are getting information right now that the Prime Minister is going to be late yet you gave us the Order Paper yesterday and we prepared ourselves to listen to the statement? That, in essence, means that the honourable Minister for Gender would like to usurp the powers of the Prime Minister. 

If the Prime Minister is not around, we can have an adjournment within your wisdom, Madam Speaker. Otherwise, we should go by the Order Paper.

We shall give a lot of information on what the Prime Minister will present. We already know what she is going to present and we shall answer it in the best currency possible. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before I left my office, the Government Chief Whip called me and told me that the Rt hon. Prime Minister was ready and was coming to present the statement. 

2.20
MR BASHIR KAZIBWE (NUP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In light of the statement made by the honourable minister and in the absence of the Prime Minister at this moment, I pray that we amend the Order Paper and let Members of Parliament, in the meantime, start expressing issues of national concern. 

As you are aware, the country, especially Kampala, is seated on a time bomb. We cannot wait for any other moment. There are issues that are affecting our people. We demand that you give us that time to start – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are not going to start jumping from one issue to another. The Order Paper is very clear. Let people take responsibility. If somebody is supposed to be in the House, there must be a representative. Yes, Government Chief Whip?

2.22
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to extend our apologies for this. We own it; we are responsible for it. We are sorry and we are going to ensure it does not happen again. 

Secondly, the Prime Minister, as we all know, received a very urgent call from the President. I called you, Madam Speaker and said she is ready with the statement but she will be leaving State House shortly and she is about to reach here. 

I beg for your indulgence on that, Madam Speaker. It is not that we are trying to under-look your authority; we request you to use your authority to forgive us and allow us to handle other matters as the Prime Minister comes. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I did not intend to raise a point of order against my friend, hon. Tayebwa, the Government Chief Whip. However, he wants to show that this Parliament is driven according to the programme of the President. When the Prime Minister cannot be here in time, we have to wait because she is with the President. 

Is it in order for the honourable minister to show this House that it is driven by the programmes of the President, that because the President is meeting the Prime Minister, Parliament cannot proceed until she comes here because she is in State House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, he did not say that the President is running the House; he only said that she got a call.

MR SSEWUNGU: Impliedly, he is saying so.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No! The President is not running the House.

MR CHEMASWET: Madam Speaker, rule 170 provides that the Chairperson of the Committee on Appointments shall report to the House any appointment approved by the committee and the report shall not be subject to debate.

That would cure the same problem that we are handling now. Hon. Betty Amongi was making a presentation but we have strangers here and we do not know whether they are ministers or not because the report of the Committee on Appointments has not been tabled in Parliament. 

Secondly, rule 172(2) says, “The Committee on Appointments may, by resolution of at least one-third of its members, refer a particular nomination to a decision of the House.” We read from the media that the appointment of hon. Kaboyo had been rejected and we expected that to be brought to the House but later on she was approved by the committee. If these reports were availed to Parliament, it would be easier for us to know the ministers who were approved and those that were rejected. Thank you.

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, we were talking about the Prime Minister not being around. I wonder how the topic changed. In Uganda, we have deputies of the Prime Minister - the First Deputy Prime Minister and the Second Deputy Prime Minister, who is in charge of the business here.

I am wondering why people are talking about the Prime Minister being met; are you saying that in the absence of the Prime Minister, the First Deputy Prime Minister and the Second Deputy Prime Minister cannot be in the House?

Secondly, to show you clearly that the Prime Minister’s Office was not ready to present a statement here, since Members do not have iPads, we should have had hard copies of the report or the presentation with us. However, you clearly see that we are starting the other issue of the 10th Parliament whereby we come to the House and the ministers and the Prime Minister are not prepared. This must stop. We should not do business as usual. The 11th Parliament should be ready for debate and ready to handle issues of the country; therefore, we need the Government side to get organised.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Speaker does not have the report too.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am not a member of the Committee on Appointments but I was very appreciative of the statement that came from them. They warned the ministers who were interviewed that they hoped that they would work like real fishermen who would not be looked for to look for fish - that they would be in the House. Fish normally come at a certain time; if the fish come and you do not catch them on time, you will not be able to catch any fish. 

The chronic problem of the absence of ministers has been with us over the years. I was very excited, thinking that it had come to an end. I am very shocked today - the second day of the First Session of the 11th Parliament - I am being told that the Prime Minister is not there. However, that is not the problem. We have the First Deputy Prime Minister and the Second Deputy Prime Minister, and I am sure that in the process you might have appointed the Third Deputy Prime Minister; I am not yet aware. 

Not only that, I have seen the Government Chief Whip in the House. Can the Government Chief Whip now constitute himself into the Prime Minister so that we can proceed with our business? (Laughter) This is because, Madam Speaker, if you allow Parliament to be frustrated now, it will be the trend.

We have to show the Cabinet that they have to be a cabinet of fishermen not a cabinet of scribes and pharisees. The pharisees are of the past; now, we have fishermen and we want them with their nets at the seashore. (Laughter)

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, we should make sure that the ministers and the Prime Minister stop using the name of the President as a way of getting out of their responsibility from this House.

That is my concern as a Member of Parliament elected to deliver to the people of Uganda. We must make sure that we direct them to be ready for business as we are in the House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, did the President call all the ministers to State House?

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to clarify on record here that the meeting going on at State House is being attended by the Vice-President, the Prime Minister and her deputies, the Minister of Health and the Minister of Trade. They are handling a very urgent matter concerning oxygen shortage in the country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How many ministers do you have?

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, I am trying to be as truthful as possible on this matter – (Interruption)

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. The doctrine of separation of powers is crystal clear. Our work and main preoccupation is fourfold - legislation, representation, oversight and appropriation. We are not going to have a Parliament that is going to serve at the pleasure of the Executive.

Government Chief Whip, you whip the NRM. We are not going to allow you, through your work - no matter what - to co-opt everybody here. Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we finish with the point of order, before you come in?

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, at your discretion, I ask you to rule the Government Chief Whip out of order –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What point of order are you giving? (Laughter) What is the point of order about?

MR KATUSABE: The point of order I am raising is whether the Government Chief Whip is in order to continue bringing up the same matter that you have already ruled upon. Is he in order? We have a doctrine of separation of powers. This is Parliament; it has no business or personal business with the transactions done in the Executive. 

The Prime Minister’s Office has nothing to do with individuals. In the absence of a Prime Minister, there should be somebody delegated. So, Government or national issues cannot stall because the Prime Minister is not in the House. I think we are not ready to entertain any national scandal. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you all sit because you are not listening? Can you all sit? You are not listening. I got communication that there was going to be a meeting on the legislative agenda. The issue is, is there only one minister in the office? No! 

Secondly - hon. Macho, can you sit down - yesterday, we raised an issue that we shall get a statement from the Prime Minister today before handling matters of national importance.

For you to raise matters of national importance, respective ministers must be available. The issue is: are these the only ministers we have in this House? Is the Government Chief Whip whipping the ministers to be here? Government Chief Whip, we want your ministers for us to move to the next item. Anyhow, as you constitute your Prime Minister’s Office, where are the ministers?

Honourable members, the information I have got is that hon. Tayebwa has been given powers to present the report. So, as we wait for that report, can the Leader of the Opposition present to us the Shadow Cabinet?

MR ENOSI ASIIMWE: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of information. I would like to let you know that we can barely hear you. The system is down; we can barely hear you and whatever is going on. I request that they fix the microphones fast. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Clerk, can that be checked?

MR KABANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not think we are proceeding well because our Members on the other side are just shifting blame. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kabanda, have you become a Speaker today for you to take a ruling? 

MR KABANDA: It is a procedural matter, Madam Speaker. The Members on the other side - Madam Speaker, you communicated that the Order Paper be amended to give the Leader of the Opposition time to present his Shadow Cabinet. 

Hon. Gilbert Olanya requested that the Leader of the Opposition be given only three minutes for him to be here and he is already in the House. Why don’t we let him do that? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Anyway, it is his maiden speech. Hon. Kabanda, we have heard you. The Leader of the Opposition is on the Floor. Please, have a seat.

MR KABANDA: Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, when you are going to speak, mention your name so it can be captured on the Hansard. 

2.38
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you for your patience and indulgence, Madam Speaker. Certainly, the afternoon is dampened by the inordinate conduct of the chief fisher in this House –(Laughter)– and here we are, expending taxpayers’ money with no business being transacted.

I am aware the Prime Minister’s Office handles disasters but it has never been declared a disaster zone. Hopefully, the Prime Minister will make amends, going forward.

Madam Speaker, I am moving under Rule 14 of our Rules of Procedure to present to this House the honourable ladies and gentlemen I appointed to assist me in their mandate as shadow ministers:

    1. Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba	- Shadow Attorney-General;
    2. Hon. Shamim Malende	- Shadow Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs;
    3. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi Muhammad  -	Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development;
    4. Hon. Nantongo Fortunate Rose -	 Shadow Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development; 
    5. Hon. Katusabe Atkins - Shadow Minister of Public Service;

    6. Hon. Nyeko Derrick - Shadow Minister for Presidency and Security;
    7. Hon. Dr Abed Bwanika	- Shadow Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries;
    8. Hon. Nabukenya Brenda - Shadow Minister of Education and Sports;
    9. Hon. Odur Jonathan - Shadow Minister of Defence and Veterans Affairs;
    10. Hon. Kiwanuka  - Shadow Minister of Internal Affairs;

    11. Hon. Dr Batuwa Timothy - Shadow Minister of Health;
    12. Hon. Nsibambi Yusuf - Shadow Minister of Works and Transport;
    13. Hon. Kawalya Abubaker - Shadow Minister of Kampala and Metropolitan Affairs;
    14. Hon. Nkunyingi Muwada - Shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs;
    15. Hon. Balimwezo Ronald Nsubuga - Shadow Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development;

    16. Hon. Nyakato Asinansi	- Shadow Minister of Energy and Minerals;
    17. Hon. Masaba Karim - Shadow Minister of Tourism and Wildlife;
    18. Hon. Frank Kabuye - Shadow Minister of Youth and Children Affairs;
    19. Hon. Mwijukye Francis - Shadow Minister of Trade and Industry;
    20. Hon. Naluyima Betty Ethel - Shadow Minister of Local Government;

    21. Hon. Nabukeera Hanifa	- Shadow  Minister of Human Rights;
    22. Hon. Christine Kaaya Nakimwero – Shadow Minister of Water and Environment ;
    23. Hon. Gorreth Namugga – Shadow Minister of Science, Innovations and Technology;
    24. Hon. Hillary Kiyaga – Shadow Minister of Culture and Performing Arts;
    25. Hon. Anna Adeke Ebaju – Shadow Minister of Cooperatives and Microfinance;

    26. Hon. Joyce Bagala – Shadow Minister of Information and Anti-corruption;
    27. Hon. Santa Okot – Shadow Minister of Special Regions – the special regions connote Luwero, Rwenzori, Karamoja, Northern Uganda, Bunyoro and Teso;
    28. Hon. Gilbert Olanya – Shadow Minister of East African Community Affairs;
    29. Hon. Charles Tebandeke – Shadow Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries;
    30. Hon. Geoffrey Kayemba – Shadow Minister of Sports.

Madam Speaker, for the record, we made no attempt to tinker with the Constitution or the rules to expand or enlarge the size of the Shadow Cabinet. We are believers in a lean Government and we have decided to lead and move by example. We are not going to preach water and drink wine. 

The Shadow Cabinet has 30 members. We believe we shall be able to offer the people of Uganda the best alternative. This team is presented here because their existence has implications for the public purse. Therefore, the public should know these individuals as they begin on their fresh mandates. 

I thank you for your indulgence. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Leader of the Opposition. I wish to congratulate all those people – 

MR MPUUGA: With your permission, I wish to lay on Table the list of these Shadow Ministers. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I wish to congratulate all of you who have been appointed as Shadow Ministers. Congratulations. (Applause)

I have seen the Rt Hon. Prime Minister come. You are welcome, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. The whole House has been waiting for you. You have a statement to present on the status of the COVID-19 pandemic. We have given you 45 minutes for the presentation and then, we will have a debate on your statement for 20 minutes. 

STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF GOVERNMENT’S INTERVENTIONS AGAINST THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, one of the issues Members are raising is that you are going to present a statement, whose copies they do not have. So, what will they be following? 

2.46
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, let me find out why the statement is not yet uploaded on the iPads. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members do not have iPads.

MS NABBANJA: Do they need hard copies? 

MR BASALIRWA: Under our rules, specifically rule 52 that relates to statements by ministers - first of all, the statement by a minister shall be in a written form. Secondly, it should be debated, provided the debate does not exceed one hour.

We are aware that the iPads are not yet available but we have pigeon holes and email addresses. I do not know whether we would be proceeding correctly to merely come and listen to the minister and debate on the basis of a statement where we do not have prior knowledge. Shall we be proceeding well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are not proceeding well. Members need to have a document that is being referred to. 

MR MPUUGA: In view of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister’s inability to avail copies of the statement in any form, I request that we move under rule 20 and have the House suspended for 15 minutes to allow the Prime Minister to avail copies to Members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe instead of suspending the House, we could look at matters of national importance. 

MS OGWAL: Alternatively, since this is a very important matter, would it be procedurally correct if the Prime Minister could be allowed to make the presentation with a commitment to making the copies available in our pigeon holes so that tomorrow or in the next Sitting, we would be well informed based on the information she has given us and we can go straight into the debate of the subject?

Also, rule 50 states that “a minister shall attend sittings of the House to answer questions asked to him or her”. The questions, which are going to be raised in that report will concern many sectors and I believe that the “chief fisherman” will make sure that when we are debating the matter, all the ministers are available to answer the relevant questions. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The statement by the Prime Minister is supposed to answer many things. I am saving this Parliament the burden of even raising them as matters of national importance – if they are answered. 

I would like to support the proposal by the Leader of the Opposition. This being a very important statement that you, Madam Speaker, even announced it hours ago, it does no harm to suspend Parliament for 20 minutes to get the statement distributed to comply with the Rules of Procedure and help us follow it. This is because we may end up raising the same issues that have been addressed by the Prime Minister. If you so wish, Madam Speaker. Thank you. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: These are matters of extreme public importance that deserves the seriousness of this august House. I do not know how my fellow senior Member, hon. Cecilia Atim, has guided this afternoon because whenever she rises, I know the House is in good hands. However, for her to deteriorate and start waiving the rules of this very House she has been in, I got a bit disappointed. 

Such matters cannot be taken lightly. These are matters where we are here to represent the people of Uganda. Matters concerning COVID-19 and the efforts of Government are eagerly awaited. We need to give accountability for the efforts of Government. Right now, we are under a lockdown for 42 days. Therefore, such matters cannot be taken lightly. 

We would wish to know how many people have received the assistance of Shs 100,000. It has to be on record. What is the rate of suffering of Ugandans? What about our people in the business community, the schools, health interventions and all that?

Madam Speaker, this, therefore, demands that we get a comprehensive statement with copies in our hands, so that we can make a meaningful contribution and account to the people of Uganda whom we are representing in this august House. Madam Speaker, I move that you be pleased to insist that we must have statements distributed to Members, so that we debate from a point of knowledge.

A while ago, you ruled that it would be hon. Tayebwa to spearhead the statement. Fortunately, we now have the Rt Hon. Prime Minister herself in the House. We should avoid sambala sambala if we are going to make a difference to the lives of the people of Uganda. Thank you.

Mr nsereko: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You earlier on gave a wise ruling to this House. First, this House has endured waiting for both the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition. That means, Members are honourably here to partake the statements that they are willing to serve to this country. 

You have given a wise ruling that in the meantime, as copies are probably being made, the House should not be stalled because Members have issues of national importance that they want to put forward. Probably, those issues shall even help inform the Prime Minister’s statement and the debate that shall come after.

Therefore, I would like to plead with you and appeal that you stand by the decision you gave this House, so that Members come forward to present matters of great national importance as we stand over the statement by the Prime Minister and wait for copies to be run. After all, the other ministers you summoned are now present in Parliament. 

Members have questions from their constituents and they should probably be given a chance to present them as we get responses from ministers. Later on, when the copies are ready for us to digest, the Prime Minister can come and make the statement. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, honourable members. We will have matters of national importance. The fact that we do not have the copies - I am requesting the Prime Minister to avail all the Members with a copy of her statement. You will go and read the statement over the weekend and on Tuesday, we shall debate it the whole afternoon. 

Can we now have matters of national importance.

Mr kazibwe: Madam Speaker, this is equally important as it regards the day you have talked about. Tuesday will be a national holiday as it will be Eid.

The Deputy Speaker: We shall then have the debate on Wednesday. Thank you for the information. The report will be presented and debated on Wednesday. Let us have hon. Lukyamuzi.

2.57
Mr Paulson luttamaguzi (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Correction, Madam Speaker; my name is Luttamaguzi Semakula, not Lukyamuzi. Lukyamuzi is a different Member of Parliament but - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Let us have hon. Luttamaguzi Semakula Paulson, MP Nakaseke.

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Correct, Madam Speaker. Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my maiden speech and I have a matter of national importance. During this second wave of the COVID-19 pandemic, all regional hospitals have been re-equipped, with the exception of Nakaseke Referral Hospital.

Nakaseke Referral Hospital serves eight districts, which include Mityana, Luwero, Nakaseke, Nakasongola and Mpigi. Doctors at Nakaseke Referral Hospital, nurses and medical assistants are stranded because all the other referral hospitals were re-equipped apart it. As a result, this has created a lot of anxiety among the population that stays within Nakaseke, near the hospital, including among doctors and medical assistants. 

My prayer is that Nakaseke Referral Hospital is also reconsidered during the second – (Mr Basalirwa rose_) – I will allow the information.

Mr basalirwa: Thank you, honourable Member from Nakaseke, for giving way. The information I would like to give my honourable colleague is that it is not only Nakaseke which has challenges of that nature. When you go to Bugiri Hospital, it is a similar issue.

Therefore, the issue of the health sector, especially during this COVID-19 time, requires urgent attention from Government. I am very sure that if each of us, coming from districts that have hospitals like Bugiri, are given an opportunity to explain what is happening, it is going to be a very bad story. The problem is not limited to Nakaseke; it is in Bugiri and other parts of the country. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, I am giving you only three minutes each, so if you give out your time –

Mr luttamaguzi: Thank you, honourable colleague, for the additional information.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the Ministry of Health should reconsider Nakaseke Referral Hospital when they are re-equipping all referral hospitals in the country for the second wave of the pandemic. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable Prime Minister, we need a response from the Ministry of Health to that effect on Wednesday.

3.00
Ms Sharon balmoyi (NRM, Woman Representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise on the issue of national importance –

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Balmoyi, I have a list of Members who have registered their issues – However, since it is your maiden speech, you can go ahead.

Ms balmoyi: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Indeed, this is my maiden speech. The people of Gulu District got a national calamity yesterday. There was heavy rain that ravaged crops in three different subcounties. They send their disappointment about the extent to which the crops have been destroyed. 

We had a very bad season given the fact that crops had dried up. Now, they are crying to the Government to intervene in this situation and provide them with crops and emergency relief aid. They were about to start harvesting. Right now, they do not know where to start from.

Secondly, on the issue of COVID-19 relief, my district has not received anything – (Interjections) – they have not! The boda boda cyclists and small-scale business people are complaining that – (Interjections).

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, allow the Member to present her issue.

Ms balmoyi: Thank you, Madam Speaker. They are complaining that they have not received any penny from the COVID-19 relief team. I am glad that the Prime Minister is here; I would like her to address that.

Also, Awach Health Centre IV is equally not well equipped with all the necessary COVID-19 equipment that should help them to handle the pandemic. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Laker. I hope you are getting it, Rt Honourable Prime Minister. 

3.03
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the destructions of buffaloes and elephants in the subcounties in my constituency. 

As we speak now, buffaloes and elephants have migrated from Murchison Falls National Park and have pitched camp in Kilak South Constituency in Lakang Subcounty, Bana and Lajalula Parishes. 

The elephants and buffaloes are very destructive. As we speak now, they have destroyed more than 1,000 houses belonging to our people –(Interjections)– I will give you time to give me information. The elephants killed a woman called Filda Akong on 7 July. 

For the last two weeks, the buffaloes and elephants have been destroying people’s crops. This is very serious and we need to take the matter very seriously – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are your prayers? 

MR OLANYA: My prayers are that:  

    1. The minister in charge of wildlife should direct the Uganda Wildlife Authority to immediately move to Kilak South in the parishes of Kololo, Bana and Lajalula and drive away the animals that have spent two weeks harming our people.

    2. The Government should consider compensating the woman’s family -Filda Akong - who was killed and the people battling for their lives in the hospital. 


	Uganda Wildlife Authority has not been compensating people despite the animals getting people on their land. 
    3. The Minister in charge of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees should consider distributing tarpaulins to those ones that have left their homes and are running for their lives. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to give this time to my brother from Nwoya because they also have a similar problem. Let him give information in one minute as I wind up. I beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have already spent your time. The minister responsible should give us a report on this and make a follow-up on the status of what is happening in the area. We need that report on Wednesday. 

3.07
MR FRANCIS KATABAAZI (NUP, Kalungu East County, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. At the moment, we have very many people treating themselves from home when they get infected with COVID-19; there is basic medication, which most of these doctors have prescribed to us. For example, there is zinc, vitamins –(Interjection)– it is my maiden speech. Hon. Luttamaguzi, do not disturb me. (Laughter) There is also another medication whose name I cannot pronounce. (Interjection) That one and many others.

We have found that very many people have got cured of COVID-19 without going to the hospitals. The hospitals have been more dangerous than getting treatment from home because of the fear of catching the virus there. 

My prayer is that the Ministry of Health avails these simple doses to the small health centre - I, II and III - as well as the licensed private clinics in order to give us a good coverage of treating this pandemic. This is because people are not moving so they cannot reach the referral hospitals. Hence, they find it challenging to reach the referral hospitals. This will bring services closer. With this lockdown, there are very many people who have died of COVID-19 but there are also others that have also died of COVID-19 restrictions. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, it is my prayer that the ministry teaches and empowers the small medical facilities at parish and sub-county level –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have got your concern. Madam Clerk, I instruct you to record all the matters of national importance, forward them to the respective ministers and we get written explanations on Wednesday. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You have partly touched on what I wanted to raise; that the honourable colleagues are raising many questions of national importance. I would like to assure the House that the Government is able to answer each and every question. 

I would like to ask whether it is not procedurally correct for us to respond to each question as it arises, instead of having an accumulation of many questions to answer at once. Where the responsible minister is absent, then, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister can make a commitment that the minister will come back and give a response, other than receiving 30 questions and Members are not getting answers. 

I am seeking your guidance that we respond to each question as it comes, especially for where the ministers are present because we can respond to all these questions. I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are your ministers available to respond to what has been raised? I see the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees there.

3.13
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, some of the ministers are here and they can ably answer questions related to their dockets. 

However, some of the questions that have come up are in my report - the answers are in my report. If I had been given an opportunity, Madam Speaker, some of those questions would not have arisen. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The questions that relate to COVID-19, you will respond in your report on Wednesday. Other issues that do not relate to COVID-19, like the issue on disasters, if we hear from the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees now, it may be able to answer so many other questions. There was a question from hon. Laker of Gulu.

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Ms Esther Anyakun): Thank you, Madam Speaker. However, I want to also let you know that most of these issues have been reported to my office, specifically on the issue of floods. 

We are trying to respond simultaneously with some of the Members. I know before the end of August, we shall be having more problems regarding floods. We have tried to handle. For example, on Wednesday, I will be going with the Member of Parliament for Kayunga to her district to see the magnitude of the hailstones and the internally displaced people due to the overflow by the waters from Lake Kyoga. Therefore, we are handling this issue and we shall be in position to handle with the support of honourable members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there was also an issue of hunger because of –(Mr Nambeshe rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we finish and then you can speak -

MS ANYAKUN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know many Members have questions for our docket regarding issues of famine. The ministry is coming up with a comprehensive report for the entire country about the issue of a looming hunger. It has been taken very seriously by the Office of the Prime Minister.

On Tuesday, during the management meeting, we plan to present it to the Prime Minister and then, take it to Cabinet and definitely we shall be in position to come to the House with a report. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When do we get the report?

MS ANYAKUN: Madam Speaker, we are writing a comprehensive report about the entire country and we shall present it on Tuesday with our management to the Prime Minister first before we take it to Cabinet.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When you say, we are preparing, are you going to give - people are dying of hunger. We need to act fast when it comes to lives of the people - people are dying. There is procedural matter here -

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedure I would like to raise hinges on the response from the Minister for Information.

Madam Speaker, our rules are very clear. Questions for oral answers or questions are stipulated from rule 45; they have been earmarked and the order of presentation is different. 

Now, matters of urgent national importance should be responded to immediately - that is what makes them urgent. When an honourable member comes here to seek redress having failed to interface with the minister as regards a matter - for example, if it is a matter of life and death, you do not postpone it for three days or a week for a minister to give a written response. A minister can undertake and state that we have received that question, for example, if it is in the docket of Tourism, like hon. Gilbert Olanya posed. So, the Prime Minister cannot say that all matters are in her report including the one on the elephants.

Therefore, in this case, what is important is for a given minister to rise and make an undertaking-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She did not say that the issue of the elephants is also in her report -

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I have a lot of respect for my brother hon. Nsereko. I did not inform this Parliament that the Minister for Tourism will come next week. I said those ministers who are here can respond to their questions. Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In fact, that is what they are doing. The ministers are responding. But we also do not want the ministers to say it is in our reports, we want actions on some of these things.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, as I wind up, my issue was that when honourable colleagues bring matters - this is their temple of justice and you are the custodian of justice. And as parties relate in Parliament, one poses a question on behalf of the people they represent expecting answers.

Therefore, if an honourable minister is here, we are not speaking of those that are not around. Please, undertake either to give a comprehensive response but give an answer so that someone goes home knowing that what I presented has gotten a response from the minister present.

The responsibility is on the Whip to whip all the ministers, like you guided to be present in all sittings of the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, had you finished? 

MS ANYAKUN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My name is Esther Anyakun. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Of Nakapiripirit- 

MS ANYAKUN: Nakapiripirit District. I know I am inheriting a name from hon. Ecweru. Thank you very much. Just as I was saying, we are coming up with a comprehensive report. I requested a few Members to tell me how the situation is because we also sent a team to the field to tell us how things are going especially upcountry. For the people who did not give us reports - we need to review issues from the household level for most of the districts that were affected. We already got reports from Karamoja, Teso and Acholi. We are waiting for Western Uganda.

We are compiling the report so that when we make procurement for food items for the people, it should be in position to support in issues of -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Anyakun. Let that report not take too long. We need it for the people who are suffering from hunger.

MR NAMBESHE: Honourable Minister of State for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, I would like to seek clarification from you. Are you talking of a comprehensive report, which you have inherited from your predecessor or there are on-spot inspections in places, which are disaster prone? Currently, in Bududa the heavy downpours are pounding the area, landslides are hitting the people and many people are staying in places of worship; they are not in their homes because of the numerous cracks.

Do you have a team that is inspecting places like Bududa, which are prone to landslides and floods?

MS NETALISIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know the minister is going to come up with a comprehensive report but we are dealing with an emergency. You have heard hon. Gilbert Olanya talk about elephants and buffaloes attacking people and there is already someone who has died. 

I am wondering why the minister is waiting for a comprehensive report before she comes up with an action plan. I expected the minister to give a directive and instruct those in charge of wildlife to swing into action, because it was one of hon. Gilbert Olanya’s prayers -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Netalisire, we are talking about hunger and floods and not wildlife.

MS NETALISIRE: Madam Speaker, I heard about someone dying because of these animals. Even with hunger, these are emergencies where we expect things to be handled immediately. There are those emergencies that can wait for the report but there are those we need her to make a directive on, and the Government should come in and respond as soon as possible. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I gave a directive that the person responsible for Uganda Wildlife Authority must act on that issue immediately. We need a report on Wednesday on that issue. Now, we are talking about hunger and floods and the issue that the honourable member is asking about; is it a report you inherited or you have sent a team on the ground to get for you more information on what is happening?

MS ANYAKUN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have not inherited any report. The reports we are using to come up with this report are what we get from our information systems on disaster preparedness. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will be waiting for your report on what you are doing regarding these areas that are affected by floods and famine. We need action as fast as possible. 

Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, we need action to be taken. Is the minister here? The issue of Nakaseke Hospital and other hospitals will come out in the Prime Minister’s report. 

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, according to the Prime Minister, the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities will be informed to take action.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What about the Minister of Health?

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Health is not here. However, I would like to give some information regarding Nakaseke Hospital. Nakaseke Hospital is not a regional hospital but a general hospital. The ICU beds were given to regional hospitals. 

Today, the Minister of Health is attending a meeting to see how best we can import this ICU equipment directly from the manufacturer to avoid middlemen who are hiking the prices. If these items come into the country, I will make sure that Nakaseke Hospital benefits.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as it was said, it is not only Nakaseke Hospital; they talked about Bugiri and also Bukedea Hospital.

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, we have a number of hospitals, including Kagadi, Masindi and many others. The list is long. We are currently looking at how to mitigate this so that these other general hospitals can also start treating COVID-19 patients. 

I wish I was given an opportunity to give the report, which I have prepared. Madam Speaker, I am sorry I came late. The reason is that there was an emergency in Karamoja. Therefore, we rushed to State House so that we could find a way of helping the people of Karamoja because they are having a number of raids.

I am sorry I delayed but my report is ready. They have already sent this report to Members’ emails. We are also trying to see to it that our Members do not get COVID-19 from these papers. 

Madam Speaker, I beg for your indulgence so that I can present this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I made a ruling on the presentation of that report. We are handling matters of national importance. I also request the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that we continue – Honourable member, I am giving a ruling and you want to raise a point of procedure. I request, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that you bear with the House and present your report on Wednesday. We will debate it the whole day and finish it.

MR OMARA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Omara, I have not yet called you up. I have a list here of Members that is recorded. Maybe, we can have yours and then we record it.

3.30
MR ABDULHU BYAKATONDA (Independent, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a Workers’ Representative and I also earn a living as a researcher and consultant in this country. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Recently, I managed to visit a number of districts, one of them being Busia. The issue is that, as the frontliners battle COVID-19, they have encountered a number of challenges. One such challenge is that there have been brutal attacks, especially on nurses, by men in uniform. In Busia, Ms Ruth Nabwire was tortured to the extent that she died. There was also Ms Scovia Nafula, a focal laboratory person, who was tortured when she was leaving duty.

Similarly, Mr Mulimbwa, one of the people in charge of the IT systems, was also tortured. Recently, in Kabale, one Muhammed Byaruhanga, a nursing officer who was leaving duty at 9.00 p.m., was tortured badly by the security operatives of one of the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) of that area and he is now bedridden. 

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the Government finds a mechanism of regulating this impunity and these people should be compensated because they are in a critical condition.

Secondly, the Government realised that teachers in private schools are very important to the economy and the President directed that Shs 20 billion revolving fund be sent for private teachers in Uganda.  This was done in March 2020. 

These teachers are already organised. They have a union called Private Teacher’s Union, which is mandated under Article 29(e) of the Constitution on freedom to associate or to form trade unions.

Government has since not acted on this and they are looking out for other mechanisms, which infringes on the rights of workers to organise labour under section 3 and 4 of the Union Act. 

My recommendation is that Government comes up with a position because some teachers have already started committing suicide because of hunger and poverty. Recently, a one Peter Kirya in St Mary’s Buwenge committed suicide. Below his pillow, he left a note saying that he had failed to fend for his family and the option was to commit suicide. 
Lastly, as I was moving in hospitals, the issue of Personal Protective Equipments (PPEs) needs to be handled urgently. The statistics show that over 50 health workers have died because of lack of PPEs. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When you say “men in uniform”, do you mean the army men, the police? Whom are you referring to? Please, clarify on the men in uniform in Busia who are beating the nurses. 

MR BYAKATONDA: In Busia, it is mostly Police. And in Kabale, it was the body guards of the RDC. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we hear from the Minister of Internal Affairs?

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Madam Speaker, I have heard the concern of the honourable member of Parliament. I would like to request that he makes a substantive written brief so that I can follow up and we take action. (Interjections) I would like details. I request that he gives me details of his concern and we follow up and take action. 

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise up on a point of order. I find it difficult to rise on a point of order to the former Chief of Defence Forces, a General and Minister of State for Internal Affairs. 

Madam Speaker, you have clearly ruled and your ruling should be abided by everyone in the House. If a minister is present, then they have to give an answer. The honourable member has risen with clear information from what you clearly posed to the Minister of Internal Affairs. 

Now, he seeks a written submission from the honourable member, which is not provided for in the Rules of Procedure. Probably, our honourable comrade thinks this is procuring statements from criminals. These are honourable colleagues.

I would like you to intervene to protect the honourable member so that he gets a response. 

If the minister has no answer, he should be the one to seek time to come with a comprehensive response, not a comprehensive question from the honourable member. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nsereko, I think the honourable minister meant well. He wants more information for him to be able to act; he needs information. 

3.37
THE MINISTER OF SECURITY (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. While we shall be interested in getting more information to follow up these matters, I would like to inform the House that definitely, the Government does not condone any of those acts that were reported. Government is going to take action after investigating those incidents reported. 

However, I would like to inform the House that due to the COVID-19 – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of order. As you put the point of order, I request the responsible ministers to send people on ground to find out what has happened so that you take action fully aware of what is happening. 

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Of recent, Muslims have been arrested allegedly for attempting to kill Gen. Katumba Wamala. Those Muslims have been tortured and the media have been showing torture marks on their backs and all over their bodies. 

Is the Minister for Security in order to allege that Government does not condone torture when there is evidence? Even courts have awarded damages to victims of torture, especially in the Muslim community. I speak as the Imam of Parliament. 

Is the minister in order? When have you ever come out to condemn the torture on Muslims? Are you in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Basalirwa, I am not sure if those people were arrested as Muslims. Let us first remove that kind of religious tagging. Honourable member, I have made a ruling on that. I will give you your own time to bring a report to this House on torture. Honourable minister, please, conclude.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We arrest criminals. We do not arrest religious people. (Applause) These are suspects. Whether Christians, Muslims or pagans. We are going to follow up these matters. 

As I was saying, because of the COVID-19 lockdown, the security people are taking action to enforce lockdown to control the spread of COVID-19. Where officers make mistakes, action will be taken. Thank you very much. 

MR DAVID ISABIRYE: Madam Speaker, I was giving more information to Hon. Byakatonda. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has already passed. 

MR DAVID ISABIRYE: If you could allow, Madam Speaker, it is important.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When another person is called onto the Floor, you hand over the issue to him. 

MR DAVID ISABIRYE: But Hon. Byakatonda was still on the Floor. The reason I am insisting is the issue of men in uniform harassing health workers. The information I would like to give is that it is not only health workers. I was also harassed yesterday in Wandegeya by a police woman. After introducing myself, she told me how members of Parliament are not essential workers and that I was not allowed to move. Madam Speaker, I would like the Minister for Internal Affairs to take note of that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Defence, our members have been harassed. Kindly let your people on the road know that members of Parliament are essential workers too.

3.42
MR ACROBERT KIIZA (Independent, Bughendera County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise under Rule 54 (I) on a matter of national importance concerning the influx of refugees from the Democratic Republic of Congo into Uganda through Ntoroko and Bundibugyo districts. 
These refugees are entering through porous borders. Yes, they were designated a transit camp in Bubukwanga but which was designed to accommodate only 1,000 people yet as we speak, the number of refugees in the camp is 2,680 in 81 households.

When I visited the camp on Friday, I observed a lot of challenges ranging from, for example, in Bundibugyo the rate at which COVID-19 was spreading was low. At the time we had cumulatively, only 8 victims but by Friday in the camp, the refugees who had been isolated were to the tune of 126.

I pray that these refugees get transited to a refugee settlement camp that is designated to accommodate them. 

Madam Speaker, you are all aware that the Rwenzori Region is prone to floods. Like my honourable colleagues have said, Kasese and Bundibugyo people who were affected by floods and are still displaced in Internally Displaced Peoples’ Camps with challenges of food.

When the Prime Minister was looking at the number of people who would benefit from the COVID relief fund; some people were not considered at all.

There are pygmies in my area who are very vulnerable but have not been considered anywhere. My prayer is that Government comes down to the ground and works with the local leaders to ensure that all these people are considered. Thank you.

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Ms Esther Anyakun): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Member for raising this issue. However, what I know is that he is very much aware that during my first 10 days in office, I visited Ntoroko and Bundibugyo districts to do a fact-finding mission. 

The challenge we have is that the asylum seekers from the Democratic Republic of Congo entered and mixed up with the communities. It is only when we visited the place together with the development partners that we desegregated them from the communities.

We are screening to identify Ugandans who came with them from the Democratic Republic of Congo because that is why this number is coming to 2,680. Otherwise by the time I went there we had screened them to only 1,900.

I went to Kanala in Ntoroko and Kasese to see the people who were displaced by the floods but the prayer by the Member is to move these people away from Bukukwanga, which is a transit centre.

We know very well that the President gave us a directive on not moving people who are supposed to stay where they are because of COVID-19.

Definitely, I appreciate that development partners have worked hard to isolate some of those refugees who were got with COVID-19; they are not in the communities now.

However, we cannot transport these people to another community. If we have to take them away from for example, Bubukwanga in Bundibugyo, to Kyaka II, what will the community in that area say? We will have introduced COVID-19 into another community. So, this should be handled very carefully. We are making sure that at least they are tested and treated. After screening them, there is a procedure for them to qualify to become refugees before they are taken to the settlement camp. So, this is being handled by the ministry together with our development partners. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, next time you visit such an area, call the area MPs so that you sort out issues there to avoid such matters again coming to the House.

MS ANYAKUN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was there with hon. Ibanda and when I asked about the members of Parliament from Ntoroko, I was told they were in Gulu. However, much obliged!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. You need to inform them in time to prepare to be on ground.

3.49
MR GEOFREY KAYEMBA (NUP, Bukomansimbi South County Bukomansimbi): Madam Speaker, I am the shadow minister for sports. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the plight of sports and athletes in Uganda. As you all know, the Prime Minister did not include the sports people among those that have to get aid.

As we all know the sports fraternity employs a lot of Ugandans yet their basic earning is from gate collections, sponsors and transfers. However, from March, 2020, fans were banned from entering stadia.

Other sectors like boxing tournaments were cancelled and so, a big number of these people out there especially the youth, from 15 to 40 years, have no source of income.

I ask this House to request the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to extend relief to the sportsmen in the country. This can be done through their federations and the National Council of Sports; they have their contacts and names.

Secondly, we ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to consider providing financial support or stimuli to all registered sports clubs because they have been suffering since 2020 March. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in your submission on Wednesday, we need to know the plan you have for the sportspersons in terms of the stimuli, relief and all that you are giving other people.

3.51
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance relating to the management of the facilities availed by the Government to the people allegedly identified as “vulnerable”.
 
When the Prime Minister introduced this package – I congratulate her, by the way, upon assuming that office and wish her the best of luck – we expected reviews to be carried out on the categories of persons identified as vulnerable people. 

They restricted the groups, based on the urbanisation or declaration of urban centres, including rural subcounties, which were turned into municipalities and town councils. In the metropolitan area, many people were left out even when they had nothing to survive on owing to the lockdown.

The classification of “municipality” and “town council” is an artificial one, which has no correlation with the survival means and mechanisms. You may find people in what you still classify as a rural subcounty, who are private teachers, taxi drivers and other categories of people running businesses that have since been locked down.

May we hear from the Prime Minister the plans of reviewing that list, in addition to increasing the amount, to bring it in commensurate terms with the cost of living? This is not restricted to the people of Busiro East whom I represent or Wakiso District – (Mr Ssewanyana rose_)- With your permission, I will receive information from hon. Ssewanyana –(Interruption)

MR SSEWANYANA: Thank you, hon. Sseggona, for giving way. Madam Speaker, in addition to that point about the funding of the vulnerable people, no one has got this money in Kampala, according to the information that I have. We have got no evidence of any person saying that he or she has got this money, however small it may be.

The Prime Minister has continuously misled this country, playing on the psychology of Ugandans and the people of Kampala that she has been giving out some money to the people of Kampala. We are representatives of these people. We have local council chairpersons who can bear witness that no one in their villages has got this money. So, the Prime Minister should come today to clarify in front of Members of Parliament whether they have given out this money. Thank you.

MR SSEGGONA: I have received the information with gratitude. I know that the Prime Minister has so far given money to some resident, I think in Gulu, and she made a telephone call which confirmed that, actually, money was disbursed. Somebody confirmed that he had received money. In my constituency, including areas called town councils which are classified as vulnerable, I am not aware of anyone who has received the money. 

As a result, Madam Speaker, Members of Parliament are being turned into mini-governments. As people wait for the money from hon. Nabbanja – now popularly codenamed, “the Nabbanja Money” - (Laughter) You know, in Luganda - with immense respect - the name “Nabbanja”, which is a very popular name, means “a debt”. (Laughter) Now, Members of Parliament have become indebted to the population simply because the Rt Hon. Robinah Nabbanja undertook to pay a debt to Ugandans.

May we have the Prime Minister confirm measures to review the list and deliver to the expectations of the people of Uganda?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nabbanja, on Wednesday, when you are making your submission, you need to cover everything that is related to COVID-19. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give hon. Sseggona is that –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sseggona finished his submission.

MR OLANYA: He had already allowed me, Madam Speaker. I beg. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

When we tried to investigate the person who was called after receiving the money from Acholi sub-region, we discovered that that person was not registered by the Local Council I (LCI) or through the normal process. The boy said that he was taken straight to register with the office of the Resident District Commissioner.

Madam Speaker, there is some problem with this money. We also learnt that the majority of the people who are receiving this money are NRM cadres. If you are the best cadre, you will receive this money. This is the information I want to give.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Olanya, I do not want you to say that the NRM cadres are stealing the money because the majority of these people you see here are NRM cadres. That is why we have accountability committees. We should be able to find out where the money is, if it has gone somewhere. So, do not just make a general statement to that effect. Wait for Wednesday. 

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On our side, we are getting concerned, especially about the allegations which are being made that would require straight and urgent answers but we are being guided that they should be answered on Wednesday. Therefore, Madam Speaker, are we proceeding well –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are proceeding very well. (Applause) Those are COVID-19 issues that must be included in your report. I gave you time; you did not use it. I am saying we will proceed on Wednesday. Capture them and answer all of them at a go. You are even lucky that Members are able to ask now. 

MR TAYEBWA: With much respect, Madam Speaker, we are only requesting that you guide the Members that they have their limits, in terms of what they are presenting. I thank you.

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker - as hon. Baryomunsi sits down and I complete this point. As the Prime Minister prepares to come on Wednesday, I have seen some statement circulating on our phones, saying it is the statement.

I want to humbly request that those of us who come from municipalities that are beneficiaries of this money should be provided with lists of beneficiaries. As part of the documents to be sent on either to our phones or to our pigeonholes, let us have the lists.

Madam Speaker, I am getting concerns from Bugiri Municipality that, actually, the people who benefitted are not from Bugiri Municipality.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Basalirwa, all the people will have the lists. We will have evidence of payments.

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much. We will wait for the lists. We want to check Bugiri Municipality –(Interruption)

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: The additional information I would like to give to Hon. Basalirwa – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Prime Minister is on the Floor. Can we hear from her? 

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Give me just one minute, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we hear from the Prime Minister? 

4.01
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have the list of the beneficiaries. I would like to assure members that did this exercise in a transparent manner. For example, money was coming from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to Bank of Uganda; from Bank of Uganda to Post Bank; from Post Bank to MTN and Airtel, and from MTN and Airtel to the beneficiaries. Therefore, if I was given an opportunity to present my report, all these questions that are coming up now would have been answered. I request Members – You are pre-empting my report because I have already submitted it on your phones. All these answers will be there.

However, I would like you to note that we also have a privacy law. I do not know how we are going to go about that. I need guidance. This information has got people’s NIN and other things. I do not know whether it is procedurally okay for me to give out all these information. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, at an ample time, an accountability committee will look at that. Remember that the accountability committees have the powers of the High Court. Those issues will be resolved. We can even form an ad hoc committee to look at that.

If you are fearing the issue of privacy and whatever else, we will form a committee that will have those powers as per the Constitution. 

MS OGWAL: Maybe, we need to sympathise with the Prime Minister. She may have very good intentions, but we do not know how they have been implemented. What I would want the Speaker to guide the Prime Minister on, is that the lists of all the districts or the constituencies should have been put in our pigeon holes through the Clerk.

By the time the Prime Minister comes on Wednesday, we would have done her a favour by verifying those people who have been given money; those boda boda from Dokolo and where they reside. It is because they even give their voters’ numbers and the NINs. So, we will be able to verify them. By the time you come, I will be able to tell you how many are fake and how many are genuine.

I request that the Prime Minister should be generous enough to equip us with the list right now. We would rather wait for the report on Wednesday. Can we at least have the list so that we start working with you hand in hand?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Cecilia Atim, let us get the report. After getting the report, if we wish to verify – As I have said, if we are fearing leakage of information, we can have a committee to look at those lists, just to confirm them. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Indeed, you properly guided that the Prime Minister will present the report on Wednesday, where most of these issues will be answered. My understanding of this session is that members raised matters which cannot wait because they are very urgent. Therefore, I beg that for those issues – There are many sweeping allegations being made, which we can answer on the spot – from your side - yes.

I beg that you find it procedurally correct that the issues, which require urgent response to the satisfaction of the members – like when a member said the people in Gulu have not received money - we can answer them straight away. We may not wait for the report on Wednesday. When someone says it is NRM members who are receiving the money, we may not wait for the report to answer it.

Therefore, I beg that you find it correct that those allegations be answered now as we wait for the report from the Prime Minister; so that the people who are watching Parliament do not get an impression that we do not have answers, yet we have a competent team led by the Prime Minister that can respond to each and every issue, which is being raised on the Floor of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unless you are saying we should discuss the non-COVID-19 related matters, we will not handle matters that are COVID-19 related now. As I ruled already, we will discuss the report on Wednesday. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: You ruled that questions to do with COVID-19 should wait. However, we find it uneasy to wait until next week to respond to questions raised when we can answer them now. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is okay. We can discuss – 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence to guide the House. Since many of the points being raised are actually in the Rt Hon. Prime Minister’s statement, could we say that only urgent matters that do not relate to COVID-19 be heard, and the rest wait for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister’s statement on Wednesday? 

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: The additional information I would like to give to the Prime Minister is actually about the police; that she should also add police on the list of the vulnerable people. For four months, most of the barracks especially in Kampala have not had power. These barracks include Nsambya, Wandegeya and Old Kampala. So, the way they eat and the way they sleep – They should also be considered on the list of the vulnerable people. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That issue should be given to the Minister of Internal Affairs. I have a list here which has: Hon. Omara, Hon. Ikojo John Bosco and Hon. Stella Apolot Isodo. They all have issues concerning Covid 19; matters of COVID-19 should wait for Wednesday.

MR ATIMA: Madam Speaker, I think you invited me to present a matter of national importance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not on COVID-19 matters for now.

4.09
MR PAUL OMARA (Independent, Otuke County, Otuke): Madam Speaker, I had two issues of national importance; one on COVID-19 and the other one is on something else. If you would please, I would be willing –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can submit on non-COVID-19 issues. 

MR OMARA: Thank you. I rise on matters of national importance, regarding the tragedy of inadequate rainfall in the first planting season of 2021, and its impact on Lango Sub region. 

This matter has been put together in a petition to the Office of the Prime Minister and I have a copy here signed by the Members of Lango Parliamentary Group. 

Madam Speaker, Lango sub-region is composed of nine districts and also has a wonderful industrial city called Lira. We are a very energised and hardworking people and we have fertile land. 

Unfortunately, because of the prolonged sunshine in the region in season one, we now have serious famine.  People there have lost everything they have planted and they do not have the seeds to plant for season two. We are looking to Government to support our people.

We have three prayers:
First, we request Government to provide the people of Lango with immediate food relief. 

Secondly, because we do not have seeds for season two, we request the Office of the Prime Minister to provide our people with seeds, which have quick maturity dates.

Finally, recently, the sub-regions of Karamoja, West Nile and Teso were provided with hand hoes. I think – (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR OMARA: I now request the Rt Hon. Speaker that the Office of the Prime Minister provides the people of Lango with hand hoes so that they can walk through this period and plant something. 

I beg to move.

The Deputy Speaker: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, have you have got what Lango Sub-Region is asking for? They want food, hoes and seeds. They are reporting as a sub-region. (Hon. Acon rose_) Can the Prime Minister first respond?
 

Mr Acon: Madam Speaker, there is information I would like to give to the Prime Minister and this House. Already last night, two people starved to death as we are talking about the food shortages. One of the persons has been drinking hot water for about seven days and yesterday, that person was pronounced dead.

Therefore, my humble appeal is to ask Government to speed up with this kind of food assistance. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, they are asking for food. People are dying of hunger; they are asking for fast maturing seeds and hand hoes.

4.15
The prime minister and leader of government business (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, I request that you give me time since you allowed me to come back here on Wednesday so that I come with concrete answers to Members’ issues.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Honourable members, when I look at most of the lists that I have, matters of urgent national importance are on COVID-19 – (Hon. Kabanda rose_) Let me first make my communication, hon. Kabanda. The ones I received in my office and registered - what is not registered, I have asked the Clerk to register. We are not going to deal with just chits of papers.

Since we have given the Prime Minister up to Wednesday to present, we will ask our questions and she responds then. Therefore, I think we will not have a productive debate, especially when we are relating everything to COVID-19. I am adjourning the House to Wednesday next week.

(The House rose at 4.16 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 21 July 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 
