
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Official Report of The Proceedings of Parliament

FIFTH SESSION - 16TH SITTING - FIRST MEETING

________________________

Monday, 4 July 2005 

Parliament met at 2.23 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms. Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you back from the weekend and to say that we have a lot of work starting this week as you have heard before. We need to be more diligent as regards time keeping and also the amount of time we spend on each item. I would like you to take note of that. Thank you.

2.28
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Under matters of urgent importance, I would like to inform Government, through you, that the situation in Tororo County requires urgent Government attention. The people of Tororo County started advocating for self-identification way back in the 1940s and they carried it forward through the 1960s, 1970s, 1990s until recently. The people of Tororo are demanding for district status so that they can have an opportunity to enjoy their natural heritage and culture; to have identity like other people of this country; to enjoy their human rights and to be autonomous. As a result, they will to be able to access Government services more effectively, administer it and ensure that these services are able to reach the people.

Madam Speaker, I have been busy for the last one month but the latest incidence is that the people of Tororo have been calling meetings of their own. They had three constituency meetings in my absence and I was summoned for a constituency meeting on Sunday which I accepted and attended. During that meeting, the people resolved that since the President had visited Tororo County and granted them district status, that district is supposed to be operational with immediate effect from 1st July. 
They have information that Government has given directives that budgeting should be made for the new districts to be created but this does not include their new district. Therefore, they resolved that they would like Government to address their issue very seriously. In fact, yesterday they had resolved to demonstrate, install an interim district chairperson and take charge of Tororo District. If it was not for hon. Sam Anyolo, the guest I had invited, who pleaded with them, I do not know what would have happened. He requested them to grant him the opportunity, within one week, to consult Government before they took action. 

They directed me not to call them for any constituency meeting or to involve them anymore in discussions pertaining to the district issue because they were going to take charge themselves. As an MP, I have done my best and taken the President and the NPC there. All this worried me because if hon. Sam Anyolo had not been there, we were going to have serious violence. I would like to appeal to the Minister of Local Government and to the President through you, Madam Speaker, to consult the people of Tororo in detail so that we do not have violence and loss of property in that part of the country. I would like to be associated with peace and harmony, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I know there is a problem in Pallisa, let us hear from Pallisa also.

2.32
DR. STEVEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think this problem of creating districts should be resolved soon. This is because people are being kept in suspense and rumours are leaking from the Cabinet unofficially. In Pallisa for example, when the President came to Butebo, we asked for a district which would include Pallisa County and Butebo County. Then a rumour came from the Cabinet to the village that we had been divided between Budaka and Butebo. One of the ministers leaked the information to the district - (Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That is a very serious statement. May we know the name of the minister who leaked information from Cabinet so that appropriate action can be taken?

DR. MALLINGA: Hon. Namuyangu leaked the information to the people on the ground and the people started rejoicing. On Saturday, I think it was either Friday or Saturday, people in Budaka had been told to riot so that they should be noticed. Fortunately, the Police from Pallisa and Mbale went there and stopped the riot. Then rumours were carried all over the district that people from Butebo had been taken to Budaka; and that is an abomination to the people of Butebo. All along they have never been able to get along with Budaka, and in fact in the past, we used to have wars with the people of Budaka. 

All the years we have been in Pallisa District, we have been sidelined and that is why we asked for a district. I can take Government representatives so that we can go and examine the roads through Butebo and Pallisa and examine the mango tree schools that I still have. Let us also examine healthcare. We really need the problem of the districts to be resolved. Let the people know how Pallisa is going to be divided so that they can rest. 

Yesterday on public radio, somebody known in the district called in and said three people in Pallisa are marked and are going to be hurt. Those are Mallinga, Awu and Ogwari. Then he said they have hoes and they are going to start digging up the road from Tirinyi to Pallisa and that they have spears and they are ready to instruct their people to attack. Let us resolve this problem, let the resolution be brought here and let the people know what is happening. Then the whole thing will be solved.

2.35
MR MOSES KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, it is certain that new districts are going to be created. Some of the parent districts have been given non- indicative figures excluding parts of the districts, but if there is no resolution, the implication is that by the end of the month, the parent districts will be spending money from the district funds in areas that are supposed to be within the new districts. 

If you take the case of Kamuli district for example, the district was given for planning, indicative figures excluding the proposed district of Kaliro. What is going to happen to the salaries of teachers and other traditional civil servants? And what is going to happen to some of the activities that are supposed to take place in Kaliro district, because as of now, there is no vote for Kaliro district as known by Parliament. We all know very well that some planning has been made by Kaliro district but not as far as we are concerned. 

What will the Chief Administrative Officer in Kaliro do when the people in the present Kaliro start asking for their salaries?  Is he going to pay them out of the vote for Kamuli district? Why are these resolutions not forthcoming? Parliament is ready to consider them expeditiously. Madam Speaker, I think this is a matter that needs to be resolved immediately.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think we should hear from hon. Gole because he has something to say, then we shall have Commissioner Wacha and then the minister.

2.37
MR NICHOLAS DAVIS GOLE (Budaka County, Pallisa):  Thank you Madam Speaker. Hon. Mallinga has just said that a rumour circulated that the Budaka people have got a district, that is Budaka and Kibuku. However, the information we have is that Dr. Mallinga crossed from UPC on condition that he would be given a district. It was he who assured the people of Butebo and Pallisa that they were going to get a district and the information was run on radio of Teso and Veritas and it is known that it is he who sent the information. 

It is therefore not correct to allege that it was the honourable minister of Government who told the public. He is the one who goes around telling people that the Bagweri should go and he has even convinced colleagues in this House, that the Bagweri in Pallisa should go. Last Thursday, the Vice Chairman, Mr. Changwali  -(Interruption)  

DR MALLINGA:  Is the honourable member of Parliament in order to mislead this House that Pallisa and Butebo have a majority of Itesos? As a matter of fact, the majority of the people in Pallisa County and Butebo County are Bagwere, but they are a different kind of Bagwere compared with the Bagwere –(Laughter)- from Kibuku and Budaka. People from Budaka and Kibuku are the reason we asked to be divided because all the years we have been together, we have not been able to get along, and we have received minimal attention as far as services are concerned. When you talk about corruption, it is in Budaka and Kibuku. When you talk about embezzlement, it is in Budaka and Kibuku.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, I thought you are raising a point of order.

DR MALLINGA:  Is the honourable member of Parliament in order to mislead the House by giving wrong information?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I have not had time to study the different Bagweres and the Itesos in Pallisa, so I am unable to give a ruling on that matter.

MR GOLE: I thank you Madam Speaker. It is along those lines that hon. Mallinga is pursuing. He thinks that Bagwere in Budaka are so different from Bagwere in Kibuku, which is not the case. Fortunately, I did not even mention the different types of Bagweres or Itesots in Butebo and Pallisa. What we have is a political problem, which we need to address as people of Pallisa. I do not understand why Dr. Mallinga is dragging the honourable minister in these affairs. I thank you.

2.39
MR BEN WACHA (Oyam County North, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also agree that this matter should be resolved.  The issue of district statuses is being used to undermine certain members of Parliament. In my state, in 1998, President Museveni made a visit to my constituency and while there, he promised the people of Oyam that they would get a district soon. A resolution was passed by Apac District Council, agreeing that the counties of Oyam and Kole be put together to form Oyam District. The resolution was sent to Ministry of Local Government when hon. Bidandi Ssali was still the minister but somehow it got lost.  

Recently, when the wave for getting new districts started, the district again sent a resolution. Unfortunately up to now, when possible names of districts are being mentioned, the name of Oyam never comes up and there is propaganda that it is me, hon. Omodi Okot and hon. Okulo Epak who are against the creation of these districts. I implore the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Local Government to come up with a resolution and I am giving notice on the Floor of this House that if the name of Oyam district is not there, I am going to move it on the Floor and I challenge anybody to challenge it. I thank you, Madam.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the Minister of Local Government alleviate the fears of members and give us a time frame. I would like my members to stay happy and work together in this House.

2.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to alley the fears of members that Government is delaying to bring a resolution to create new districts. I want to assure the House that before the end of this week, I will be here with a motion for a resolution to create new districts. It is not until we are here, in the House, with the Motion that people should start debating on who is getting a district and who is not. 

Let me also allay the fears of those districts, which will become mother districts, because hon. Kizige raised a point that some districts have not budgeted for certain items. I think this is very wrong because since Government and Parliament have not pronounced themselves on which districts are going to be created, -(Interruption)  

CAPT. (RTD) BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, last week or so, the President was in Nakaseke launching Nakaseke district headquarters. Therefore, I want to know from the minister, what criteria is being used to launch some district headquarters before a resolution comes before Parliament?

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Speaker, I am not aware that Nakaseke district has been officially launched. All I know is that there is a procedure to follow and Parliament is the last institution with powers to create new districts. If you have heard that Nakaseke has been officially launched, I am not aware and that is not official.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Mallinga made a very serious allegation against hon. Namuyangu and she is not here. Hon. Mallinga, unless you can really substantiate to this House, that you were actually present when the minister was making these statements, you are actually accusing her of a breach of the Oath of Secrecy and the Oath of Cabinet. It is a very serious matter. Where you there and did you actually hear her?

DR MALLINGA: I was not there but everything that goes on in Cabinet regarding division of Pallisa district, I hear from the ground. The people call me and say the minister told her people such and such a thing. Last Saturday, there was almost a riot and it was organized. I was told the minister was there at a funeral. I am willing to bring people who were at that funeral when the minister said that the only way Butebo would be taken to Budaka is if the people of Budaka were willing to riot.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, you were not there.

DR MALLINGA:  I was not there, but I was told.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: People are told a lot of things. I think if you were not there and you did not hear it yourself, you should withdraw the statement. If you did not hear it yourself, please withdraw.

DR MALLINGA:  I did not hear it myself.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So withdraw because those are rumours.

DR MALLINGA:  I would like to withdraw it then.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay.

DR MALLINGA: But I wish that this matter be investigated to see whether it is true or not.

2.45
MR MARTIN WANDERA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a matter of privilege, and I beg, under the authority of Rule 55, to make reference to a newspaper article carried in the Government newspaper in which the army commander is reported to have said that our colleague, hon. Col. Bogere, is going to face the UPDF Council because of a decision he took to abstain when we took the vote on the Constitution (Amendment No.3) Bill,05.  

Madam Speaker, if that were true, it would be a serious breach of the National Assembly and Privileges Act, that grants certain rights to us as members of Parliament and this amounts to harassment. I would like to ask the Minister of Defence to clarify to this House, whether the statements reported in the New Vision are true and if so, why Col. Bogere is being subjected to this kind of harassment? If we let this continue, other constituencies will also come up with resolutions of imperative ways for people to vote.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Fortunately, Gen. Aronda is also a member of this House. I think we shall ask him to tell us whether this is what he said.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 27/2005 TO THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS

2.48
MR AGGREY AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Notwithstanding our established procedure, permit me to read Question 27/05.

2.49
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr. Ruhakana Rugunda):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, hon. Aggrey Awori, Member of Parliament representing Samia-Bugwe North Constituency asked a number of questions relating to social facilities and services available to the Police Force. The honourable member wanted to know the following:
1.	Whether there are plans to construct hospitals for this force.
2.	Whether there are medical doctors attached to the Police force exclusively.
3.	Whether health facilities or services especially prenatal and postnatal services are available for wives of the Police personnel
4.	Why, in his opinion, the welfare of the Police force, for example accommodation, sanitation, is the poorest compared to those of other security organs.
5.	The number and the distribution of primary schools exclusively provided for the Police force.

Madam Speaker, it is true that it is the responsibility of the Government of Uganda to provide the said social facilities and services to the Uganda Police Force. This is always done within national resources available.  Unfortunately, due to the limited nature of these resources, the Uganda Police share has not been enough to enable Government provide services of the quality, which would be comfortable for the Police Force.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I want to remind honourable members that the Police force has been reorganized. The reorganization is meant to make the force more efficient in the delivery of services to the public and to ensure that the force optimally utilizes the resources made available to it. This inevitably includes provision of social services and facilities. In line with this, I am glad to report the development and strengthening of the medical Police unit as the latest action that is under way in the Police force.  

Honourable members might have heard the Inspector General of Police talking about this very subject last week. We however need more doctors, midwives and other categories of health personnel. 

With specific reference to the questions asked by hon. Aggrey Awori, I would like to inform the House that we provide the following facilities and services using, as I said, the available resources to Uganda Police Force.

On the question of medical facilities, during the financial year 1999/2000, the Uganda Police Council approved a plan to construct a hospital. However, honourable members may recall that in the year 2001, the Police had to vacate Parliamentary Buildings.  Police headquarters, now located in Kibuli, had to share the limited facilities there with the Police Training School. This has put a lot of pressure on those facilities available to the Police force. 

Since it is possible for Police personnel and their families to access other Government facilities, for example Mulago Hospital, and indeed they are doing so, the plan to construct a hospital was put on halt. Our efforts are now focused on building a Police headquarters. All plans are ready and construction will start as soon as resources become available.  Building a Police Hospital will be looked at, after the headquarters are built.

Madam Speaker, on the question of medical personnel, there are nine medical doctors and two dental surgeons who serve the Police force. There is one doctor each in Masaka, Mbarara, Fort Portal, Hoima, Jinja, Mbale and Soroti. In Kampala, we have two medical doctors and two dental surgeons.  

However, as pointed out above, other medical personnel in Government health facilities can attend to Police personnel and their families.

Prenatal and postnatal services: Madam Speaker, the Police force has prenatal and postnatal services and facilities in the following places:
Nsambya Police Health Unit in Kampala, this year, Shs 50 million has been set aside to renovate this unit.
Jinja Police Health unit, Masaka Police health unit and similarly, there is nothing that stops Police personnel in other places from accessing other Government facilities when the need arises.

Madam Speaker, the honourable members will be pleased to learn that in pursuit of our community policing method, these units do not turn away non-Police personnel who go there for medical attention.

Welfare of the Police Force:  Madam Speaker, it maybe true that the Police Forces welfare does not compare well with what is available in other forces.  As already stated, the Police facilities available are provided using their share of the national resources.  It is the share of the national resources that helps us to provide what is on the ground.

Secondly, honourable members will appreciate the fact that the Police force is a national force with facilities all over the country. For example, we have 119 barracks in 63 Police districts and 56 gazetted Police stations. 

In addition, there are over 700 Police posts scattered all over the country.  With this sort of coverage, it is not easy to provide services of the quality we would be comfortable with, using the limited resources available.

Honourable members provision of adequate welfare facilities is a priority matter in Uganda Police Force. To indicate the extent to which we utilize the resources given to us, I am laying on Table an appendix to this statement. The appendix shows what we have done and where we have done it since the year 2000.  

Some of this has been done using Government funding through the Budget.  The assistance we get from Justice, Law and Order sector and internally generated savings have also helped, especially in the acquisition of uniports.  With your permission, Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the Appendix that I did refer to. 

The number and distribution of primary schools:  Madam Speaker, we have six Police children primary schools.  These are located at Kampala, Ntinda, Jinja, Mbale, Lira and Gulu. 

In pursuit of the community policing method, in addition to encouraging Police integration of our society, children of non-Police personnel are not discouraged from accessing education at the Police children schools.  Similarly, some children of Police personnel go to other schools of their parent’s choice.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, and honourable members, I want to say that we are aware of the inadequate services and welfare available to the Police force.  We always try to improve on them using the resources available and as our national resources increase, I am sure and confident that the Police and its share will also increase.  This will consequently lead to improved services to the Police force. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also make available a copy of the annex I refer to hon. Aggrey Awori.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  Now, the Minister answered all the three questions at once. So it might cause some lugubriousness. But let us get some supplementary starting with hon. Awori.

MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you Madam Speaker.  I am equally happy that the honourable minister has answered all my questions at ago to make it possible for us to provide supplementary information.

Let me start with a preamble, just like he started with a very long preamble of lamentations.  His preamble was basically a lamentation. Madam Speaker, it is tragic that we are under the rule of law and the only organ we can call to enforce law and order is the Police force and yet it is the most marginalized security organ of the State. 

 It is pathetic to hear from the Minister giving us various statistics on the so-called improvements in the pipeline and the status quo.

Could the Minister tell us the ratio for instance, in terms of medical facilities, of those nine doctors to nine dental surgeons? This is the kind of medical force we had several years ago when the Police force was under 10,000 men and women.  

Now I suspect that they are over 17,000 men and women officers.  How do you expand the number of people without expanding the services?  Could the honourable minister tell the august House and this country, why we have kept this ratio static and yet expect the people to produce an efficient service?

When you talk about prenatal and postnatal facilities, is the honourable minister aware that even before those women and men who support our people in the course of maintaining law and order, before they beget these children, are confined to about three families to a uniport?  

Madam Speaker, could the honourable minister tell the august House why you continue to abuse the human rights of the Police personnel by denying them privacy? When you have more than one family sharing an accommodation, definitely, you have deprived them of privacy. Could the hon. Minister explain why he continues to abuse the Police force by denying them this basic human right?

Two –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the third. But raise supplementary information instead of having a preamble and then a question.

MR AWORI: No, we are now in the peak of it, in the substance –(Interruption)

MR ANDRUALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I heard you very well asking hon. Aggrey Awori to answer questions arising out of the questions. But now he is talking about the rights of the policewomen and so on, which is not one of the questions he asked, is he procedurally correct?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No the question of accommodation is answer No. 4 according to the Minister’s list.  Honourable Member, please ask supplementary questions, do not first create ground, the ground is already created.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker for helping my hon. colleague on the matter of language.  Welfare is within the parameters of human rights, once you deny me my welfare – 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, Our Rule 62 of the Rules of Procedure do provide for a dress code for Members of Parliament.  Allow me to read it: “All Members shall dress in a decent and dignified manner that is to say a pair of trousers with a jacket, a shirt and tie, a kanzu and a jacket or a safari suit for male Members.”  

Is hon. Omach Jachan in order to dress in a way that does not conform to our Rules of Procedure?  Is he in order to put on a nightdress?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, whereas the Rules provide for a suit and so on, there is a now a growing tendency for Africans to design their own clothes. So I believe hon. Omach Jachan is wearing an African suit.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Talking about medical facilities, I would like to know from the hon. Minister about the current status. 

One, I do understand from my friends and relatives in the Police force that you provide them with 30,000 shillings per month for medical facilities.  I wonder whether you know that the cheapest ordinary clinic in the country, especially in urban centres charges a minimum of 15,000shilings.  Why are you subjecting our Police force to such pecuniary problems?

Two, the dental facilities you have outlined here are definitely inadequate. 

Three, the neighbouring security organ, that is the Prisons, have probably the second best hospital in the country at Murchison; it is almost next to Mulago.  But why are you not sharing this facility given your difficulties with resources?  It is a referral hospital at Murchison Bay for the Prison department, so as a minister of both departments, why have you not combined them to share this wonderful facility at Murchison?  Why do you subject Police to Mulago where they have to queue for long hours and often fail to get any services?

Three, on the matter provided in your answer on page 5, “Number and distribution of primary schools,” I note that Kampala is in central, Ntinda is in central, Jinja is in the east, Mbale is in the east, Lira in the North, Gulu in the north and none in western Uganda; the Minister may be familiar that one time –(Interruption)

CAPT. BASALIZA: Thank you, hon. colleague, for giving way.  I would like to inform hon. Awori that in Western Uganda, we have two referral hospitals and one university hospital in Mbarara and Fort-Portal.

MR AWORI: Thank you, honourable colleague, for your information, but it came a little bit late in that I had already covered the medical aspect. I was talking about schools.  So, thank you for your information but it is a bit irrelevant.  

My hon. colleague in charge of internal affairs, could you tell this august House what facilities you have provided for the HIV program within the Police force?  Do you have any program at all?  And how many of our dear security officers are falling victims of this scourge per month?  

I am asking this question because you are not helping them to prevent it. There is no serious program and if so, at least under the medical program you would have included this scourge. We have not been mindful of the persons who may be afflicted with this problem and yet they are in charge of our law enforcement. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, your last question raises some ethical matters.  Is there a law in this country that compels the State to establish your status and if so what do they do? Do they sack you?  

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I was not asking for disclosure of the sero status of any persons in public service –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, you are asking the Minister what he has done for those – whether he has assisted them to get ARVs and so on.  But in a situation where we are not compelled to disclose information, that raises a lot of ethical questions.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I may have been poor in addressing the question; basically what I am asking for is once they have analysed it, is a question of epidemiology. The Army has a program, what program do you have in the Police force?

MR OMODI OKOT (Kole Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I want to draw the attention of the minister to page 4 of his report, and it is on the matter of Police post.  Madam Speaker, all over the country, there are many places designated Police posts and some of which are centres.  

I want the minister to tell us what must be there in order for a centre to be called a Police post.  There are instances when some lousy houses are hired and policemen are required to live in twos or threes, and allowance is written for this post.  So these people become target for thieves, hooligans, and sometimes they are killed.  

I would like the minister to tell this House what qualities and qualification a Police post should have before it is designated a Police post.  

Last, we who were in Gulu had handed over a report on the IDP camp in Pabbo. There were pictures shown of Police posts, and unfortunately some of these houses are being hired at very high cost.  The Government is paying a lot of money but if you look at what is presented, it lives a lot to be desired.  

I would like the minister to categorically tell this House what qualifies a place to be called a Police post and how many of such posts there are.  Do they vary in the rental charges? Because, I have seen many and I know that some are not worthy to be paid for.  

Madam Speaker, does the minister have a plan of building houses for the Police in such areas where we have dilapidated houses being hired from the communities around.  The minister must tell this House about this, because a lot of money is being wasted in this particular field.

Finally, I would like to ask the minister to tell this House why on page 3, he talks of medical personnel.  You counted 9 medical doctors, none is for the north and yet there is a lot of need for medical personnel in this area. Why does the minister find it easy to make the north grow without such services?  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let us hear form Hon. Wambuzi first and then Hon. Malinga.  But please, let us have short information not submissions.  
 
MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): Thank you Madam Speaker.  I would like the minister for internal affairs to tell this House whether he has any intentions of coming back to this House and briefing us about the progress he is making on the Sebutinde report.  I know he has very many problems, resources are inadequate, and he is really working in a very hard situation. But it is only this House, which could help him.  

I would also like the minister to brief this House about where we stand as far as allocating budgetary resources to the Uganda Police in particular in comparison, say with Tanzanian and Kenyan Police.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon Members, do you really expect the minister to answer that question today?

MR WAMBUZI:  Madam Speaker, it is very important for us, especially in the process of harassing the Police. We should know whether we are allocating adequate money to the Police or not. 

As we form the East African Community, its important for us to know whether we are allocating adequate funds to the Police so that our Police officers at the Busia border become comparative with the officers from the other countries.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Wambuzi, I disallow your questions because they are not related at all to what we are debating. In any case, we shall shortly have a report on the East African Community, where you can bring that matter.  So for now, I disallow both questions.

DR. MALLINGA:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to pronounce myself to the level of medical care, which the Honourable Minister has advanced and I am satisfied. 

 Madam Speaker, you cannot build, for example, a whole Police hospital for Kampala. I have never heard of a country where that is done.  The way to do it is to provide primary care at the Police barracks, but then make the rest of the medical care say, Mulago hospital, Nsambya hospital and any other hospital available to the Police staff and that is what is happening here.  

To set up a different prenatal and postnatal clinic for the Police is just wastage of resources.  The general medical care facilities are available, and Police should avail themselves of those facilities.  Where necessary, arrangements can be made with private practitioners so that Police can go there at certain periods to be treated. But to build medical institutions for the Police is a waste of resources and no country ever does it.  

You have Police surgeons in a busy place like Kampala, who will go out at the site of accidents or crime to -(Interruption)- I want to help out because hon. Awori raised questions, which were rather unnecessary; I am sorry.

MR YIGA:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I have got two questions.  One, in my constituency there is a Police post called Kalungu Police post.  Sometime back, it was a Police station but somehow it got demoted to a Police post.  They have land and some infrastructure in terms of buildings, both for offices and accommodation, which are really dilapidated, and need urgent renovation. 

My people would like to know whether the government has plans to go back and re-gazette this Police post and make it a Police station as before, so that they may get better services than they are getting right now.  

Welfare also covers transport and my constituency has three Police Posts. They do not have transport, yet we know that some time back when members contributed some money to aid the Police Force, we bought a double-cabin pick-up –(Interruption)

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you for giving way. I think that Police Station was demoted to the level of Police Post. Maybe there was not enough crime to justify the Police Station.

MR YIGA: I thank my colleague for volunteering an answer.  But the Minister would give a better answer because if that Police Post was refurbished, it would serve a bigger area.  

When we raised some money and bought a double-cabin pick-up for the Police Force, somehow the Government never appreciated it. The impression I got was that, the Government discouraged fundraising for the Police, yet I could fundraise and buy those people a desk, a chair and a bicycle.  

The Minister admits that the problems of welfare are a result of inadequate resources. I would like to know whether he would allow generous people to come in and voluntarily offer bicycles, desks, benches and any other requirements, as we wait to get adequate resources? 

MR RUHINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As a Member of Parliament for Nakawa, I must commend the Government for the effort they have put in to improve the welfare of the Police Force. The school you talked about in Ntinda, Nakawa, and many other facilities have been put in place.  

However, the welfare in terms of accommodation and sanitation is still very poor. The modern management trend is through Private Public Participation (PPP) meaning that you tap resource from the private sector and engage it to rejuvenate to the public sector. I know there are some business individuals or entities that would be willing to come and construct, say, buildings for the Police. Why don’t you give them Government bonds and pay them a modest interest rate?  Why can’t we look at such synergies in our administration?  Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I understand this question to derive from the fact that we have a very poorly facilitated Police Force, given the fact that the Police are overcrowded in the unipots. Sometimes you find six or more officers in one unipot. This means that the question of housing needs to be addressed very urgently.  However, the clarification I would like is more to do with form than structure. The Minister seems to say that there are antenatal and other facilities at the health units.  What I am interested in is, if this poorly paid Policeman or woman walked into one of these facilities, would she get the drugs?  Would she get the gloves?  Would she deliver in that unit? If the offices and the structures where they sleep are that dilapidated, what assistance can they get from elsewhere?   

I would like the Minister to assure us that if we walked into those health units, we would surely find drugs and delivery kits.  

MRS ODWONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to know from the Minister how the Police Force has been prepared for the transition process. Looking at most Police Posts, which do not even have vehicles, I wonder how they will participate effectively to keep law and order during the upcoming elections, beginning with the Referendum, and later on, general law and order within the communities.

I also wish to know what special programme you have for the Policemen serving in difficult circumstances, especially, areas of conflict. For instance, I know that in Kitgum Police Station, the welfare of the Policemen and their families is very appalling. The Policemen have to improvise and carry stones as heavy as 30 kilos for the roofs. We are afraid that one day, stones will fall on them and kill them. The Ministry should avail iron sheets to some of these Police Stations so that they help them with at least a few of their accommodation problems.

Mr Minister, there are rampant cases of defilement.  We have been told that there are doctors that are attached to the Police Department.  How many of those doctors are female?  Many at times defilement cases have been lost, because we cannot really point out certain things with empirical facts.  However, most of the times, it could be that the victims fear to approach and open up for the male doctors.  

Finally, yet importantly, I would like to know whether there would be special programmes of involvement.  Many times we have been told that the number of Policemen is very low.  I do not know whether there will be another countrywide mobilisation and campaign to help bring in more youths, particularly girls to join the Police Force.  Otherwise, I would like to commend the Police Department, from the lowest ranking Policeman to the Inspector General.  Despite the difficulties and shortcomings, they have done their best to do their duty without complaint. Thank you very much. (Applause)

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I want to commend the Government and Police for the good and beautiful structure in Kibale, where we shall have Police headquarters. I hope that the facilities and equipment will be provided. Some time back, I raised a matter and I got the impression that Government was going to follow it up.  That was a grant, which was offered to Government for the construction of Police houses and this grant was somehow lost because the Ministry of Finance said it would cause microeconomic instability.

I do not know whether they have never discovered a formula on how to make sure the balance does not cause instability.  The impression the-then Minister gave was that the Uganda Government was going to re-negotiate with the Government, which had offered the grant. Could the Minister let us whether there has been any effort?

Madam Speaker, as you go to Kansanga, there is Kabalagala Police post. We recently learnt that the owner of the building that houses the Police showed up, after a long time. I do not know whether Police is planning to negotiate with the owner or leave. The owner may not want the Police to continue occupying the building.  In any case, if he asks for accumulated rent, I do not know whether Police would afford. I would like the Minister to tell us about the plans for structure in Kabalagala

3.28
PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the Minister’s statement and the Government’s effort to improve security through the Police. I wish the Minister would add some numbers on the statement so that it is more solid.  Let me raise a few things where I hope the Minister will help.  

On page 3 you say; “All plans are ready, and construction will start as soon as the resources become available. Building a Police hospital will be looked at after a headquarters is built.”  We would have liked to hear something to do with numbers for instance, “as soon as possible” or “a specified period”. “When the headquarters is built” is not clear at all. It will never be because this is – if we want to hold you accountable these numbers are very important. 

Similarly, on medical personnel, “There are nine medical doctors, two dental surgeons,” we would want to know from your standard performance, a force of so many men and women officers, how many medical people of each category should they really have so that we know what you have and the variance that you need.  It would help the Minister, if he told us, “I have a force of so many strengths; by standards, this should have so many medical doctors, so many dental surgeons, so many nurses.”  Then we would be able to know how many you have and how many you need.  Based on that, we are scientifically approaching a solution to your problem.

Concerning the welfare of the Police, you are telling us that you have 119 barracks, 63 Police districts, 56-gazetted Police stations and over 700 Police posts. I would like to know the standard facilities you give to a Police barracks, a Police district and Police station and a Police post. After you have established the standard, you will tell us what you actually have so that we can see the difference between standard and what is on the ground. Then when you tell us about resource availability, it will give us a sense of what resources we should give you.  But if you tell us the resources available, we have no measure on what resources you would require even meeting your standards. This would help both parties. 

My last comment relates to the fundamental challenge the country is facing, that of eradicating corruption. Two things cause corruption.  There is corruption based on need; a Policeman has no school fees, no uniform, no food, no accommodation, and when you put him on the road with his gun, he is forced to be corrupt when he should not have been. Therefore the inadequacy of facilities to a Police officer breed corruption, which is one of the greatest challenges the country is facing. There is also corruption based on greed which we can deal with on a different level, so –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are supposed to be asking a supplementary question.

PROF. KAMUNTU: May I now ask the Minister, if he is aware that by not facilitating the Police he is perpetuating corruption, which is the greatest challenge this country is facing.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.32
MR AEL ARK LODOU (Dodoth County, Kotido): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  My concern is about accommodation in Police stations.  In 1975 President Amin did a good job and built two permanent Police stations in Karenga and Kalapata; Karenga borders Sudan, and Kalapata borders Kenya. Since that time, the Police station in Karenga houses about 30 Policemen and yet there are over 30 rooms. Kalapata houses about 20 Policemen, if at all.  Kabong Police station has few Policemen, but the infrastructure is very adequate.  However, knowing that we have two international borders, Sudan and Kenyan borders, we need Policemen at each of them, but we have none.  During the political transition, we need Policemen to be in Kabong.

Madam Speaker, we have criminals, who are arrested normally in Kidepo National Park, who are transported to over 180 kilometers in Kotido; and yet there is infrastructure for the Policemen to be in Karenga, Kalapata and Kabong.  Is there an arrangement by your Ministry to deploy Policemen to those areas?  Thank you.

3.34
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister has stated that as our national resources increase, the Police’s share will also increase. This will consequently lead to improved services to the Police. I would like to know from the honourable minister whether I should believe him, because he is aware that Government revenue has been increasing all year round as the welfare of Police becomes worse.  For him to say that when we get more money we shall improve their welfare is not to take these questions seriously. These questions are meant to help Parliament as well as the Ministry.  You supported the proposal by the Ministry of Defence in Cabinet regarding the 24 percent of the budget from other departments. 

I would like to know from you whether you intend to make such a proposal. I will surely support you, for the good of our Police Force. Honourable minister, remember we are talking about people who are packed in uniports as though they were sardines. I would like the Minister to answer.

MR KASSIANO WADRI (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Ndugu Rugunda for the quick and precise response he made. However, I would like to seek some clarification on one issue.  There are supposed to be three categories of personnel in all the Police barracks; Police Officers, Medical Personnel and Welfare Officers. All the problems of housing, sanitation, medication and counselling would be well catered for by the concerned personnel.  These should be employed at both district and Police headquarters. I would like to know from the Minister whether these officers exist in all the district barracks. Their families also need recreational activities for the children bearing in mind the housing problem and its associated challenges. 

The other time the committee on Internal Affairs went on the spot-checking especially in the nearby barracks and we found that Police Officers were selling uniforms. One uniport was being shared by three to four married Police Officers. When an officer goes on duty at night, he is not sure whether his spouse is safe. The welfare officers’ role becomes very important -(Interruption) 

CAPT. MWESIGYE: I would like to know from hon. Wadri, whether he knows that Rtd Col. Dr Besigye was a minister of Internal Affairs who should have had plans for the Police. 

MR WADRI: You see it is below my standards to talk about personalities, we are talking about institution building. Dr Kiiza Besigye is out of the country but the Ministry of Internal Affairs, which he led is here. There is a substantive minister, whom I am asking these questions. He is capable of giving me all the answers I need.

Madam Speaker, is the role played by these very important welfare officers appreciated? If they are in place, are they carrying out their duties? These issues I would like the Minister to clarify.

MR. AWONGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to ask three important questions.  But before I ask these questions I would like to thank the honourable minister for the very good statement contained in this document.  I would like also to thank the Police right from the Inspector General up to the low ranks for a job well done.  I am happy that the discipline of the Police has improved and that is what I think made their work much better than before.  I also want to propose that for the welfare of the Police, if we are serious Members of Parliament, 33 percent of our salaries for the next three months should be deducted and donated to the Police Force. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

MR LOLEM: Madam Speaker, I want to inform my honourable colleague that when he is here, he is here as a Member of Parliament, not anymore as RDC where he can dictate. There are procedures we follow to pass the Police budget.  Therefore, I want to inform you that we have passed the Budget for Police and he has to know he is no longer RDC; he is a Member of Parliament.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these are supplementary questions, not a debate.

MR AWONGO: Madam Speaker, I made a proposal and as a Member of Parliament, I have a right be listened to in this House.  I have not dictated. I know how much the Police has contributed for the improvement of life in this country.  In many parts of this country, especially in towns like Koboko, Police barracks and posts have been squeezed in very narrow areas that make the expansion of the Police Force very difficult.  May I know from the honourable minister whether the Ministry has got plans to acquire bigger land so that the Police is able to perform better than right now.  

Madam Speaker, the honourable minister is aware that Koboko is a gateway to both Sudan and Congo. as a gateway, there is  need for a very strong gate so that nobody can break it. Yet in Koboko, there are only 10 Policemen with about 17 Police Constables and the mobile Police are kept in Arua, which is about 50 miles away.  Whenever there are problems, the Mobile Police are called. It takes hours for these people to come. Do the Police and Minister really help the people of Koboko to ensure that the Mobile Police are stationed there to protect that big and important gateway?  

MS MEHANGYE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I thank the Minister for providing a vehicle to the DPC in Kamwenge finally.  There was time when Kamwege as an entire district did not have transport at all. Now there is one vehicle for the District Police Commander (DPC). My question on transport is, how do you honourable minister expect the Police to execute their duties using that one vehicle to run round the eight sub-counties, including a town council? How do you expect them to fulfill the demands that are made on the Police so that they can run from one place to another? How do you advise them to run on boda bodas, to borrow bicycles? How do you advise the Police to work when they have been asked to reach out to these far off areas? 

Honourable minister, how many pairs of uniforms do you give to the police officers? Do they receive these uniforms according to what one can afford? I am asking this question because in Kamwenge I have seen police officers wearing very old, worn out and completely dilapidated uniforms. The Police should be an institution that we are very proud of. If any visitors or tourists miss their way, they ask the Police. But they find the Police dressed like people going to the market place! Surely, how many pairs of uniforms do you give to these police officers so that we can see if they are enough or whether you need to give them an extra pair of uniform?

And about the accommodation for the Police, both office accommodation and dwelling places, the small rooms from where the Police operate are appalling. You find them in mud huts and uniports. In Kamwenge there are mud huts with mud peeling off. Others are grass-thatched and this is the where they are expected to have important documents kept safely. I do not know what you intend to do about their residence because their accommodation for sleeping is terrible. 

You have talked about the plans to build the headquarters and hospital sometime when the funds are available but what are your plans whether in the short-term, medium term or long term, to improve accommodation for the police officers? We are talking about three or four families sharing a uniport or one little house. I think you really understand that it is not very easy for these families to share these houses –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know that you are supposed to be asking supplementary questions. Questions about accommodation have been raised by hon. Wadri.

MRS MEHANGYE: So, I want to specifically know whether it is in the short term or long term, but let it be put in perspective that we are thinking about accommodation for the Police. Thank you.

MRS EUGENIA MINDRA JOYO (Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for giving us information about the services of the Police. I would like to ask him to clarify to me the difference between regular police and the administration police, which are handled by the local government. In most of the sub-counties it is the administrative police who are handling the responsibility of the Police. 

In two of the sub-counties in Itula sub-county headquarters for example there are only two administration police without even a gun. How are they supposed to manage the security of the area? Similarly in Aliba sub-county there are two administration police who do not have guns. Where are the guns? How are they supposed to carry on their responsibilities?  

The other point is, the Police officers do not have offices. They are sometimes just squatting at the office of the sub-county headquarters. They cannot even afford to rent a room at the trading center. They live in very poor, unsafe houses. Even if they had guns they would not be safe. So, is the minister really aware that such a situation exists? When you report a case to these people, they cannot confidently pursue the culprits because they are not armed and feel insecure. So we ask the minister to seriously look into that issue.

Lastly, the issue of accommodation for the staff even within Kampala, in Nsambya, Ntinda and Naguru barracks is bad. The houses are not worth living in especially the ones in Ntinda. They should be demolished. Suppose the houses collapse and fall on those personnel, what will government do? They will first of all have lost personnel and then they will have to compensate. But we are not after compensation; we want them to be alive and give us service. So, can the minister work much harder to improve on the budget, claim more money from the Government so that the situation of the Police is improved? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for having put up a case as far as police welfare is concerned. 

First of all, I would like to commend the good work the Police has done despite the hard circumstances under which they work. We should appreciate even here in Parliament whenever they are called upon to protect Parliament they have done a great job. However, I have a few supplementary questions. 

Mr Minister, do you have a strategic plan for the Police force? For instance, the Ministry of Health is already having a strategic health plan, planning to put health centers and tools at every parish in every community. Any nation that does not consider health and security as paramount issues needs a lot of review. So, when are you coming up with a strategic plan to ensure that at least in every parish there is a well laid out network to ensure that internal security, which is a major duty of police, is taken care of? We need a strategic plan, which elaborates the welfare, the future plans and everything. Can you come up with a strategic plan for the Police force? There has been a deliberate effort to construct police headquarters at regional and district level.  

It is very unfortunate that in Rakai for the last three years when my sister Sarah Kiyingi was still Minister of State for Internal Affairs that is when she laboured to put up a district headquarters’ structure. To date that structure is at a standstill, it is filled with cracks, the workmanship was so poor. Can the minister inform us, when is the Police Headquarters for Rakai District going to be completed? When you go to Masaka it is completed, Mbarara is already on the final touches; my brother from Kibaale has said they are doing the final touches, when are the Police headquarters for Rakai District being completed for the Police force to be transferred to the district headquarters?

Lastly, Mutukula Police Post is a border post. We have a similar border post on the Tanzanian side, it is well spaced and the infrastructure is well laid out. When is the Police structure at Mutukula border going to be in place to ensure that as people leave and enter Uganda they have a proper security check?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, you cannot give information on supplementaries, please.

MR KASAMBA: Finally, there has been a lot of community initiative to put up police posts. At least I have witnessed and participated in launching one at the borders of Mbarara and Ntantamuchi. Many police posts have been built on community initiatives even one as you go around Kamengo there is a powerful businessman called Tokyika, he has facilitated the putting up of a very well-established police post at Kamengo. When is the ministry coming up to operationalise community initiative, to participate in ensuring that adequate structures are put in place? When are they going to ensure that at least policemen and policewomen are housed in decent and affordable infrastructure? Thank you.

MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sometime this year the Police were celebrating 99 years of existence, next year they will be celebrating 100 years. But given the statement from the minister and the answers he has given to the question, the Police have very little to celebrate. When are you going to give the Police something to celebrate about? You pass Naguru, the structures are so dilapidated and maybe it is the only symbol that they have been here for 100 years - deterioration is the symbol of aging.  

Mr minister, some time ago the Government decided to put Local Administration Police under one command. When you go to the villages there is nothing to show that these people of the Local Administration Police belong to the same force. They have no uniforms; they have no facilities of any measure. When are you putting the Local Administration Police under the uniformed command of the Police?

MR TABAN MBALIBULHA (Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I also thank the minister for bringing this statement. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not a statement; these are answers to questions so ask supplementaries.

MR MBALIBULHA: Thank you very much. My question comes from page 4 under the welfare of the Police force. Paragraph 2 reads: “Secondly, Madam Speaker and honourable members, you will appreciate the fact that the Police force is a national force with facilities all over the country.” My emphasis is on “facilities allover the country”. On Saturday the Kasese market caught fire. The nearest fire engine was in Mbarara and it arrived very late when property had been destroyed. My question is, if the Police force is a national force with facilities all over the country, where is our fire engine for Kasese? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It seems honourable Kafiire is burning, and hon. Santa Okot. Let us have those two and then the minister will answer.

MRS JULIET RAINER (Kibuku County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am from Pallisa District. I am reporting that Kaderuna Police station is in a very sorry state. They are being housed in an old ginnery. All the walls are cracked and I would love to take the honourable minister with me this weekend. I will accommodate him in my house. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, order members!

MRS RAINER: Why am I going to accommodate him in my House? Because there is no room at the police station. Unfortunately, Mr Minister, most of the staff are women. The other day two of them delivered. The roofs are leaking, so what you are encouraging is health conditions being very bad in Kaderuna and the man in charge is a university graduate, you imagine. It is really bad. Either we do away with the police or we improve the conditions. But the invitation to go to Kaderuna with the honourable minister over the weekend still stands. Thank you.

MRS SANTA OKOT (Woman Representative, Pader): Mr Minister, thank you for those answers. Last week we discussed the issue concerning the LDUs and the Minister of Defence made a statement explaining that the welfare of the LDUs is supposed to be handled by the Ministry of Internal Affairs. I told the House here that if Ministry of Internal Affairs since time immemorial had failed to handle the issue of the Police, we get very worried whether these LDUs would be served properly to make them handle and guard the people in IDP camps. 

Mr Minister, the question I want to put before you is, I would like to know whether there is any plan to put personnel in the police station at Lachekochot, which used to help the people who travel on the highway between Gulu and Kitgum road? That police station used to serve three sub-counties, which are near the place. It used to have a standby vehicle. The office is standing there but without personnel. I would like to know whether there is any programme in place to reinstate the police so that the 30,000 people who live in Ata IDP camp can be safe living.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I know that this subject is very important but so far 21 members have asked supplementaries. I will only be oppressing the honourable minister if I continue. Mr Minister, please respond.

4.06
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to salute colleagues for the indepth discussion and the interest they have showed in the issues of Uganda Police force following the question by hon. Awori. And for those who did appreciate the work of Uganda Police force, I thank you. I salute you particularly because the Uganda Police force is doing excellent work a midst many constraints. 

I will briefly go through some of the questions but not attempt to answer all of them. Suffice to say that the Uganda Police force is not as marginalised as hon. Awori did state. The Uganda Police force is at the center stage in as far as consideration of our security forces is concerned. 

There were many remarks to the effect that the Uganda Police force has very few doctors but let us look at the facts. In Uganda the doctor to patient ratio is about one doctor for every 18,000 people. It is of course a bad ratio we should improve it but as far as the Uganda Police is concerned we have one doctor for 1,500 policemen. That compared with the general population is a high number because the Police force has twelve times as many doctors per person. Madam Speaker, let me make this point again and say that the Uganda Police personnel have full access to the health facilities that the Government provides and what we are now talking about is additional facilities for the Police force. 

I must commend hon. Mallinga for his explanation, which was absolutely apt. There are very good HIV programmes on education, there are comprehensive primary healthcare programmes within the Police force to assist the police personnel and their families on various health programmes, including HIV programmes.  

Hon. Okot raised a number of points and questions concerning the police posts, their manning and also the hiring of buildings expensively. Our line is simple: we hire as a temporary measure pending the availability of resources so that we can construct our own homes at police post level and beyond.  

Hon. Wambuzi, there is a clear programme on the Ssebutinde report’s implementation. I would be extremely happy to come to this House and give a progressive report. As I speak now about 75 percent of this report and its recommendations have been implemented.  

The question raised by hon. Yiga about Kalungu Police station and its demotion, I would need to make some investigations before giving an unequivocal clarification and response.

The question of private/public partnership for the police to help in construction is a good point raised by hon. Ruhindi. We have discussed this matter on several occasions. In principle we support it but there is only one hindrance in that you literally borrow money from private companies to be paid off in a long time. However, this would be inconsistent with the general budgetary lines of government avoiding taking on commercial loans when we are already struggling to pay concessional loans.  

Issues raised by hon. Alaso on the availability of drugs, drugs are sometimes available but there is no guarantee that they are always available. Nevertheless, we endeavour to continue to do so in order to ensure that as many essential facilities can be mobilised and made available.

Hon. Jane Akwero raised questions that are very valid. We are in a transition and let me use this opportunity to help colleagues appreciate this point. To make sure that the police are getting money does not necessarily require cutting off 25 percent from other ministries. It does not mean that. That is an emergency way of budgeting, which we should do everything possible to desist and run away from. We should go for deliberate budgeting so that we do not disrupt our national budget when we have passed it here. 

This financial year the Uganda Police force has got what I considered to be a lion’s share. This is the case because as you know Cabinet decided that we shall recruit 4,000 policemen and women. This is about five times the number we normally recruit in one year. Which means that the Government has already mobilised money, which is already in the Budget. Therefore, the Police in my view are getting a very reasonable share of the national cake.

Are we going to be ready for the transitional period? Definitely, yes, there is no question about it. 

Let me take this opportunity to appeal to all Ugandans to ensure that they are as responsible as possible so that the Police does not have to run after X, Y and Z. Things should be as orderly as they can but in case people do not follow the law, the Police is ever ready to ensure that law and order is enforced.

On the question of female doctors, our primary concern is doctors but it is also true that we are putting deliberate efforts in the Police force to recruit as many female professional officers, including doctors. It is actually our priority as a policy.

Hon. Kasirivu, yes, it is true that Kibale is one of the beneficiaries of new structures that have been put up by the Police force. We will ensure that we equip and support it with personnel. 

The police structure you talked about at Kabalagala, really the law will take its course. The Police will negotiate if the information you have given is accurate. The Police will follow the law to sort out this matter. I do not anticipate any problem at all.  

Hon. Kamuntu Ephraim did raise a point of –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, honourable minister. The question of female doctors is a very important thing. It would be prudent for the minister to treat it as a primary concern rather than think it is just another appendage to the recruitment of doctors. I am not satisfied with the response that was given. 

I recall very well hon. Akwero Odwong asked, “How many female doctors do you have?” Currently the issues of rape and defilement are handled by the Police force. The victims of rape and defilement feel very haunted when a male doctor asks them to recount the whole experience. They begin to wonder whether they are not being told to do it over again. That is why we are very concerned that we should be told if there is only one or two female doctors then we will begin from there to lobby for more. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, hon. Alaso. I did state that it is a policy of the ministry and government to give priority recruitment for women in the Police force.  

Number two, it is also very desirable that we should encourage women doctors to handle women. However, there are excellent male doctors who handle women very well. So, while we are recruiting women as a priority, let me appeal to women to be prepared to be handled and examined by men who –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I must also take exception to that statement. The statistics indicate that the cases of rape and defilement in this country are among the highest you have. We did not hear how many convictions you have secured. It is actually a fact that women find it difficult to relate their experiences of rape and all that trauma to men. So, when you say we should be ready to be examined by men, I take exception to that one. It is not acceptable. You must make specific provision for women doctors to be available for the women in this country.

MR AWORI: Notwithstanding my intention to call the minister to order prior to your ruling and following your ruling on the matter, I wish to call upon the minister to withdraw officially his remark, otherwise we call him to order. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The statement to which members take exception is the one where you say women should be prepared to be examined by men.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I do not intend in any way to be in conflict with the Speaker on this matter. Suffice it to say that we are dealing with a professional matter and the facts of the matter are that we do not have enough female doctors in the medical profession and that some of our best gynaecologists are men. So, while respecting highly the preference of ladies to be examined by female doctors, I think first and foremost we should give respect also to professional ethics so that –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: I have no serious objection to my honourable colleague’s professional explanation. However, we have our Rules of Procedure that once the Speaker has ruled on a matter, unless you come up with a substantive motion you have to abide by the ruling. Is he in order to continue to rub in with his professional explanation notwithstanding your ruling and our Rules of Procedure?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is out of order.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I abide by your wise ruling. 

With your permission I move on to the question raised by hon. Kamuntu –(Interjection)– if I may be allowed to finish my responses, please. Hon. Kamuntu did really raise very significant points but he wanted the minister to give timeframe as to when the Police headquarters or hospital would be built. Hon. Kamuntu who is an expert on budgetary issues more than anyone else knows that there is no way a minister can authoritatively stand here and give a calendar of when such a huge project will be done when he does not have the money available on the budget. So, hon. Kamuntu Ephraim, I can categorically answer your point in terms of timeframe when I have money on the budget passed by Cabinet and Parliament.

On the question of corruption, the comments made by hon. Kamuntu Ephraim are absolutely valid and it is true that sometimes some of these people work under very difficult conditions and they become vulnerable. It is no excuse but they become more exposed and we should do everything possible to equip them and also protect them from this temptation.

The question of plan to deploy the Police force in various posts raised by hon. Ark Lodou, the Police will do everything possible to deploy its personnel in all the places that we can afford.

Hon. Martin Wandera, I did answer his point because he was saying the Police should really act in a dramatic way and call for 25 percent cut on the Budget. I have already brought him on board because the Police is getting, in my view, a reasonable part of the Budget.

Hon. Wadri Kassiano, are there welfare officers in police barracks? The answer is actually yes, in some barracks and when there are not, the officer in charge takes care of welfare issues.

Hon. Awongo did raise a very interesting proposal, which I think will be looked at and considered by colleagues. I agree with him that Koboko is an important gate for Uganda and needs support especially now that there are going to be even more dynamic relations, trade and other activities with Sudan. The Government takes this point very seriously.

Hon. Mehangye -(Interruption)

MS TIPERU: Point of clarification, Ndugu Rugunda.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, if I can be -(Interruption)

MS TIPERU: Point of clarification, Ndugu Rugunda. Please, it is very important.

DR RUGUNDA: Since this is a matter to deal with West Nile I will give you the Floor.

MS TIPERU: Thank you very much for accepting. As you know, one of the first areas among others that Ndugu Rugunda visited was Yumbe District and that day we got a lot of hope when you arrived there. As you witnessed the condition of our buildings, especially the police post, the grass-thatched houses we call Tukus were really bad. You witnessed the cells were in poor condition. You even pledged to give us a patrol vehicle. So, I am seeking clarification, what is the fate of the people of Yumbe? Since you last visited we have not seen a change and yet you could use your humorous nature to really see that these things reach our people. I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Hon. Tiperu, you should encourage Ministers to visit and give them time -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And accommodation.

DR RUGUNDA: To implement what -(Laughter) It is true that we are procuring police vehicles. It is true that gradually more and more districts are being given these police vehicles and Yumbe will not be an exception in this process.  

On the point raised by hon. Mehangye, recently Kamwenge did not have a police vehicle and now it has other transport problems, which we will gradually look at and solve.

The question of police uniform, a policeman or woman gets two pairs of uniform in a year.  

The question of grass-thatched houses, by the way where I have gone I have encouraged policemen and women that instead of sharing uniports they should put up grass-thatched units as a temporary measure pending government solving these problems. So, I would like hon. Members of Parliament to work with the Police, including hon. Aggrey Awori, so that the Police can be encouraged to solve some of these problems pending final solutions from government.

Hon. Mindra did also raise a question of arms for the LDUs. Sometimes when guns are inadequate it is possible to deploy some of these people but every effort is being made to ensure that every policeman who is deployed is also deployed properly and is equipped with a gun.

Hon. Kasamba asked about a strategic plan, the Police have actually a working strategic plan.  

Rakai police headquarters is in the pipeline and so you should not get too worried. You can re-assure the people of Rakai.

My brother hon. Mwandha was uncomplimentary to the efforts being made by the Government and the Police force. The Police has everything to celebrate. It is on the right track, it is expanding itself, it is re-organizing, it is increasing discipline and every effort is being made to equip it and to improve its structures. 

On the question of local administration police, Cabinet has actually passed the Bill to have one national police force incorporating the local into the national. We expect that the Bill will be presented to Parliament very shortly since Cabinet has already passed it.  

As I said, I am not attempting all the comments that have been made.

Hon. Kibanzanga did raise a point that is true, on the fire engine for Kasese. First of all, my sympathies hon. Kibanzanga for the fire that really destroyed so much property. It is true that we do not have adequate fire facilities. Suffice it to say that clear steps are being taken. We have now purchased two fire tenders, which are already in place. 

And No. 2, we have had a donation of fire engines in Entebbe. 

Then No.3, the Government is shortly authorizing fire masters from a private fire firm to come in and also supplement our national efforts to fight fire like the one that appeared in Kasese. 

Hon. Kafiire, your invitation has been accepted. I must say I intend to use that opportunity to discuss many other issues that may narrow the gap -(Laughter)

MS KIRASO: I am sorry to take you back hon. Rugunda but thank you very much for giving way. I am seeking clarification on the Fire Masters. Are you going to sub-contract them? What is the cost benefit analysis like? Is it not cheaper for government to get its own unit and supplement what you already have or just continue paying a private firm? Has a study been carried out? Which one is more cost effective?

MRS ZZIWA: We know that fire fighting in many countries is actually not the responsibility of the Police. It is the municipal and city authorities’ responsibility. Actually one of the qualifications of a city or a municipality to graduate to another level is its capacity to fight fire. 

I would like to add my voice to hon. Kiraso’s inquiry to find out what steps you are taking to ensure that we go in that direction? With due respect, with the equipment we have got I do not know how long it will take them to reach Kasese in order to be able to save lives, or Bundibugyo or Apac for that matter. So, I would like to get some assurance.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, on the issue of fire fighting, in the whole of West Nile there is no equipment except a truck, which is owned by the Civil Aviation Authority and should any fire break out that vehicle is not allowed to leave the airfield until when they communicate to the Civil Aviation Authority and it okays them to go to fight fire.  

Is it possible, through your ministry, to have some understanding with the Civil Aviation Authority so that when fire breaks up that communication between say where the fire has broken up, the Police and Civil Aviation Authority – I mean a lot of time is wasted - it no longer serves as an emergency intervention. Can you, through your ministry, have that understanding so that there can be a quick response whenever there is any fire outbreak? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the question raised about Fire Masters, government is now having discussions with them. It is true, as hon. Zziwa has put it, even in our own laws they empower local authorities and municipalities and city councils to handle fire matters. So we are working as indeed one government with police, the city authorities and the Ministry of Internal Affairs to work out the necessary modalities. But let me also say the government has no intention of hiring Fire Masters.   

Nevertheless, private people who wish to contract Fire Masters can have that relationship. However, as I said, these are just preliminaries because the discussions are still going on and we would like them to be completed as quickly as possible so that Fire Masters can be operational. The question of them not being in Kasese or West Nile or in Kisoro, we should look at this as the beginning. If the beginning is okay, and I expect it is going to be okay, I do not see why the private fire fighting facilities cannot be expanded to Mbale, Jinja and many other centres.  

On the question of Civil Aviation Authority raised by hon. Wadri, first of all the Movement has markedly improved communication. It is not a question of the Civil Aviation Authority headquarters being far because communication is very simple, but I would still think that this is a matter that can be discussed in more detail with the minister responsible for the Civil Aviation Authority. The point you have raised is nevertheless a legitimate one.

On the point raised by hon. Santa Okot, I do not agree with her that the Ministry of Internal Affairs has failed to supervise the Police Force. In fact the contrary is true that the ministry is doing very well in supervising the Uganda Police force.

Secondly, the question of auxiliaries, I am glad that hon. Amama Mbabazi, Minister of Defence and hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, Minister of State for Defence, did deal with this matter very well last week. It is true that money for the auxiliaries passes through the Ministry of Internal Affairs but because it is utilized under the direct supervision of Defence, it is really Defence that handles it and accounts for it. So on the question of auxiliaries, government is already dealing with it. 

A Cabinet committee, as you were informed, has been set up and we expect that the Cabinet committee will shortly be able to produce its report. We think that this Cabinet committee will help government and the country know the exact numbers we are dealing with and how to finally solve this problem, which has almost become perpetual of auxiliaries not being paid properly. Government is anxious to bring this matter to an end.

With regard to the police post or station that you referred to between Gulu and Kitgum, this is something that I do not have information on now but it is something that we are going to look at and we will do all that is possible to support the wanainchi in the area. We shall get police facilities because they obvious need them especially with problems of security in that part of Uganda. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AWORI: When the honourable colleague stood up to answer my questions he also tabled a document with an appendix to the answers but this document has just reached me now after he had finished answering and yet there are some questions, which could be arising from this document. I am just wondering whether we should let the matter rest as it is, or could we have supplementaries arising from the document? If so, what was the purpose of bringing only one copy when the answers are supposed to be for the entire House?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Hon. Awori is not being honest to this House. When the honourable minister was submitting and when he laid the document on the Table, I passed a document to hon. Awori in time enough for him to raise any supplementaries. Now he is turning around to say that the document has just arrived to him! Is he in order to do this?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My problem is that I have not seen that document and I do not know the contents. I am not in a position to preside over things, which I have not read. May be we shall find another occasion to deal with it. I do not know what is in it; I have not received it.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. I really appreciate that.

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, a very important question has been raised in the process of discussing the questions, which were answered today, and that is the question of rape and defilement. We did not deal with it satisfactorily. I would like to inform the honourable members that every hospital normally has a team called the rape or defilement team. It consists of a nurse who is very well trained to interview and talk to these patients. There is a psychiatrist who gives psychological support to these patients over time, and lastly there is usually a gynaecologist.  

The nurse would ask the patient whether she minds seeing a male gynaecologist. If she says no then a female gynaecologist will be obtained as part of the team. If neither is obtained then the nurse can deal with the problem. The role of the gynaecologist is to examine the patient –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mallinga, you are talking about the hospitals, but we are talking about the police stations. Victims are supposed to go to the Police Surgeon. That is what we are talking about, not the hospital but police surgeon.

DR MALLINGA: Police do not take care of rape or defilement; they take them to the hospitals.

MS ALASO: Is Dr Malinga in order to undermine our efforts to deliberately mainstream gender into the Police force in accordance with the national gender policy, which this country has?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is out of order. Honourable members, instead of fighting the position we are putting up we want you to understand that it may be necessary for the Ministry of Internal Affairs to target women doctors specifically to join the force, and specify this in the advert. It may also be necessary for the Ministry of Health to encourage more girls to join the medical profession. So please, do not take these issues lightly. What we are talking about is very serious.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF 
PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE THE PAYMENT OF AN ALLOWANCE TO THE ESTATE OF TITO OKELLO LUTWA (DECEASED), FORMER HOLDER OF THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT 
UNDER SECTION 3 OF THE PARLIAMENT (REMUNERATION OF MEMBERS) ACT, 1982

4.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Aloysius Okumu-Ringa): Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise the payment of an allowance to the estate of Gen. Tito Okello Lutwa (deceased), former holder of the Office of the President, under Section 3 of the Parliament (Remuneration of Members) Act, 1982 as amended by the Presidential Emoluments and Benefits (Amendment) Act, 1998. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it seconded?

AN HON. MEMBER: Seconded.

MR OKUMU-RINGA: “WHEREAS section 3 of the Parliament (Remuneration of Members) Act, 1982 as amended by the Presidential Emoluments and Benefits Act, 1998 provides that Parliament may by resolution supported by the votes of not less than half of all Members of Parliament authorise the payment to a former holder of the Office of the President an allowance of not less that two-thirds of the salary of the President, 

WHEREAS Gen. Tito Okello Lutwa (deceased) was President of Uganda from July 27 1985 to January 25 1986; and 

WHEREAS Gen. Tito Okello Lutwa (deceased) died on 3rd June 1996 before receiving the allowance; 

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that an allowance of two-thirds of the salary of the President out of the Consolidated Fund is authorised to be paid to the estate of Gen. Tito Okello Lutwa (deceased).”  

Madam Speaker, the emoluments due to the estate of the Late Gen. Tito Okello Lutwa are to the tune of Shs 12 million being the amount, which is due in respect of the estate. This amount is derived from the value, which is two-thirds of the amount due and in precise terms it is Shs 12.96 million only.  This payment is the sum in total, which is due for payment as provided for by law.

The provisions of the Presidential Emoluments and Benefits Act are very clear on this matter and I would like to lay one copy on Table in order to assist and later on be able to substantiate the issues that members may wish to raise. I beg to move.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek the following as a matter of guidance from the honourable minister. He is saying he is going to table a formula of how he determined the figure of Shs 12 million as a total sum. The said President died a long time ago and I assume this figure must have been determined from the day he ceased to be a President so there must be an element of interest on the figure. Have you considered interest and if so, which interest rate are you going to use, the Treasury Bills or the commercial one? 

Mr Minister, you are saying among other things that this is according to the law we passed here. You are not even telling us the basic sum. How much do Presidents make, by the way? How did you get the sum of Shs 12 million? You intend to table a document to which we have no access until we have pronounced ourselves on the matter? Must we really accede to the motion by voting for it without knowing the basic elements involved in terms of determining the total emoluments? 

This is an estate you are talking about, which means the money is owed to the family. The family has been deprived of this money for a long time. Why do you want to give them a lump some of money as if he just retired or died yesterday? You owe the estate money; it was your own negligence in terms of coming to Parliament for a resolution of members. So, could the honourable minister who has come up with a motion for a resolution give us guidance, with this outline, then we know whether to support the motion or not? To debate without the basics will be misleading. The minister should give us those guidelines before we engage ourselves in the debate. 

MR WACHA: Madam, mine is a very small issue. I have the Order Paper here indicating that this motion for the resolution is brought under section 3 of the Parliament (Remuneration of Members) Act, 1982. I seem to have heard the minister talking about the Presidential Emoluments Act as well. Under which law is this resolution being brought here because the two are very different?  

MR PAJOBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to know from the honourable minister why he is only raising the case of one former President and yet we have four others who died: Paul Muwanga, Yusuf Lule, Idi Amin and Okello Lutwa; plus Vice-Presidents: Samson Kisekka, Gad Wilson Toko and Paulo Muwanga who died –(Interjection)- why is he only bringing only one? What about the rest? If it is a law, let it involve everybody. Bring everybody, we work out the formula and pay them all. (Applause)

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much.  My concern has actually been aired out by hon. Wacha. I specifically requested for the Presidential Emoluments and Benefits Act, 1998 from the Table to look at. Unfortunately, the minister was not fair to the House by not quoting the relevant section because it would have given us more information about the resolution. I do not know how he wants us to deal with this because the information is quite categorical. I wish he had quoted the actual law to deal with other than the one, which he actually quoted for purposes of this resolution. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I want clarification from the minister. In the resolution he said the allowance is to the state. Do we pay allowances to the state or we pay pension and gratuity on the resolution that he presented?  

PROF. OGENGA: Madam Speaker, mine is a very simple clarification. The honourable minister talked of an exact figure but when he was quoting the law he said that the law said not less than one-third of something. If the law says not less than one-third, how do you arrive at an exact figure? 

DR OKULO EPAK: Madam Speaker, I want to thank hon. Pajobo for raising most of the issues I wanted to raise. However, I want to give an additional point. During the NCC we had a Presidential Commission of three: I think it was Wacha, Nabuchocho and Musoke; these were presidents. (Laughter) Honestly –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: I do not want the House to be prejudiced. The Wacha he is talking about is Mzee Joel Wacha Olwo not Ben Wacha, Member of Parliament. (Laughter)

DR OKULO EPAK: Thank you. Hon. Ben Wacha then was a Member of the NCC, which appointed his namesake Mzee Wacha a presidential commissioner. 

Madam Speaker, it is very sad for this country for a minister to come to the august House with selected or a selective presentation of a case, which has many more claimants. I would agree with hon. Pajobo that the minister must go back and bring a comprehensive report and tell us why others qualify and others do not qualify and we should be convinced on why they do not. Otherwise, using this approach leaves a lot to be desired. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before you move your motions, I am of the view that this matter should have first gone to our Committee of Presidential and Foreign Affairs or Public Service so that you agree on the issues of policy. Honourable minister could you and our committee not sit and conclude this matter in a short time?

MR OKUMU-RINGA: Madam Speaker, I would like to request that I respond to this then we can take on that. But I agree with you –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let him respond. It will help us to instruct the committee.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, it has been made abundantly clear by my honourable colleague on the Floor that the motion by the minister is flawed in form and substance. So, why should we continue to debate a matter, which is ill prepared? I go with your ruling. Let the minister kindly abide by the Rt hon. Speaker’s advice and withdraw quietly before we move a motion to throw him out. 

MR KALULE SSENGO: I also want to be assisted. I am wondering whether the minister made a mistake, an advantage error, because if you bring a resolution to Parliament just to approve Shs 12 million for a whole former vice-president, I think there is something wrong. Former vice-presidents and presidents are given Shs 12 million shillings! This is chicken feed. How do you bring the whole House to discuss Shs 12 million? We must be serious. This is a respectable country where you cannot bring a whole Parliament to discuss Shs 12 million to give to the family of a deceased vice-president. This is an insult.

I request that the minister goes back and sits with the committee then he brings something commensurate with the title so the whole world cannot hear that Parliament sat to approve a mere Shs 12 million for the family of a deceased. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, there are issues of policy, quantum, form and dignity that are involved. So, I would like to urge the minister to go and meet the joint committee of Public Service and Presidential and Foreign Affairs, go through these resolutions and then come back. We shall give it time, even though we have a lot of work. 

MR OKUMU-RINGA: Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the concerns of honourable members and also your ruling. With the notes I have taken I would like to go by your ruling that we go to the relevant committees and harmonize some of these issues. I would like urge members that since you are now aware of the issues -(Interjections)- I will take this matter to the committee and report back. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay.

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, there is already a motion on the Floor and we cannot proceed with this matter unless the motion is withdrawn and the resolution submitted to the relevant committee. I ask you to direct him to withdraw this motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Since we are unable to conclude this motion, withdraw it for now. You can come and move again after meeting the two committees.

MR OKUMU-RINGA: Madam Speaker, as regards reference made by honourable members to certain issues, the first issue, which refers to motion No.1 of payment of remuneration to the late former President Gen. Tito Okello Lutwa, I withdraw this particular motion. The subsequent motion, which has not yet been presented, will be discussed by the committee and I will bring it back when we are ready. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you very much. Hon. Leader of Government Business, there was some business from the Ministry of Agriculture, which we had touched on some time back. What was remaining was for the ministry to inform Parliament on how they are going to wind up the Tea Authority obligations, terminal benefits and things of that nature. They could also come quickly so that we can conclude it. It has been hanging around for some time.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister of Agriculture will be ready tomorrow to deal with the matter. 

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance and actually through you to the hon. Minister for Parliamentary Affairs and preferably the Prime Minister in charge of Government Business in the House, from time to time our colleagues in the Cabinet come up with defective Bills and motions as if they have not had substantive and conclusive debate in the Cabinet. Could they tell us whether they just come up with these issues without thorough debate in the Cabinet or what? Do you debate matters like this resolution you are seeking, did you discuss it -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, there is no longer any resolution. So, I do not know what you are dealing with. It is not there. (Laughter)

Honourable members, thank you for the work you have done today. The House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow afternoon.

(The House rose at 5.05 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 5 July 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)


