
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Official Report of The Proceedings of Parliament

FIFTH SESSION - 20TH SITTING - FIRST MEETING

________________________

Friday, 8 July 2005

Parliament met at 10.40 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to begin by thanking you for the work you did until 9.00 p.m. last night and to welcome you to this morning Sitting. I am aware that a number of us are anxious about the issues concerning the resolution for the districts, but we have set aside Monday afternoon to deal with the issue of the districts, so that we can try and move faster on these items. Therefore, the issue of districts will be handled on Monday and you can sharpen your tongues for the debate. 

10.42
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank members of Parliament, to thank you and the Speaker of this Parliament for having honoured me and the people of Lwemiyaga with your presence on my wedding that took place on the 19th. (Applause) I want to assure members of Parliament that the people of Lwemiyaga are very grateful for the opportunity you gave them to have the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker together. They are also very grateful to had the two rare ministers, who do not normally go for parties and weddings. They were hon. Begnina Mukiibi and hon. Isaac Musumba –(Applause) – and they were grateful to have 42 members of Parliament and to host people from Lwemiyaga, Kazo, Nyabushozi, Sembabule, Kabula and Buwekula. 

It was a fantastic occasion, Madam Speaker. Please take my heartfelt greetings from the people of Lwemiyaga and to all Government Officials, Public Servants in Government, the Chairman of the Organising Committee hon. Bright Rwamirama, my bestman hon. Herbert Nuwagaba, hon. Kaddunabbi and hon. Mawiya Lule who did a tireless job to make it a success.  Please take my kindest and warmest regards and please come again. Members, you have a home in Lwemiyaga – (Laughter)– whenever you feel like it, you are always welcome. Lwemiyaga is your second home so do not hesitate to come again. I thank you Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Although the Speaker congratulated you in Lwemiyaga, we collectively do it again. Give our regards to Mrs. Ssekikubo.

10.44
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you Madam Speaker. Yesterday you brought to the attention of this August House the tragic incident that took place in London, for which we appreciate. We take this opportunity to convey our condolences to the bereaved families and to the Government of Great Britain. 

Madam Speaker, it is not normal for me to respond to hecklers, but I take note of the informal information conveyed to me by my honourable colleague on the other side. At an appropriate time, I will move a formal Motion on the matter that I have already mentioned which is the tragic events that occurred in London by a terrorist act. 

However, Madam Speaker, the second aspect of my concern regarding that tragic event is our own security in this August House. I am sure you are aware that there is no gathering of national leaders in this country that can beat Parliament. It is only in Parliament that you find all the national leaders gathered at one spot with the exception of the president. Since that tragic event, I have been going around, including this morning, to look at the security of this building.  

Madam Speaker, the reason for my standing is to call upon the Parliamentary Commission to beef up the security of this August House and its precincts. For instance, we definitely need close circuit cameras to facilitate the surveillance of the precincts of Parliament by our Police.  Also, I note with great concern that due to mismanagement in the Police department, men and women officers in the Police Force have not been paid last month and are experiencing a lot of difficulties.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does this include the Police of the Parliamentary Commission?  

MR AWORI: This includes the entire Police Force and is due to the tragic events of ghost policemen. Because of investigations, they have put salary payments on halt and the Police are really experiencing hardships. I am sure that even our own Police force attached to us here must be going through the same thing. Through you, I am appealing to the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Internal Affairs to facilitate the payment of our Police Force together with the rest of the Police before this weekend at least. They are really experiencing serious financial hardships which could easily jeopardize the security of this country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, concerning the first matter, we brought it to your attention yesterday and we inform you if there is a condolence book opened at the British High Commission so that you may go and enter your names and pay your condolences there. Secondly, I think the Parliamentary Commission has made a lot of efforts to improve on the security of this institution. We even increased the number of Police here over the last six months. The matters you have raised are in our Budget. We thought about them a long time ago and we are pursuing them. Therefore it is not that we are not mindful of your security and we shall continue to work and improve on it.

Concerning the salary issue, I do not know whether that matter is in court, but perhaps the Government could tell us, because I do not know what to say about that. Minister of Internal Affairs, hon. Rukutana, I understand you have not paid the Police Force in the country.

10.50
MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA (Rushenyi County, Ntungamo):  Madam Speaker and the honourable members, the Police Force is paid through the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Salary payments are up to date and the releases were made when they paid you. Therefore, there should be no reason why any Police officer has not been paid his due salary for June. The releases were made in time. 

10.51
MAJ. (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to add and also seek some clarification on the matter of security raised by hon. Awori. We have very limited parking space and most often than not, visitors take our parking spaces.  I was suggesting that a mechanism be put in place to identify members’ vehicles. Also if we could gazette the other park where people normally demonstrate and make it a visitors’ park. This way we can know, at any one time, which is a visiting vehicle and a member’s vehicle. 

This is because experience today shows that people are bombing using cars and I can tell you that many times, we find cars after we have left, which cars do not have their owners.  Therefore, I think we should actually take over that park and use it as parking space for visitors.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Commission will consider this proposal.

10.52
MR KALULE SSENGO(Gomba County, Mpigi): Madam Speaker, as a way of identifying vehicles of members of parliament, I do not know why Parliament does not provide some kind of identification numbers, say a small placard to say MP (member of parliament). Yes, they used to do it in the past. Otherwise how can you identify members of parliament cars when cars are similar. We must have some form of identification to distinguish a visitor’s car from that of a member of parliament. Otherwise, how will you know the difference? I thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think what my colleague is rising was a practice for many years by this Parliament that members were provided with a sticker on the windscreen or a number plate. But because of the change in the social situation since then, we sometimes park after hours in places where we do not need to be known as members of parliament, so it could be a problem.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we shall examine the pros and cons of that.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FINANCE BILL 2005

10.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “ The Finance Bill, 2005” be read the first time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr. Minister, do you have the Certificate of Financial Implications?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, these Bills are consequential upon the Budget. The financial implications are contained in the Budget and as a matter of procedure, I do not think they require Certificates of Financial Implications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But last year you brought a certificate. It will be committed to the Committee on Finance.

BILLS
FIRST READING

The Income Tax
 (Amendment) Bill, 2005

THE MINISTER OF STATE FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “ The Income Tax Amendment Bill, 2005” be read the first time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the Sessional Committee on Finance.

BILLS
FIRST READING

The Value Added Tax 
(Amendment) Bill, 2005

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “ The Value Added Tax Amendment Bill, 2005” be read the first time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the Committee on Finance.

BILLS
FIRST READING

The Excise Tariff 
(Amendment) Bill, 2005

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, GENERAL DUTIES, (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Excise Tariff Amendment Bill, 2005” be read the first time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the Committee on Finance.

BILLS
FIRST READING

The Uganda Revenue Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2005

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, GENERAL DUTIES (MR Rukutana Mwesigwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Uganda Revenue Authority Amendment Bill, 2005” be read the first time. I beg to move 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the Committee on Finance.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT NO. 3) BILL, 2005

Clause 29

10.58
MR MARTIN WANDERA: Madam Chairperson, I beg to propose a minor amendment that the words ‘in consultation’ be replaced by ‘ in accordance,’ so that it shall read, ‘There shall be a public officer designated Clerk to Parliament, appointed by the President in accordance with the advise of the Public Service Commission.’ The Clerk to Parliament is at the level of permanent secretaries and that is the phraseology used for permanent secretaries. 

As we know, competence in appointing people of this calibre lies with the Public Service Commission. Therefore, they should be appointed with the advise of the Public Service Commission and not just in consultation. I beg to move.

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Chairperson, I am not supporting hon. Wandera. I had a substantive amendment on this Clause and I wanted to move it. I was only waiting for the minister to announce the Clause.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesigye): Madam Chairperson, the amendment moved by hon. Wandera is not minor in my view because it has policy implications. It proposes a shift in policy in a sense that it seeks to oblige the Head of State to appoint the Clerk only if the Public Service Commission agrees. In my view, that is a shift in policy which Government must study before we consider that amendment. We need to consult further.  

I suggest that hon. Wandera formally writes his amendment, and also hon. Zziwa who intends to move an amendment so that they can circulate it. I suggest that we stand over this Clause, study these amendments and consider them from a position of information and knowledge. I beg to propose.

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I want to inform the honourable minister that my amendment was circulated and it has been on the Table since last week. The honourable minister must have come across it. I also served a copy to the Attorney General.

Madam Chairperson, I want to move an amendment on Clause 29 so that it reads as follows, ‘That there shall be a public officer designated as Clerk to Parliament appointed by the Parliamentary Commission in consultation with Public Service Commission.’

AN HON. MEMBER: Seconded.

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Chairperson, I wish to inform this August House that first and foremost, the justification for this is that the Parliamentary Commission is the employer of the Clerk and the Clerk should be responsible to the Commission. If he or she is appointed by the President, he or she will be more responsible or loyal to the President who appoints him, thereby prejudicing the separation of powers which was the main purpose of establishing the Parliamentary Commission.

Madam Chairperson, I want to say that the Parliamentary Commission has effectively run and managed this parliament and it has intensively studied this amendment. It has also studied deeply and extensively, the running of the parliamentary system under the parliamentary democracy arrangement which emphasizes the autonomy of parliament under the separation of powers.  

I want to also mention that Uganda is a member of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) and members of the Commission under your leadership, Madam Chairperson, have taken the interest to study what takes place in other parliaments of the CPA. They have looked at parliaments in the first world like Canada, United Kingdom, Singapore and Australia, and in all these parliaments, the Clerk is appointed by the Commission.

Likewise, even in countries that are nearer to us, we undertook to look at their parliaments. For example in Ghana where our 1995 Constitution draws most of its clauses, also there the Clerk is appointed by the Parliamentary Commission. 

Kenya, our neighbour, visited our parliament in 1999 and saw the initiative undertaken by the Parliamentary Commission of introducing the Administration of the Parliament Act. They took a leaf from this in an effort to enhance their effectiveness in service delivery in Parliament. Kenya was able to move faster than us by amending their constitution and giving the powers of appointing the Clerk to the Parliamentary Commission. We all know that each of the members of Parliament of Kenya has an office, staff and other facilities which I do not want to talk about, which facilities we think are an entitlement to parliament.

Madam Chairperson, I want to mention that the current status quo regards the Clerk as a public servant who is governed by the Public Service rules and regulations. In regard to matters of the development of parliament, the Clerk’s hands are tied. The Clerk cannot, for instance, move out to negotiate with our development partners on matters of procurement and funding. 

You will appreciate that when the Commission realized this handicap, and it was not very easy for it to move an amendment on the Constitution, it moved to establish the office of Parliamentary Professional Development, which was occupied by Mr Emmanuel Pinto. He was mandated to liase with our development partners and procure much of the help, which currently assists parliament in one way or another particularly in the areas of capacity building and equipment, which we are currently enjoying. I am sure if the Clerk was not hand tied under the Public Service rules and regulations, we would have had a better deal than this.

Madam Chairperson, I want to also mention that the Clerk’s current appointment by the Executive gives him more loyalty to the Executive and we are sure and certain that parliament’s four pronged role namely the Legislative, the Representative, the Oversight and the Appropriation is not being achieved.

In the oversight function, Madam Chairperson, we need to be as independent as possible yet we find that more than often, we are handicapped. When committees want to go out and inspect projects and programs which Government has undertaken, we are always incapacitated. We believe that more than often, the Clerk is hand tied and cannot negotiate directly with the Executive because he is governed by those Public Service rules and regulations.

Currently in the Government, there is a system of grouping sectors and parliament is grouped under the Public Administration Sector. We have, for the last so many financial years, begged to be removed from the Public Administration Sector which is always subjected to cuts but this has been in vain because the Clerk cannot stand with us on these very heavy negotiations.

Madam Chairperson, you know very well that currently we are begging to meet with the Minister of Finance so that we can deal with this current budget that we are about to start debating on but we have not even sorted that out. All this is because more than often, the Clerk’s hands are tied simply because he is governed by the Public Service rules and regulations. 

Madam Chairperson, for that reason, we think that it would be prudent for this Clause to be amended in the way I have proposed. We should not be the odd men out. Kenya, Tanzania, Malawi, Ghana and other African countries appoint the Clerk. In the new trend of parliamentary democracy, that is the way to go. More importantly, in order to enhance the effectiveness of parliament and improve the concept of separation of powers, we need to have the Clerk appointed by the Parliamentary Commission. I beg to move. (Applause)

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, I seek clarification. I have listened to hon. Zziwa and the presentation she made in support of her amendment. In her submission, she seemed to be saying that the Clerk to Parliament will be able to negotiate with Government better if he or she is appointed by an authority other than the President. Is that the reason why the Clerk cannot negotiate with Finance? Is it simply an issue of the authority behind the appointment?  (Interjections) Madam Chairperson, I think that somewhere in our rules it says I must be heard in silence. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is reserved for the Speaker.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, I think that somewhere in our rules it says that a member will be heard in silence once he is given the opportunity by the Chair. 

I wonder whether that is what the honourable member is leading us to be believe. In my view, and we may have time to make substantial contributions on this matter, if the Secretary to the Treasury is appointed by the President in consultation with the Public Service, wouldn’t it be reasonable to assume that the person negotiating with him also derives his authority of appointment from the same source? I just want to understand hon. Zziwa’s input.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members. The honourable member gave that as an example of the handicaps she has sighted. However the basic reason is strengthen the institution of parliament and guarantee its immunity. I think that was her main reason.

MR MWESIGE: Madam Chairman, I oppose the amendment. I do not think the mover has demonstrated, in my view, that the mischief that this amendment seeks to cure is the fact that members of parliament do not have the facilities that they would wish to have. This is not a problem that is peculiar to parliament alone. Rather, the problem is the limited national resource envelope and not that the Clerk is appointed by the President. This is not the only independent institution where the President appoints accounting officers or even heads of institutions for that matter. Members know -(Interruption) 

MS KIYINGI: Madam Chairperson, is the honourable Attorney General, like the Minister of State for Finance, in order to continue labouring the point of the Clerk being appointed by the President as being the main issue in the presentation by hon. Zziwa? You have clarified that, that is just a small bit of the reasons and the major reasons are that we want separation of powers and we want to be in line with the rest of the CPA countries by having the Clerk appointed by the Commission. Is the honourable Attorney General in order therefore, to waste our time going on and on about an issue which you have already clarified? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have already said that the reasons are many and they have been given. The other reason was a small example. Therefore, can you address the issue of why you want this parliament to be different from the rest of the Commonwealth? I think that is what we want to hear.

MR MWESIGE: Well, I am not satisfied that this parliament is different from the rest of the Commonwealth. I am not satisfied in the least because the examples quoted by my honourable colleague need to be studied. As I said, it is only fair that we be given opportunity to study those precedents. If there have been studies, I would want to be privy to those studies so that I can address this subject properly. I have not been able to get copies of those studies and that is why, initially, I had requested that discussion on this Clause be differed so that those studies can be availed to Government. Only then will we be able to address this issue in a fair manner.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, I am surprised. We are on a serious business of amending the constitution, and my understanding is that before you amend an Article, you must do research. What I am hearing from the Attorney General is that they have not done a study. Then why are you amending?  

MR MWESIGE: The onus to produce the research is on the one who moves the amendment. The burden is on him. The amendment is to the effect that elsewhere in the Common Wealth, the practice is that the Clerk is appointed by the Commission. Clearly, the onus is on the mover to provide those studies because I am not the one introducing the amendment.

Madam Speaker, the point I was making is that the shift of policy is not necessary. Heads of institutions like the chief justice, and the judiciary are appointed by the President, with the approval of parliament. I have no problem with the Clerk being appointed -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Honourable Chairperson, is the honourable Attorney General in order to equate the Chief Justice to a Clerk? It would have been proper if he had equated him to the registrar of court? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The Chief Justice is certainly very senior to the Clerk.  

MR MWESIGE: Madam Chairperson, I know for sure that the Clerk is not equivalent to the Chief Justice. But the issue is the principle, which is whether separation of powers extends to appointments. That is the issue advanced by the mover. The mover is saying that by appointing the Clerk, the Parliamentary Commission will be more independent than it is today and I am saying that is not the standard case.  

The fact that the Chief Justice is appointed by the President has not compromised the independence of the Judiciary. The fact that the President appoints judges has not compromised or injured the Judiciary in any way. The President appoints the Governor of the Bank of Uganda but there is a Board of the Bank of Uganda. The Board does not appoint the Governor but that has not injured the functioning and independence of the Bank of Uganda. I could go on and on. 

MR AWORI: Madam Chairperson, having listened very carefully to my honourable colleague who is trying to destroy all the points put forward by the mover of the amendment, could you exercise the powers vested in your Chair and procedurally put the Question?

11.19
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I remember vividly, during the last Parliament, when we were enacting the Administration of Parliament Act. The issue of the Clerk and his appointment also came up and I remember the reason that was given was that it was constitutional matter and therefore it had to be handled by amending the constitution. There was no problem only that if we amended the constitution, it would be provided for. We are doing that now. We are now amending the constitution and this is the time to deal with this matter. I do not see the problem of the Attorney General who was here with me in the 6th Parliament and participated very well.

MR MWESIGE: Madam Chairperson, that was never the understanding in the 6th Parliament. In fact, when we enacted the Administration of Parliament Act, we never envisaged that the Parliamentary Commission was going to be a Service Commission, because there is a difference between a Commission per se and a Service Commission. The Education Service Commission is a Service Commission while the Electoral Commission is not a Service Commission. 

It was never the intention of this House that the Parliamentary Commission becomes a Service Commission mandated to recruit staff. The intention of Parliament then, and you can read the Act, was to have a Commission that would oversee the administration of Parliament. Let us not confuse Service Commissions with Commissions that are appointed to oversee the administration of institutions such as Parliament. I thought I should clarify that point. 

MRS ZZIWA: The information I have, Madam Chairperson, is that the Act was to provide for the administration of Parliament, for employment and remuneration of officers and staff of Parliament and for other purposes connected therein.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, I am very surprised at hon. Mwesige.  When he was the Chairman of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, we met together with Chief Justice. The prayer of the Judiciary was that they want an Act of Administration of Justice so that they are able to handle their employees under Justice and hon. Mwesige knows that. When he comes here to confuse some of these things- I wonder what changes these people when they go the Front Bench.

MR MWESIGE: Madam Chairperson, again hon. Byaruhanga is misrepresenting the Chief Justice.  What the Chief Justice sought to establish was, yes, a board or a commission to over see the administration of the Judiciary. But he did not seek to waive the mandate of the Judicial Service Commission because there is a Judicial Service Commission that is responsible for the recruitment and discipline of staff in the Judiciary. The Chief Justice cannot have come to the committee to demand for a commission that will recruit staff in the Judiciary. The facts are very clear.

MR WACHA: Madam Chairperson, let me start from where the honourable Attorney General stopped. It is true that we had a meeting with the Chief Justice and it is also true that after that meeting, the Chief Justice asked some of us to draft a law for the Administration of Justice Act. The principle behind all this was that the Chief Justice wanted a body that would work like the Parliamentary Commission is working, to make appointments in consultation with the Judicial Service Commission. I thought I should make that clear.  

Madam Chairperson, the problem we are seeing now originated from the 1995 Constitution. Let me venture to state that that particular provision, the Article 87, was actually moved by me in the Constituent Assembly. The position, then, was that we wanted the position of the Clerk to be parallel to that of other permanent secretaries. When we were making this constitution, our Act, the Administration of Parliament Act was not yet in existence. Later on, it was found necessary to have the Administration of Parliament Act to make it proper and easy to carry out:

(a)	The administration of Parliament.
(b)	The recruitment and remuneration of members and staff of Parliament.

As a matter of fact, when the Act came into being, all members of staff of Parliament was shivered off from the Public Service and became members of staff of Parliament.  But we were confronted with the position that we could not shiver off the Clerk from the Public Service because this position is guarded by the constitution. That was all. If it was not for the constitutional provision, the Office of the Clerk would have been brought to Parliament.

Madam Chairperson, we are confronted with the position of all the other members of staff being controlled by Parliament, but then the man who is supervising them is not controlled by Parliament. We also have a position where the Speaker of Parliament has control over his staff but he has no control over the man or the woman who is supervising them so you have dual allegiance. 

Let us not personalize this but deal with the principle behind it. Let us not look at the Speaker, Mr Ssekandi, or the present Clerk, but deal with the principle. When the Kenya Parliamentary Commission came here, they said, “You have done a great job but you are still going to run into problems because you are still not appointing your Clerk”.  When they went back, the first thing they did was to amend their constitution. They said, “The first thing we are going to do is to amend our constitution so that we have the Office of the Clerk under the Parliamentary Commission.” The same is happening in Ghana and Zambia.  

Madam Chairperson, this makes the administration of the institution easy and that is all we are asking for. We are not, in any way, trying to demean the power of appointment of the President. But we are also being very careful and we are saying that the Parliamentary Commission cannot do it alone. There must be a supervisory hand, which will assist it to handle the appointment and that is where Public Service comes in. Even now, I want to inform members that we are making recruitments of our members of staff, but we do it in consultation with the Public Service Commission.

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, honourable colleagues and Madam Chairperson. I think the problem we are having is that the Executive, the Judiciary and the Legislature are equal arms of the State. But when we use the word ‘control’, I am also defeated because Madam Ocaya Lakidi, if I remember very well, is the Permanent Secretary for the Judiciary, is appointed by the President but is controlled by the Chief Justice yet she administers the Judiciary very well. That is point number one.  

When I look at the issue of career development of the Clerk who is appointed, singularly, by one arm of the State and cannot grow or rotate within the Public Service –(Interjections)- allow me to mention this because tomorrow your daughter or your son will the Clerk at the same level of another permanent secretary, but is appointed differently from other Permanent Secretaries. So, how will this individual develop career wise? One cannot move from Parliament to go to any (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, if you are a permanent secretary, what else can you become other than the minister?  

MR MWANDHA: Madam Chairperson, thank you very much. In response to the issues raised by hon. Mukwaya, I want to inform my colleague, hon. Wacha that the issue of career development in this particular respect does not arise because the Clerk is at the level of Permanent Secretary.  You might as well ask, “What is the next level the Permanent Secretary can occupy?” when that is the top level. 

Secondly, the Clerk is appointed on contract and permanent secretaries are also appointed on contract these days. Therefore, if there was an opening for a permanent secretary elsewhere, I am sure that the Clerk would have the credentials to apply for that position if he was fed up with Parliament. But most importantly, you do not want somebody who is going to be rotated, such that today you have somebody who has learnt the technicalities of Parliament, its Rules of Procedure and other technical issues, only to have somebody else from another ministry being transferred to Parliament as Clerk. That is the information I wanted to give my colleague, hon. Wacha.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

CAPT. BASALIZA: Madam Chairperson, I am perturbed by my colleague, hon. Mwandha who is trying to deceive us that the permanent secretary is the highest rank in civil service knowing well that there is a head of civil service, who is above permanent secretaries. Is he in order, therefore, to deceive us that the permanent secretary is the topmost rank in the civil service?

MR WACHA: I thank you, Madam Chairperson, hon. Mwandha, my elder sister, hon. Mukwaya and hon. Basaliza. The points you have raised are very important. However, let me say that firstly, the Office of the Clerk is a very technical office. It takes one years to reach the level of the Clerk.  Actually now, we have had to create two offices of Deputy Clerks for that purpose. 

Secondly on the issue of Mrs Ocaya Lakidi, you are actually supporting my point. The Administration of Justice Act does not have the mandate and that is why she is still being appointed the way she is. Have I made myself clear? I see you nodding, I am grateful. So, Madam, let me say in conclusion that let us not personalize this issue but handle it as a principle.  Secondly, it is the necessity of this institution that has made us bring this amendment. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the chairperson and wind up.

MR OULANYAH: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. This particular amendment in the Bill was examined by the committee. We even had presentations on this but we chose to leave it the way it is in the Bill and I thought I should indicate why. The comparison that is being made with the appointments in the Judiciary is a bit different because up to now, if you look at Article 148, the appointments in the Judiciary are different. There is a level where the Judicial Service Commission appoints on its own but there is also a level where they cannot do so. 

They have to recommend their appointments to the President who can make those appointments. If you look at appointments relating to Judges, Justices of the Supreme Court and Court of Appeal, High Court and Chief Registrar, the Judicial Service Commission cannot make those appointments. The same applies to the appointment of the Secretary to the Judiciary, which post is presently held by Mrs Ocaya Lakidi.

We examined these issues in relation to Parliament. The entire constitution of the Parliamentary Commission is an elected office and has an expireable term of five years. What are we subjecting the Office of the Clerk to is the appointment and review of appointment by a sessional body that is purely elected from constituencies.  Those were the considerations we made –(Applause)- is it going to be stable, is he going to be under pressure from politicians who are fresh and want change? Those are the considerations we are trying to weight.  

We came to the conclusion that the proposal by Government of how to handle the Office of the Clerk will create the only linkage that Parliament will have with the Public Service and that it would be the Office of the Clerk to harmonize the general policy level of things. When we examine this –(Interruption)- let me finish. We looked at this again and also considered the issue of transferability. As usual, they said that as regards the office of a permanent secretary, one should be able to go to Ministry of Agriculture or wherever he wants. It should not be by the operation of the constitution that transferability is prohibited.  

I have already made the point on the issues that may arise from politicians and they would want to vent it on the Clerk. That is why we did not recommend any change. But if members can persuade the August House to make changes, that would be okay. However as a committee, that is the position we took. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I want to make one more clarification and say that part of your argument is fallacious. The 6th Parliament appointed staff, who have survived to 7th Parliament and are going to be here into the 8th Parliament. So, when you mention the issue of politicians, that is fallacious. Anyway, honourable members -(Interruption)

MR GABOI: Madam Chairperson, is it in order for the honourable chairperson of the committee to continue talking while you are Chairing and giving clarification to the House? Is it in order that he continues interfering with your clarification?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, it is not. Now, honourable members, the matter has been spoken for and against –(Interruption)- yes, it has. The minister had already said that we should stand over the other one. Hon. Zziwa then moved an amendment, which was seconded and that is what we have been discussing. This is the formulation she brought, ‘There shall be a public officer designated as Clerk to Parliament appointed by the Parliamentary Commission in consultation with the Public Service Commission’. 

(Question put.)

(The Members voted  by a show of hands_)

MR MWANDHA: Madam Chairperson, there are colleagues who came in while we were voting and they have no idea as to what we are voting for. I think it is not right that people should come in and begin voting without knowing the subject matter. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have got monitors in the lobbies of this Parliament, so I expect that members are watching. When they come in, they know what they doing.

Honourable members, this is the outcome of the vote. 72 members voted ”Aye”, 87 voted “ No” and there were no abstentions.

(Question negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, are you still of the view that we stand over the Clause?

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, I propose that we vote on the Clause.

DR LYOMOKI: I have an Amendment, Madam Chairperson.

MR MARTIN WANDERA:  Madam Chairperson, for purposes of consistency, and since the Clerk is at the level of Permanent Secretary, they should appointed the same way.  Article 174(2), “ A permanent secretary shall be appointed by the President acting in accordance with the advice of the Public Service Commission.”  

This binds the appointing authority to appoint in accordance with the advice of the technical arm of Government, that is, the Public Service Commission. If we carry it, the way it is here, “There shall be a public office designated Clerk to Parliament, appointed by the President in consultation with the Public Service Commission.”  We may find ourselves in a situation, where the Public Service Commission recommends against the appointment of a particular person, but because the Constitution says in consultation, the appointing authority may go ahead and appoint someone who may not be competent. (Interjections)  Madam Chairperson, I have a right to be listened to, in silence. Members should come to the Floor and move amendments if they have the courage; I know booing is easier. 

You remember what happened to the Electoral Commission when some people challenged the qualifications of the person holding the office of a secretary to the Electoral Commission.  The argument was that the law under which he was appointed said that he would be appointed in consultation.  In addition, for purposes of consistency, the amendment that I am proposing already exists in the Constitution, why should we have provisions that are inconsistent.  

I beg to move that there shall be a public officer, designated Clerk to Parliament, appointed by the President in accordance with the advice of the Public Service Commission.  I beg to move.

MR OULANYAH:  Madam Chairperson, that in my opinion would not be a big problem, because in Clause 63 of the Bill, the Government has proposed restructuring of the phraseology relating to the appointment of a Permanent Secretary.  If we decided to handle that amendment, it would now read,

“A Permanent Secretary shall be appointed by the President acting on the advice of the Public Service Commission.” 

This proposed change will be showing on what honourable Wandera has suggested. If we are going to handle this, although the Committee has proposed the deletion of that Clause, we will be doing that at that stage, but that would be the Reading.  I would not see any significant difficulty in harmonising this appointment to be the way he is proposing.  I support the honourable member.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, do you really have any serious objection to this?

MR MWESIGE:  The chairman has alluded to Clause 63, which the Committee seeks to have deleted and Government will accept that deletion when we come to that clause.  I have no difficulty in accepting hon. Wandera’s amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  It is not clear, honourable minister.  Did you say that what he is alluding to should be deleted?  Are you saying that Clause 63 will be deleted?

MR MWESIGE: You see, Madam Chairperson, the disharmony would have cropped up if Clause 63 would be adopted as proposed in the Clause, because then the phraseology would change.  Now that the Committee proposes its deletion and we accept, then honourable Wandera’s amendment becomes relevant and I have no problem with it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wandera’s proposal reverts to the present position in the Constitution, which the Government says will maintain. Do we really need to make further amendments to it?

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I want to propose an amendment. I want to substitute the “Public Service Commission” with “Parliamentary Commission.”  Then, the appointment by the President is done in consultation with the Parliamentary Commission, not Public Service Commission. I do not know whether we should deal with this now, or after when we have disposed off hon. Wandera’s amendment.

MRS ZZIWA: I want to second it, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  We have moved away from that position.

MR KIBAALE WAMBI:  I would like to be advised by the Attorney General on the two terms; “advice’ and “consultation.”  In “consultation”, is rather wide and appears heavier than “advice.” Advice may either be accepted or rejected.  May I know which of the two words would be more encompassing than the other?  

MR MWESIGE:  Madam Chairperson, we have moved away from “consultation” and “advice.”  The amendment hon. Wandera is clause 29, to replace consultation with “ in accordance with the advice of the Public Service Commission.”  In my view, “in accordance” is stronger than “mere consultation.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, let us vote on hon. Wandera’s amendment.

MRS ZZIWA:  Madam Chairperson, there was a clarification sought by hon. Lyomoki on whether if he wishes to move an amendment on hon. Wandera’s motion, he does it now or later.  I would wish to find how you guided us on that so that move on.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have already voted on that matter, you said you prefer the Public Service Commission and the President to handle this matter.  Isn’t it?

DR LYOMOKI:  Madam Chairperson, this matter is different.  What you ruled on was the appointment by the Commission, but my amendment is the appointment by “the President in consultation or on advice not of Public Service Commission, but by the Parliamentary Commission.”  Therefore, this amendment is different from the one we dealt with.  I am only substituting “Public Service Commission” with “Parliamentary Commission” so that the President appoints in accordance with the advice that comes from Parliamentary Commission and not Public Service Commission.  

MR DOMBO: Madam Chairperson, I thought the recommendation as to why the President should seek advice from the Public Service Commission is because of the technical competence.  When you look at the composition of the Parliamentary Commission; assuming Parliament has just been elected and the Commission constitutes only new Members of Parliament, without any technical competence about the composition or what is required of a Clerk; the advice from such a Commission may not be appropriate. 

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I am following the proposal by hon. Dombo. If Parliament has just been elected and is still a young Parliament, what about a President who has been elected for the first time?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the Parliamentary Commission has been recruiting, but we rely on the Public Service Commission to advertise, conduct the interviews and then we do the rest.  So, let us stick to the Public Service Commission because of the technicalities involved.

I put the question to hon. Wandera’s amendment. 

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is the outcome of the vote: Abstentions – 6, Against – 0, Ayes – 160

(Question agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if there are no further amendments, I put the question that Clause 29, as amended do stand part of the Bill. 
 
AYES:

1.	Aachilla John Roberts Rex 
2.	Aanimu Angupale 
3.	Abura Pirir Samuel
4.	Ael Ark Lodou 
5.	Agard Didi
6.	Ahabwe Perez
7.	Akaki Ayumu Jovino 
8.	Akech Okullo Betty 
9.	Akello Dinah Grace 
10.	Akwero Odwong Jane 
11.	Alaso Asianut Alice 
12.	Alonga Othman Haruna 
13.	Amama Mbabazi 
14.	Amongin Aporu Hellen Christine 
15.	Amuriat Oboi Patrick 
16.	Anang-Odur Lakana Tomson
17.	Andruale Awuzu 
18.	Angiro Gutomoi Charles 
19.	Apuun Patrick 
20.	Arapkissa Yekko John 
21.	Arumadri John Drazu 
22.	Ateng Otim Margaret 
23.	Atim Ogwal Cecilia 
24.	Awongo Ahmed 
25.	Awori SiryoYi Aggrey
26.	Baba diri Margaret 
27.	Babu Edward 
28.	Badda Fred 	
29.	Bagalana Tom Samson 
30.	Baguma IsOke MatiYa 	
31.	Bakaluba Mukasa Peter 
32.	Bakkabulindi Charles 	
33.	Bakoko Bakoru 	
34.	Balemezi Lydia 	
35.	Bamwanga Steven 
36.	Banyenzaki Henry 	
37.	Basajjabalaba NassEr 	
38.	Basaliza Araali Henry 	
39.	Basaliza Mwesigye Steven 	
40.	Bazaale Byaruhanga Philip
41.	Bazana Kabwegyere Tarsis
42.	Bbumba Syda Namirembe 	
43.	Bikwasizehi Deusdedit 	
44.	Bintu Abwooli JaLia 	
45.	BirimumaAso Mulindwa 	
46.	Bitamazire Namirembe Geraldine 	
47.	Bitangaro Samuel 
48.	Butime Tom 	
49.	Bwerere Kasole Lwanga 	
50.	Byabagambi John 	
51.	Byamukama Dora 	
52.	Byanyima Nathan 	
53.	Chebrot Steven 	
54.	D’ujanga Simon 	
55.	Dombo Immanuel 	
56.	Epetait Francis 	
57.	Eriyo Jessica 	
58.	Etonu Benedict 	
59.	Gaboi Kibaale Wambi 	
60.	Gole Nicholas 	
61.	Hyuha Dorothy 	
62.	Isanga Nakadama	
63.	Kabakumba Masiko 	
64.	Kabareebe Amon Reeves 	
65.	Kafabusa Werikhe 	
66.	Kagaba Harriet 	
67.	Kagimu Kiwanuka Maurice 	
68.	Kagonyera Mondo 	
69.	Kajeke Wilfred 	
70.	Kajura Muganwa Henry 	
71.	Kakoko Sebagereka 	
72.	Kakooza James 	
73.	Kalule Ssengo Emmanuel 
74.	Kamanda Batalingaya 	
75.	Kamuntu Ephraim 
76.	Kapkwomu Ndiwa 
77.	Kasamba Mathias 
78.	Kasirivu Atwooki 
79.	Kasule Lumumba Justine 
80.	Katongole Badru 
81.	Katuntu Abdu 
82.	Katuramu Hood 
83.	Kawanga John Baptist 
84.	Kawoya Bangirana Anifa 
85.	Kayongo Tom 
86.	Kezimbira Miyingo 
87.	Kibirige Sebunya 
88.	Kidega Daniel 
89.	KiGYaGi Arimpa 
90.	KikuNgwe Isa 
91.	Kinobe Jimmy 
92.	Kiraso Birungi Beatrice 
93.	Kithende Kalibogha 
94.	Kityo Henry Mutebi 
95.	Kiwagama Wilberforce 
96.	Kiwanda Godfrey 
97.	Kiyonga Chrispus 
98.	Kizige Moses 	
99.	Koluo Charles 	
100.	Kubeketerya James 	
101.	Kule MuRanga Joseph 	
102.	Kutesa Sam 
103.	Lochiam Miligan 			
104.	Lokeris Aparite Paul 		
105.	Lokeris Peter Aimat		
106.	Lolem Micah 				
107.	Lubowa Moses Paul 		
108.	Lule Mawiya Umar 		
109.	Maate Rogers 			
110.	Madada Kyebakoze Sulaiman
111.	Magoola Zirabamuzale 
112.	Malinga Johnson 			
113.	Mallinga Stephen Oscar 	
114.	Masiko Komuhangi Winfred
115.	Matovu Byatike 			
116.	Matovu David 			
117.	Mayende Simon 			
118.	Mbabazi Kabushenga Hamlet
119.	Mbalibulha Taban Christopher 
120.	Mehangye Idah			
121.	Migereko Daudi 			
122.	Mindra Joyo Eugenia 		
123.	Mugambe Kifomusana Joseph 
124.	Mugerwa Namaggwa Sauda 
125.	Muhwezi Katugugu Jim 	
126.	Mukama Francis Joseph 	
127.	Mukasa Anthony Harris 	
128.	Mukasa Muruli Wilson 	
129.	Mukula George Michael 	
130.	Mukula Richard 			
131.	Mukwaya Balunzi Janat 	
132.	Mulengani Bernard 		
133.	Munyira Wabwire Omusolo Rose 	
134.	Musumba Isaac Isanga 
135.	Mutuluuza Peter Claveri	
136.	Mwandha James Eliezer 
137.	Mwesige Adolf 			
138.	Mwesigye Ruhindi Hope 	
139.	Nabeta Nasani 
140.	Nacha Lorika Rose 		
141.	Namayanja Rose 			
142.	Namusoke Kiyingi Kyama Sarah 
143.	Namuyangu Kacha Jenipher 
144.	Nandala Mafabi Nathan 	
145.	Nankabirwa Ssentamu Ruth
146.	Nansubuga Sarah Nyombi 	
147.	Nantume Eron Janet 		
148.	Nayiga Florence Sekabira 	
149.	Ndawula Kaweesi Edward 	
150.	Ndeezi Alex 				
151.	Nduhuura Richard 		
152.	Nshimye Sebutulo Augustine
153.	Nsubuga William 			
154.	Ntacyotugira Phillip Mary
155.	Nuwagaba Herbert Muntuyera 	
156.	Nyeko Ocula Michael 		
157.	Nyendwoha Mutiti Jonathan 
158.	Obbo Henry Joseph 		
159.	Ochieng Peter Patrick 		
160.	Odit John 				
161.	Ogola Akisoferi Michael 	
162.	Ogwel Loote Sammy 		
163.	Ojok B’Leo 				
164.	Okot Ogong Felix 			
165.	Okulo Epak Yefusa 		
166.	Okumu Ringa Patrick Aloysius 	
167.	Okurut Karooro Busingye Mary 	
168.	Olum Zachary 
169.	Omach Mandir Jachan Fred 	
170.	Omodi Okot 				
171.	Omwony Ojwok 				
172.	Opange Louis 				
173.	Orech David Martin 			
174.	Oryem Henry Okello 			
175.	Oulanyah Jacob 			
176.	Owori Amooti Otada 		
177.	Pataki Amasi				
178.	Rainer Kafire Juliet 
179.	Ruhindi Freddie 
180.	Rukundo Serapio 
181.	Rukutana Mwesigwa 
182.	Rutamwebwa Mugyenyi Mary 
183.	Rwakimari Beatrice 
184.	Rwamirama Kanyontole Bright 
185.	Sabiiti Jack 
186.	Sebalu Mike Kennedy 
187.	Sebuliba Mutumba Richard 
188.	Sekitoleko Juliet Kabonesa 
189.	Sinabulya Namabidde Sylvia 
190.	SSekikubo Theodore 
191.	Ssentongo Nabulya Teopista 
192.	Thembo Nyombi George William 
193.	Tibarimbasa Avitus 
194.	Tiperu Nusura 
195.	Tubbo Nakwang Christine 
196.	Tuma Ruth 
197.	Wabudeya Mukaye Beatrice 
198.	Wadri Kassiano Ezati 
199.	Wagonda Muguli John Wilson 
200.	Wakikona Wandendeya David 
201.	Wambuzi Gagawala Nelson
202.	Wananzofu Simon Peter 
203.	Wandera Martin 
204.	Wanjusi Wasieba Sylvester 
205.	Woneka Oliver 
206.	Wopuwa George William 
207.	Yeri Ofwono Apollo 
208.	Yiga Anthony 
209.	Zziwa Margaret Nantongo 

ABSTENTIONS:

1.	Aadroa Onzima Alex 
2.	Amongi Betty Ongom 
3.	Byaruhanga Charles
4.	Lukyamuzi John Ken 		
5.	Lyomoki Sam			
6.	Mukabera Annette 		
7.	Odonga Otto

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the outcome of the vote is; Abstentions – 7, Against - 0, Ayes – 209. The “Ayes” have it.

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 29 as amended agreed to.

Clause 30

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 30; do stand part of the Bill –(Interjection)- since there are no amendments, let us vote.

(Question put.)

AYES:

1.	Aadroa Onzima Alex 
2.	AAnimU Angupale 
3.	Abura Pirir Samuel 
4.	Ael Ark Odour 
5.	Agard Didi 
6.	Ahabwe Perez 
7.	Akaki Ayumu Jovino 
8.	Akech Okullo Betty 
9.	Akello Dinah Grace 
10.	Akwero Odwong 
11.	Alonga Othman Haruna 
12.	Amama Mbabazi 
13.	Amongi Betty Ongom 
14.	Amongin Aporu Hellen Christine 
15.	Amuriat Oboi Patrick 
16.	Andruale Awuzu 
17.	Angiro Gutomoi 
18.	Apuun Patrick 
19.	Arumadri John Drazu 
20.	Ateng Otim 
21.	Atim Ogwal Cecilia 
22.	Awongo Ahmed 
23.	Awori Aggrey 
24.	Baba Diri Margaret 
25.	Babu Edward Francis 
26.	Badda Fred			
27.	Bagalana Tom Samson 
28.	Baguma Isoke MatiYa 
29.	Bakaluba Mukasa Peter 
30.	Bakkabulindi Charles 
31.	Bakoko Bakoru Zoe 
32.	Balemezi Nalubega Lydia 
33.	Bamwanga Steven 
34.	Banyenzaki Henry 
35.	Basajjabalaba NassEr 	
36.	Basaliza Araali Henry 
37.	Bazaale Byaruhanga Phillip 
38.	Bazana Kabwegyere Tarsis 
39.	Bbumba Syda Namirembe 	
40.	Bikwasizehi Deusdedit 
41.	Bintu Abwooli Lukumu Jalia 
42.	Birimumaaso Mulindwa 
43.	Bitamazire Namirembe Geraldine 
44.	Bitangaro Samuel 
45.	Butime Rwakakaira Tom 
46.	Bwerere Kasole Lwanga Edward 
47.	Byabagambi John 
48.	Byamukama Dora 
49.	Byanyima Nathan 
50.	Byaruhanga Charles 
51.	Byenkya Nyakaisiki
52.	Chebrot Chemoiko Steven 	
53.	D’Ujanga Giw Simon 
54.	Daudi Migereko 
55.	Dombo Emmanuel Lumala 
56.	Epetait Francis 
57.	Eriyo Jessica 
58.	Etonu Benedict 
59.	Gaboi Kibaale Wambi David 
60.	Gole Nicholas Davis  
61.	Hyuha Samali Dorothy 
62.	Kabakumba Labwoni Masiko 
63.	Kabareebe Amon-Reeves Muzoora 
64.	Kafabusa Werikhe Michael 
65.	Kagaba Harriet 
66.	Kagimu Kiwanuka Maurice 
67.	Kagonyera Mondo 
68.	Kajeke Wilfred 
69.	Kajura Muganwa Henry 
70.	Kakoko Sebagereka Victoria 
71.	Kakooza James 
72.	Kalule Ssengo Emmanuel 
73.	Kamanda Batalingaya  
74.	Kamuntu Ephraim 
75.	Kapkwomu Ndiwa Kapkwomu 
76.	Kasamba Mathias 
77.	Kasirivu Atwooki Baltazar 
78.	Kasule Lumumba Justine 
79.	Katongole Badru		
80.	Katuntu Abdu  			
81.	Katuramu Hood Kiribedda 
82.	Kawanga John Baptist 
83.	Kawoya Bangirana Anifa 
84.	Kayongo Tom			
85.	Kezimbira Miyingo Lawrence 
86.	Kibirige Sebunya Israel 
87.	Kidega Daniel Fred 
88.	Kigyagi Arimpa John 
89.	Kinobe Jimmy William Reuben 
90.	Kiraso Birungi Beatrice	
91.	Kithende Kalibogha Apolinaris 
92.	Kityo Henry Mutebi
93.	Kiwagama William Wilberforce 
94.	Kiwanda Godfrey 
95.	Kiyonga Chrispus Walter 
96.	Kizige Moses 
97.	Koluo Charles Peter 
98.	Kubeketerya James 
99.	Kulany Ruth 
100.	Kule MuRanga Joseph 
101.	Kutesa Sam 
102.	Lochiam Miligan Rose 
103.	Lokeris Aparite Paul 
104.	Lokeris Peter Aimat 
105.	Lolem Micah 
106.	Lubowa Moses Paul 
107.	Lule Mawiya Umar 
108.	Maate Rogers 
109.	Madada Kyebakoze Sulaiman
110.	Magoola Zirabamuzale 
111.	Malinga Johnson 
112.	Mallinga Stephen Oscar 
113.	Masiko Komuhangi Winfred 
114.	Matovu Byatike 
115.	Matovu David 
116.	Mayende Simon 
117.	Mbabazi Kabushenga Hamlet 
118.	Mbalibulha Taban Christopher 
119.	Mehangye Idah 
120.	Mindra Joyo Eugenia 
121.	Mugambe Kifomusana Joseph 
122.	Mugerwa Namaggwa Sauda 
123.	Muhwezi Katugugu Jim 
124.	Mukabera Annette 
125.	Mukama Francis Joseph 
126.	Mukasa Anthony Harris 
127.	Mukasa Muruli Wilson 
128.	Mukula George Michael 
129.	Mukula Richard 
130.	Mukwaya Balunzi Janat 
131.	Mulengani Bernard 
132.	Munyira Rose 
133.	Musumba Isaac Isanga  
134.	Mutuluuza Peter Claveri 
135.	Mwaka Nakiboneka Victoria 
136.	Mwandha James Eliezer 
137.	Mwesige Adolf 
138.	Mwesigye Ruhindi Hope 
139.	Mwondha Patrick 
140.	Nabeta Nasani 
141.	Nacha Lorika Rose 
142.	Namayanja Rose 
143.	Namusoke Kiyingi Kyama Sarah
144.	Namuyangu Kacha Jenipher 
145.	Nankabirwa Ssentamu Ruth 
146.	Nansubuga Sarah Nyombi 
147.	Nantume Eron Janet 
148.	Nayiga Florence Sekabira 
149.	Nduhuura Richard 
150.	Nshimye Sebutulo Augustine 
151.	Nsubuga Nsambu 
152.	Nsubuga William 
153.	Ntacyotugira Phillip Mary 
154.	Nuwagaba Herbert Muntuyera 
155.	Nyeko Ocula Michael 
156.	Nyendwoha Mutiti Jonathan 
157.	Obbo Henry Joseph 
158.	Ochieng Patrick 
159.	Odit John 
160.	Odongo Jeje 
161.	Ogola Akisoferi Michael
162.	Ogwel Loote Sammy 
163.	Ojok B’Leo 
164.	Okot Ogong Felix
165.	Okullo Epak Yefusa 
166.	Okumu Ringa Patrick Aloysius 
167.	Okurut Karooro Busingye Mary 
168.	Olum Zachary 
169.	Omach Jachan Fred 
170.	Omodi Okot 
171.	Onek Hilary 
172.	Orech David 
173.	Oryem Henry 
174.	Oulanyah Jacob 
175.	Owori Amooti 
176.	Pataki Amasi 
177.	Rainer Kafire 
178.	Ruhindi Fred 
179.	Rukundo SErapio 
180.	Rukutana Mwesigwa 
181.	Rutamwebwa Mary Mugyenyi 
182.	Ruzindana Augustine 
183.	Rwakimari Beatrice 
184.	Rwamirama Bright 
185.	Sabiiti Jack 
186.	Sebaggala Latif 
187.	Sebalu Mike Kennedy 
188.	Sekitoleko Juliet
189.	Sinabulya Namabidde Sylvia 
190.	Ssekikubo Theodore 
191.	Ssentongo Nabulya Teopista 
192.	Thembo Nyombi 
193.	Tibarimbasa Avitus 
194.	Tubbo Nakwang Christine 
195.	Tubwita Bagaya Grace 
196.	Tuma Ruth 
197.	Wabudeya Mukaye Beatrice 
198.	Wacha Ben 
199.	Wadri Kassiano Ezati 
200.	Wagonda Muguli
201.	Wakikona David 
202.	Wambuzi Gagawala 
203.	Wananzofu Simon Peter 
204.	Wandera Martin 
205.	Wanjusi Wasieba 
206.	Woneka Oliver 
207.	Wopuwa George William 
208.	Yekko John 
209.	Yeri Ofwono Apollo 
210.	Yiga Anthony 
211.	Zziwa Margaret 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the outcome of the vote is: Abstention  - 0, Against - 0, Ayes –211. The Ayes have it. (Applause)

Clause 31

DR EPETAIT FRANCIS: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  I beg to move an amendment on Clause 31, which is in effect seeking to have it deleted.  

Madam Chairperson, the clause is referring to the quorum of Parliament and the proposal in the clause is to simply leave it to be determined by rules of procedure that is in Sub-clause 1, and Sub-clause 2 is talking about different quorums for different purposes.

Madam Chairperson, it is my submission that for purposes of explicit, we need to have a focused proportion of what size of Parliament can form a quorum rather than just leave it to be determined in the rules and each purpose to have its own quorum.

In fact arising from my consultations on the White Paper, the people of Ngora were even suggesting that the quorum of Parliament should be raised to 50 per cent.  Originally, we had 33 per cent; call it a third.  The argument is that we need quality debates.  Sometimes we have had problems where, God forbid, some of the Members have tended not to put a lot of emphasis on the business they have been sent here for.  

So, Madam Chairperson, I want to request all the Members that the constitutional provision, be left as it is in Article 88, because it will help us determine whether any matter that has been resolved in this House has been done with the necessary numbers, and even help the courts to determine whether there has been a constitutional consonance with the lay out in the Constitution.  I beg my Colleagues that we have that proposed Clause 31 deleted and Article 88, but lets leave it as it is.  I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I do not know whether you had an opportunity to meet the Committee and the Minister to discuss that matter.  

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chairperson, what happened is that when we were discussing this debate, I still brought out the matter.  I did not get the opportunity to meet the Committee.  But I thought –(Interruptions)- please, let us listen to each other.  We are doing a very serious business and there is need for us to look at the concepts and the merits of the proposed amendment rather than just boo.  

Dear Colleagues, let us be sober on these issues.  I pray that we listen to each other and take the arguments as they come.  I beg to submit, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: May I ask the Minister to give the rationale behind his proposals?

MR MWESIGE: Well, Madam Chairperson, this proposal arose from the experience of the 6th Parliament where one of the most important pieces of legislation was nullified for many reasons among which was quorum.  We are not trying to say that there should not be quorum; quorum is important.  

But we are trying to say that the current constitutional formulation is too rigid to be administered and that is why we are leaving it to the House in its rules to prescribe for quorum, because it is really a procedural matter, it is not essentially constitutional.  

We are capable of providing for quorum and we are saying that, quorum should change with circumstances.  There are matters of serious public importance, which cannot just be adopted with simple quorum.  Madam Chairperson, you recall when we were discussing the resolution for the referendum, the Constitution itself required a minimum of half of all Members of Parliament.  

So quorum in such circumstances could be higher.  But when we are discussing a minor issue, quorum could be lower.  So the intention of this amendment is to make it more flexible for Parliament to prescribe for its own procedures including quorum.  

MR WANDERA: Madam Chairperson, I did present the same amendment to the Committee when the Committee was dealing with the Omnibus Bill, and I was of the view that deleting the existing 88 creates uncertainty and facilitates manipulation.  We should not forget the history of Parliamentary practice in this House.  If we left it to Parliament from time to time to determine quorum for a particular issue, then we risk running into chaos.  –(Interruptions).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Wandera, I do not want you to put it that way.  When we sit to determine quorum, we are following our rules; we decide, that for the general debate, 40 people; for constitutional issues, two thirds; for Second Reading, so many.  You cannot shift it.

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.   But is one third too much? Is 90 Members of Parliament too many for 300 Members?  Honourable Members we were sent to be in the House, and if matters of quorum are not clear, it is possible that you know when a certain group that does not have this country at heart is in the majority; they may decide to keep shifting quorum.  So let us be very careful, I listened to the Attorney General; there is no evil in this amendment that he is trying to cure.

MR OULANYAH: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  But I must start from this point. It is a becoming habit for Members to start standing up to say, they referred the matter to the Committee when they did not.  That put me in a difficult position of having to stand up and say, “no.” 

But now, I must do it, to put the other people on notice.  The honourable Martin Wandera did submit a written submission to the Committee.  Article 88 was never part of it.  So this is coming for the first time, the submission you made is here, I have a copy here.  So this is not one of the articles.  –(Interruptions). Articles: 88, 89 and 90 have been a subject of court litigation for a long time.  This is not the first time an attempt is made to amend these articles, to give Parliament the independence of determining whatever goes on in Parliament.  

The first time the attempt was made was in 2000, subsequent attempts were made, but court nullified the proceedings of Parliament the other day where sessional committees were put on halt. They could not do any work.  So this whole series of amendments of Articles 88, 89 and 90 is meant to give back Parliament the independence to determine some of these things so that they can be able to proceed.  

For example, when we come to Committees of Parliament, the way it is structured in the Constitution, it creates Standing Committees; it allows for Sessional Committees, but it brings in the complication in that Standing Committees almost look like Sessional Committees.  But Parliament should be able to internally regulate these procedures that is the principle behind the proposed amendments of Articles 88, 89 and 90.

MR WANDERA: Madam Chairperson, I understand the difficulty of the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. He is not the Secretary and for that matter he may not have the records available with him.  But I want to state that I submitted these amendments and the Vice Chairperson recalls that I did so, and I believe other members will also bear witness.  

But the point that I am making is that this House must be very careful with the question of quorum because if it is not clear, it will be subjected to manipulation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, in the 7th Parliament, the first exercise we did for over three weeks was to work on our rules. All of us together; we set the rules before we started the work.  I do not want you to give the impression that I woke up today and said that quorum today should be 40, and then tomorrow I say let quorum be 50; Parliament does not work like that.  

MR WANDERA: Madam Chairperson, if authority is given to Parliament and there is no standard to be followed, would there be anything wrong if we said that the quorum of Parliament would be five Members; if we pass this clause the way it is?  If it is passed properly and we put it in the rules, it would be procedurally correct, but wrong and dangerous.

CAPT. BABU: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank you very much.  My friend, hon. Wandera, is a great supporter of separation of powers; he is one man who was hoping there should be separation of powers.  You are beginning to separate those powers so that Parliament can have its authenticity, and he is now turning around to say no.  

If that is the point, then why did they determine their own salary?  That is also wrong, but that is the gist. The gist, Madam, is that Parliament should be respected, and when Members are elected, I find this very unfortunate that every time hon. Wandera stands up, he has got this attitude that Members of Parliament cannot make a reasonable decision and that we can be manipulated.  I would like therefore –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Madam Chairperson, in this House, we respect each other, and every Member of this House is free to deliberate on any matter of national interest.  Is it in order, therefore, for hon. Francis Babu to attack a Member who has duly introduced his amendment, to attack him, that every time he talks he is against what is being discussed? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the Member presented a proposal, he wants the views of the House; hon. Babu is giving him his views.  

CAPT. BABU: Madam Chairperson, thank you very much, and I would like to thank hon. Mwandha.  All I was trying to say is that this is a honourable House. It is an august body of men and women elected to lead; and when any Member stands up and thinks this House can be manipulated, I get a little bit offended, and this has been said over and over again.  I am trying to put it on record that the honourable members of this House can make a decision that can stand the test of time.  Thank you.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, I also want to put it on record that unless hon. Wandera tells us who will manipulate the other in this House, other wise, there are no manipulators; because I cannot stand and be referred to as a manipulator when actually I am not one. The world should not be told that we were manipulators unless he withdraws or substantiates his statement.

MR DOMBO: Madam Chairperson, may I name the manipulators?  I did not necessarily want to defend hon. Wandera, but we are talking about the Parliament of Uganda; and when we look at the history of the Parliament of Uganda, the very people who are arguing have been on record to say the Parliament of Uganda was manipulated to pass the Pigeonhole Constitution.  

So there have been manipulations in the Parliament of Uganda in the past. and we do not know what Parliament will be here tomorrow.  So when we are legislating and making this Constitution, we are not necessarily making it for this Parliament –(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, I want to make a background to the point of order, that when you are no longer a Member of Parliament, the people who will be here, your children and grandchildren, will read that, “Hon. Dombo, our grandfather, was part of the manipulators.”  

So the point I am making, whether there were manipulators or not, I am not a manipulator.  So, I do not want the records of today’s Hansard to read so, when I am seated in this House; that I am part of the manipulators of this august House.  That is the point I am making.

MR DOMBO: In conclusion, on the point I was raising, when hon. Wandera raised the issue of manipulation, he did not refer to a specific Parliament, but he was referring to the principle that gives an opportunity to a time when the circumstances of the day can warrant.  Let me give an example; this is not necessarily manipulation, but it happened in the 6th Parliament.  There was a time when we were amending the Constitution and the ease with which the rules were amended by suspending the rules and introducing something on the Floor compromised the effectiveness of the Parliament in the eyes of the public. 

A Motion would be moved and we suspended the rules, and something else was introduced and we voted on it.  Madam Speaker, I thought that I could give this as information.  Thank you very much.

MR MWESIGE: I wanted to inform hon. Dombo and to correct the record that yes, it is true that rules were suspended, but rules were suspended in accordance with the rules of this Parliament.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have said enough about this matter, let us vote.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Chairperson, you have not chosen many people from this side, and I think it is fair that as many people as –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you had time for a general debate. I do not know how many of you talked about this matter.  This is not a general debate; let us vote now.  I put the question that clause 31 be amended as proposed by hon. Wandera.

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is the outcome of the votes: those abstaining are five, those against the motion are 109, and those for the motion are 23. The motion is lost. 

(Question negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 31 do stand part of the Bill.

AYES:

1.	AEL ARK LODOU 
2.	AGARD DIDI 
3.	AHABWE PEREZ 
4.	AKAKI AYUMU
5.	AKECH OKULLO BETTY 
6.	AKELLO DINAH GRACE 
7.	AKWERO ODWONG JANE 
8.	ALONGA OTHMAN HARUNA 
9.	AMAMA MBABAZI 
10.	AMONGIN APORU HELLEN CHRISTINE 
11.	AANIMU ANGUPALE
12.	APUUN PATRICK 
13.	ARAPKISSA YEKKO JOHN 
14.	ATENG OTIM MARGARET 
15.	AWONGO AHMED
16.	AWORI AMOOTI OTADA 
17.	BABA DIRI MARGARET 
18.	BABU EDWARD FRANCIS 
19.	BADDA FRED 
20.	BAGUMA ISOKE MATIYA 
21.	BAKALUBA MUKASA PETER 
22.	BAKKABULINDI CHARLES 
23.	BAKOKO BAKORU ZOE 
24.	BALEMEZI NALUBEGA LYDIA 
25.	BANYENZAKI HENRY
26.	BASAJJABALABA NASSER 
27.	BASALIZA ARAALI HENRY 
28.	BASALIZA MWESIGYE STEVEN 
29.	BAZAALE BYARUHANGA PHILLIP 
30.	BAZANA KABWEGYERE TARSIS 
31.	BBUMBA SYDA NAMIREMBE 
32.	BESISIRA IGNATIUS
33.	BIKWASIZEHI DEUSDEDIT 
34.	BIRIMUMAASO MULINDWA 
35.	BITAMAZIRE NAMIREMBE GERALDINE 
36.	BITANGARO SAMUEL 
37.	BUTIME RWAKAKAIRA TOM 
38.	BWERERE KASOLE LWANGA EDWARD 
39.	BYABAGAMBI JOHN 
40.	BYAMUKAMA DORA 
41.	BYANYIMA NATHAN 
42.	BYARUHANGA CHARLES 
43.	BYENKYA NYAKAISIKI BEATRICE 
44.	ERIYO JESSICA  
45.	ETONU BENEDICT
46.	HYUHA DOROTHY
47.	KABAKUMBA LABWONI MASIKO 
48.	KABAREEBE MUZOORA
49.	KAFABUSA WERIKHE MICHAEL 
50.	KAGABA HARRIET
51.	KAGIMU KIWANUKA MAURICE 
52.	KAJURA MUGANWA HENRY 
53.	KAKOKO SEBAGEREKA VICTORIA 
54.	KAKOOZA JAMES 
55.	KALULE SSENGO EMMANUEL 
56.	KAMANDA BATALINGAYA 
57.	KAMUNTU EPHRAIM 
58.	KAPKWOMU NDIWA KAPKWOMU 
59.	KASAMBA MATHIAS 
60.	KATIRIMA PHENHAS 
61.	KATONGOLE BADRU 
62.	KATURAMU HOOD
63.	KAWOYA BANGIRANA ANIFA 
64.	KAYIZZI ASANASIO 
65.	KAYONGO TOM 
66.	KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO LAWRENCE 
67.	KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA ISRAEL 
68.	KIDEGA DANIEL FRED 
69.	KINOBE JIMMY WILLIAM REUBEN 
70.	KITHENDE KALIBOGHA APOLINARIS 
71.	KITYO HENRY MUTEBI 
72.	KIWAGAMA WILLIAM WILBERFORCE 
73.	KIWALABYE MUSOKE DANIEL 
74.	KIYONGA CHRISPUS WALTER 
75.	KIZIGE MOSES 
76.	KOLUO CHARLES PETER 
77.	KUBEKETERYA JAMES 
78.	KULE MURANGA JOSEPH 
79.	KUTESA SAM 
80.	KYAHURWENDA ABWOOLI
81.	LOCHIAM MILIGAN ROSE 
82.	LOKERIS APARITE PAUL 
83.	LOKERIS PETER AIMAT 
84.	LOLEM MICAH 
85.	LUBOWA MOSES PAUL 
86.	MAATE ROGERS 
87.	MADADA KYEBAKOZE SULAIMAN 
88.	MAGOOLA ZIRABAMUZALE 
89.	MALLINGA STEPHEN OSCAR 
90.	MASIKO KOMUHANGI WINFRED 
91.	MATOVU BYATIKE 
92.	MATOVU DAVID 
93.	MAYENDE SIMON 
94.	MAYOMBO NOBLE 
95.	MEHANGYE IDAH 
96.	MIGEREKO DAUDI 
97.	MINDRA JOYO EUGENIA 
98.	MUGAMBE KIF’OMUSANA JOSEPH 
99.	MUGERWA NAMAGGWA SAUDA 
100.	MUKASA ANTHONY HARRIS 
101.	MUKASA MURULI WILSON 
102.	MUKULA GEORGE MICHAEL 
103.	MUKULA RICHARD 
104.	MUKWAYA BALUNZI JANAT 
105.	MUNYIRA ROSE
106.	MWAKA NAKIBONEKA VICTORIA 
107.	MWESIGYE ADOLF 
108.	MWESIGYE RUHINDI HOPE 
109.	MWONDHA PATRICK
110.	NABETA NASANI
111.	NACHA LORIKA ROSE 
112.	NAMUYANGU KACHA JENIPHER 
113.	NANKABIRWA SSENTAMU RUTH 
114.	NANSUBUGA SARAH NYOMBI 
115.	NANTUME ERON JANET 
116.	NAYIGA FLORENCE SEKABIRA
117.	NDUHUURA RICHARD 
118.	NSHIMYE SEBUTULO AUGUSTINE 
119.	NTACYOTUGIRA PHILLIP MARY 
120.	NYANZI VINCENT 
121.	NYENDWOHA MUTITI JONATHAN 
122.	OBBO HENRY JOSEPH 
123.	OCULA MICHAEL
124.	ODONGO JEJE 
125.	OGWEL LOOTE SAMMY 
126.	OKOT OGONG FELIX 
127.	OKULLO EPAK YEFUSA 
128.	OKUMU RINGA PATRICK ALOYSIUS 
129.	OKURUT KAROORO BUSINGYE MARY 
130.	OLUM ZACHARY
131.	OMACH MANDIR JACHAN FRED 
132.	ONZIMA ALEX 
133.	OPANGE LOUIS 
134.	ORECH DAVID MARTIN 
135.	ORYEM HENRY OKELLO 
136.	OULANYAH JACOB 
137.	PATAKI AMASI 
138.	RAINER KAFIRE JULIET 
139.	RUHINDI FREDDIE 
140.	RUKUNDO SERAPIO 
141.	RUKUTANA MWESIGWA 
142.	RUTAMWEBWA MUGYENYI MARY 
143.	RWAKIMARI BEATRICE 
144.	SEBALU MIKE KENNEDY 
145.	SEKITOLEKO JULIET KABONESA 
146.	SINABULYA NAMABIDDE SYLVIA 
147.	SSENTONGO NABULYA TEOPISTA 
148.	THEMBO NYOMBI GEORGE WILLIAM 
149.	TINYEFUZA DAVID 
150.	TUBBO NAKWANG CHRISTINE 
151.	TUBWITA BAGAYA GRACE 
152.	TUMA RUTH 
153.	TUMWESIGYE ELIODA 
154.	TUMWINE ELLY 
155.	WABUDEYA MUKAYE BEATRICE 
156.	WACHA BEN 
157.	WAKIKONA WANENDEYA DAVID 
158.	WAMBUZI GAGAWALA NELSON 
159.	WONANZOFU SIMON PETER 
160.	WANJUSI WASIEBA
161.	WONEKHA OLIVER 
162.	WOPUWA GEORGE WILLIAM 
163.	YIGA ANTHONY 
164.	ZZIWA MARGARET NANTONGO 


NOES:

1.	AADROA ONZIMA ALEX 
2.	ALASO ASIANUT ALICE
3.	ANANG-ODUR TOMSON
4.	ARUMADRI JOHN DRAZU
5.	EPETAIT FRANCIS
6.	KAJEKE WILFRED
7.	KASULE LUMUMBA JUSTINE
8.	LUKYAMUZI JOHN KEN
9.	MBALIBULHA CHRISTOPHER
10.	MUKABEERA ANNETTE
11.	MWANDHA JAMES ELIEZER
12.	NANDALA MAFABI NATHAN
13.	NSUBUGA WILLIAM
14.	ODIT JOHN
15.	OGOLA AKISOFERI MICHEAL
16.	OJOK B’LEO
17.	OMODI OKOT
18.	WADRI KASSIANO EZATI
19.	WAGONDA MUGULI JOHN
20.	WANDERA MARTIN 

ABSTENTIONS: 

1.	ATIM OGWAL CECILIA
2.	KIRASO BIRUNGI BEATRICE
3.	LYOMOKI SAM
4.	 MUTULUUZA PETER
5.	NUWAGABA HERBERT MUNTUYERA 
6.	SEBAGGALA LATIF
  
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, as the tally is being taken, I would like to inform the Cabinet Ministers that the Cabinet meeting, which had been scheduled for this afternoon, has been postponed to Monday afternoon at 4.00 O’clock. So please -(Interjections)- yes the Leader of Government Business said so.

MR MWANDHA: In view of the fact that it is getting to 2.00 O’clock and considering that some members may have medical requirements to have some food by this time, isn’t it the best time to consider having a break? I believe none of us would like to miss the deliberations on the Constitution. And in order to be fair to everybody, would not this be the right time to take a break?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, this is the outcome of the vote: 6 abstentions, 20 are against, and those for are 164. So the ayes have it. (Applause)

(Question agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

1.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

    A. REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered clause 29 of the Bill and adopted it with amendments; clause 30 was adopted with amendments, and clause 31 was adopted without amendment.  

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE 
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE

2.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I suspend proceedings for one hour. We shall resume at 3.00 O’clock prompt.

(The proceedings were suspended at 2.01 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.00 p.m._)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT NO.3) BILL, 2005

DR OKULO EPAK: Madam Speaker, I find it difficult but I have to raise this. We are used to the idea of meeting on Friday mornings only. Many of us had arranged for programmes and communication is difficult. It is also difficult now to cancel them. Those of us who are from the Lango sub-region have the consecration of the Bishop of Lira tomorrow so this afternoon would have been the best time to travel. Actually I missed the meeting here on Monday because I had gone to receive him in my constituency as he was entering the Lango sub-region. 

I do not want to challenge your prerogative but it looks like an ambush, which puts us in a real jeopardy. When you said that the Cabinet meeting was not going to take place we did not think that it was because of a continuation. We thought that maybe the Cabinet members wanted to rest today. I do not know what you can do for us?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Epak, I will take your matter into account and ensure that you leave in time to reach Lango. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am standing on a point of procedure subsequent to what hon. Dr Okulo Epak has attempted to articulate. The issues are pertinent and I would like to assume that they were referring to every bit of constitutional deliberation we are effecting right now. The mood I am seeing is that we are in a gear deliberate to making decisions associated with the Constitution amendment.  Now that a Committee of the whole House is sitting, is it not the right time for you to let us know and allay our fears that the points articulated by Dr Okulo Epak will be heeded to?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you not listening? I said I would take his interests into account. I have noted it.

MR SABIITI: Madam Chairperson, the Articles that are coming up, particularly Article 96(a) and other Articles that follow are very important. I think many members of this Parliament would like to pronounce themselves on them personally. As you are aware, the Speaker took a decision that we shall be meeting on Friday mornings. We were not given prior notice that we should come in this afternoon. There are many Members of Parliament who are out, for example, the Members for Forum for Democratic Change are in Mbarara this afternoon and we had requested the Speaker to allow us be absent this afternoon. Procedurally, is it fair for the Chair to conduct business when a number of Members of Parliament who have already been granted permission to be away are not here? I request you to revisit this matter so that we handle this amendment beginning next Monday onwards.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Sabiiti, you sent me a note and I am also taking your matter into account. Let us just begin.

MR SABIITI: Yes, I understand but you remember I told you that I was even leaving before we adjourned. I do not see why we should be ambushed.  You cannot ambush Parliament. Parliament has a programme; Parliament schedules are put in place. The Speaker of Parliament came here and said Fridays will be free. Why are you ambushing us?

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable chairperson. I would like to inform my honourable colleague that according to the Budget we passed for the financial year 2004/2005, we were meant to be here. Even terms of our stay were catered for and he is the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee whereby the Members of Parliament must account for their duties and everything. We were told when we pass the rules to start the Constitution amendment that we shall work as time accords us. So I would like to inform him that even if members are not around, some of us who are here want to account and we want to work.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we sat in the Business Committee and said that we were going to make adjustments, including suspending Cabinet work. We said we might even have to work on Saturdays and Sundays. You have informed me that you have some commitments and I have said I am going to take them into account.  

MRS AKWERO ODWONG: Madam Chairperson, is it in order for hon. Kibanzanga to wear a blouse and a coat without a tie? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I think that is not a suitable shirt. You are out of order. It is not a suitable shirt for this session. You need a tie and a shirt.

Clause 32

MR OULANYAH: Madam Chairperson, the committee considered the proposed clause 32 and registered strong objections, in the proposed sub-clause 2, which proposes that, “The person presiding in Parliament shall have a casting vote”. The committee came to the conclusion that this would compromise the impartiality and independence of the office of the presiding officer and would be undesirable. 

The committee recommended that this particular sub-clause be deleted. The effect of deleting this sub-clause would even render the existing constitutional provision in Article 89 more attractive than the proposed clause 1. I, therefore, propose a deletion of the whole of clause 32.

MR MWESIGE: Madam Chairperson, I accept the committee’s recommendation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, since we are deleting a clause of a Bill, can those who support the deletion put up their hands?

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is one abstention; those against are nil, and those for are 148.  

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 33

MR OULANYAH: Madam Chairperson, in clause 33 the Bill proposes to delete the existing Article 90 on Committees of Parliament and replace it with these two clauses proposed in the Article. The committee was of the view that the powers that are contained in Article 90(4) relating to powers of committees would need to be provided for in the Constitution. Otherwise, Parliamentary Committees might have difficulties invoking some of these powers if they are contained in any other law. 

The committee, therefore, proposes that while adopting the proposed clauses 90(1) and (2) in the Bill, the existing constitutional provision in sub-clause (4) be inserted in this provision and retained. We propose that the existing Article 90(4) should be retained and carried with this amendment. The amendment says that; “In the exercise of their functions under this Article, Committees of Parliament:
a)	May call a minister,
b)	May co-opt,
c)	Shall have powers of the High Court for;
	i)	Enforcing the attendance of witnesses and examining them on oath, affirmation or otherwise, 
	ii)	Compelling the production of  documents, and
	iii)	Issuing a commission or request to examine witnesses abroad.”

We beg that these powers be retained.

MR MWESIGE: Madam Chairperson, I accept the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that –(Interruption)

MR RUZINDANA: Madam Chairperson, for the sake of clarity on Article 92 in the Bill, could we say, “Parliament shall prescribe by law …”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, are you saying in a separate Act or in the Rules of Procedure?

MR RUZINDANA: A separate Act.

MR MWESIGE: I do not see compelling reasons to prescribe Committees of Parliament and their functions in a law. We have already, in clause 31, provided that quorum, which in my view is a more weighty matter than functions of committees, will be prescribed by the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. In the same spirit I do not see any harm in prescribing the functions of committees in the Rules of Procedure of Parliament; after all they are binding on Parliament.  

DR OKULO EPAK: Following what the honourable minister has said, this is open. It does not say how Parliament is going to prescribe the powers, composition and functions of its committees, and yet in his mind he means by using the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, would it not be necessary to specify it? Otherwise it is vague as it stands now. So shall we say that, “Parliament shall, by its Rules of Procedure, prescribe the powers, composition and functions of its committees.”  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there any objection to that? Can you repeat it?

DR OKULO EPAK: “Parliament shall, by its Rules of Procedure prescribe the powers, composition and functions of its committees.” Insert “by its Rules of Procedure” between “shall” and “prescribe.” Thank you.

MR MUSUMBA: This takes away the flexibility with which Parliament may decide to deal with this matter. Rules of Procedure can establish some functions but Parliament in its wisdom may decide that some elements of how the committees are going to execute this function may require a law. I will give an example. In the issuance of sermons to witnesses abroad, supposing there is need in the view of Parliament to regulate how this is going to be done, they may not do it by Rules of Procedure, they may want to do it by law. So I think that as it is now, it gives Parliament flexibility to opt for an Act when they want or to retain the rules when they want. I think we should not in its entirety tie the hands of Parliament in the way it would want to regulate the functions of the committee especially where the committee is dealing with people outside Parliament who may not be bound by the rules of Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But our committees have been dealing with people outside this Parliament, has anybody complained that we violate their rights or anything? Even courts make their laws. Why do you need an Act? You go to gazette the Act –(Interruption)

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Chairperson, I think the proposal by hon. Musumba should be dismissed outright because this provision does not in anyway hamper the ability of Parliament and the powers already given to Parliament to be the sole body to legislate and make laws for this country. It does not prejudice those powers.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: By the way –(Interjections)- yes, our rules are an Act of Parliament. They have legal force. So –(Interruption)

MR MWESIGE: Madam Chairperson, I accept the amendment moved by hon. Okulo Epak and I would like to invite you to put the question.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 33 be amended as proposed by hon. Okulo Epak. 

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members the results are as follows: abstention, nil; those against are nil, and those for are 155. So the provision is accordingly amended. 

(Question agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the chairperson moved an amendment to insert 90(4) into the Bill. I put the question that clause 33 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the results are as follows: abstentions, nil; those against, nil; and those for are 177. The ayes have it. (Applause)

(Question agreed to.)
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 33, as amended, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put.)

AYES:

1.	AACHILA JOHN ROBERTS REX 
2.	AADROA ONZIMA ALEX 
3.	AANIMU ANGUPALE 
4.	ABURA PIRIR SAMUEL 
5.	AEK ARK LODOU 
6.	AGARD DIDI 
7.	AHABWE GODFREY PEREZ 
8.	AKAKI AYUMU JOVINO 
9.	AKECH OKULLO BETTY 
10.	AKELLO DINAH GRACE 
11.	AKWERO ODWONG JANE 
12.	ALASO AISANUT ALICE 
13.	ALISEMERA BABIHA JANE 
14.	ALONGA OTHMAN HARUNA 
15.	AMAMA MBABAZI 
16.	AMONGIN APORU HELLEN CHRISTINE 
17.	AMURIAT OBOI PATRICK
18.	ANANG-ODUR LAKANA TOMSON 
19.	ANGIRO GUTOMOI CHARLES 
20.	ANYOLO SAMUEL 
21.	APUUN PATRICK 
22.	ARAPKISSA YEKKO JOHN 
23.	ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA (LT GEN)
24.	ARUMADRI JOHN DRAZU
25.	ATENG OTIM MARGARET
26.	ATIM OGWAL CECELIA
27.	AWONGO AHMED
28.	AWORI SIRYORI AGGREY
29.	BABA DIRI MARGARET 
30.	BABU EDWARD FRANCIS 
31.	BADDA FRED
32.	BAGUMA ISOKE MATIA
33.	BAKALUBA MUKASA PETER
34.	BAKOKO BAKORU ZOE
35.	BALEMEZI NALUBEGA LYDIA
36.	BAMWANGA STEVEN
37.	BANYENZAKI HENRY
38.	BASAJJABALABA NASSAR
39.	BASALIZA ARAALI HENRY
40.	BASALIZA MWESIGYE STEVEN
41.	BAZAALE BYARUHANGA PHILIP
42.	BAZANA KABWEGYERE TARSIS
43.	BBUMBA SYDA NAMIREMBE 
44.	BESISIRA IGNATIUS 
45.	BIKWASIZEHI DEUSDEDIT
46.	BINTU JALIA 
47.	BIRIMUMAASO MULINDWA
48.	BITAMAZIRE NAMIREMBE GERALDINE 
49.	BITANGARO SAMUEL
50.	BUTIME TOM 
51.	BWERERE KASOLE LWANGA EDWARD
52.	BYABAGAMBI JOHN
53.	BYAMUKAMA DORA
54.	BYANYIMA NATHAN
55.	BYARUHANGA CHARLES
56.	CHELANGAT KULANY GERTRUDE 
57.	D’UJANGA GIW SIMON
58.	EPETAIT FRANCIS
59.	ERIYO JESSICA
60.	ETONU BENEDICT
61.	GOLE NICHOLAS DAVID
62.	GUMA GUMISIRIZA DAVID
63.	GUTTI ANDREW 
64.	HOPE MWESIGYE 
65.	HYUHA SAMALI DOROTHY
66.	KABAKUMBA LABWONI MASIKO
67.	KABAREEBE AMON-REEVES MUZOORA
68.	KAFABUSA WERIKHE MICHAEL
69.	KAGABA HARRIET
70.	KAGIMU KIWANUKA MAURICE
71.	KAGONYERA MONDO
72.	KAJEKE WILFRED
73.	KAJURA MUGANWA HENRY 
74.	KAKOOKO SEBAGEREKA VICTORIA
75.	KAKOOZA JAMES
76.	KAMANDA BATARINGAYA
77.	KAMUNTU EPHRAIM
78.	KAPKWOMU NDIWA KAPKWOMU
79.	KASAMBA MATHIAS
80.	KASIRIVU ATWOOKI BALTAZAR 
81.	KATIRIMA PHINEHAS
82.	KATONGOLE BADRU
83.	KATUNTU ABDU
84.	KAWOYA BANGIRANA ANIFA
85.	KAYANJA ELLY
86.	KAYIZI ASANANSIO 
87.	KAYONGO TOM
88.	KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO LAWRENCE
89.	KIBANZANGA CHRISTOPHER MBALIMBULHA
90.	KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA ISRAEL
91.	KIDEGA DANIEL FRED
92.	KIGYAGI ARIMPA JOHN
93.	KIKUNGWE ISSAH
94.	KINOBE JIMMY WILLIAM REUBEN
95.	KIRASO BIRUNGI BEATRICE
96.	KITHENDE KALIBOGHA APOLINARIS
97.	KITYO HENRY MUTEBI
98.	KIWAGAMA WILLIAM WILBERFORCE
99.	KIWALABYE MUSOKE DANIEL
100.	KIWANDA GODFREY 
101.	KIYONGA CHRISPUS 
102.	KIZIGE MOSES
103.	KOLUO CHARLES PETER
104.	KUBEKETERYA JAMES
105.	KULE MURANGA JOSEPH 
106.	KUTESA SAM
107.	KYAHURWENDA ABWOOLI TOMSON 
108.	LOCHIAM MILIGAN ROSE 
109.	LOKERIS PETER AIMAT 
110.	LOLEM MICAH
111.	LUBOWA MOSES PAUL
112.	LUKYAMUZI JOHN KEN
113.	MAATE ROGERS
114.	MABIKKE MICHAEL
115.	MADADA KYEBAKOZE SULAIMAN 
116.	MAGOOLA ZIRAMUZAALE BEATRICE
117.	MALLINGA JOHNSON
118.	MALLINGA STEPHEN OSCAR  
119.	MASIKO KOMUHANGI WINFRED
120.	MATOVU BYATIKE 
121.	MATOVU DAVID
122.	MAYENDE SIMON
123.	MAYOMBO NOBLE 
124.	MBABAZI KABUSHENGA HAMLET
125.	MEHANGYE IDAH
126.	MIGEREKO DAUDI
127.	MINDRA JOYO EUGINIA 
128.	MUGAMBE KIF’OMUSANA JOSEPH
129.	MUGERWA NAMAGGWA SAUDA
130.	MUHWEZI KATUGUGU JIM 
131.	MUKABEERA ANNETTE
132.	MUKASA MURULI WILSON 
133.	MUKULA GEORGE MICHAEL
134.	MUKULA RICHARD
135.	MUKWAYA BALUNZI JANAT
136.	MULENGANI BERNARD
137.	MUNYIRA WABWIRE OMUSOLO ROSE
138.	MUSUMBA ISAAC ISANGA
139.	MUTULUZA PETER 
140.	MWAKA NAKIBONEKA VICTORIA 
141.	MWESIGE ADOLF
142.	MWONDHA PATRICK JOHN
143.	NABETA NASANI
144.	NABWISO BULIMA WILBERFORCE
145.	NACHA LORIKA ROSE 
146.	NAMAYANJA ROSE
147.	NAMUSOKE KIYINGI SARAH
148.	NAMUYANGU KACHA JENIPHER
149.	NANKABIRWA SSENTAMU RUTH
150.	NANSUBUGA SARAH NYOMBI 
151.	NDAWULA KAWEESI EDWARD 
152.	NSABA BUTURO JAMES
153.	NSHIMYE SEBUTULO AUGUSTINE
154.	NSUBUGA NSAMBU 
155.	NSUBUGA WILLIAM
156.	NTACYOTUGIRA PHILLIP MARY 
157.	NUWAGABA HERBERT MUNTUYERA
158.	NYANZI VINCENT
159.	NYEKO OCULA MICHAEL
160.	NYENDWOHA MUTITI JONATHAN
161.	OBBO HENRY JOSEPH
162.	OCHIENG PETER PATRICK
163.	ODIT JOHN
164.	OGOLA AKISOFERI MICHAEL
165.	OGWEL LOOTE SAMMY
166.	OJOK B’LEO SIMON
167.	OKOT OGONG FELIX
168.	OKULO EPAK YEFUSA
169.	OKUMU RINGA PATRICK ALOYSIUS
170.	OKURUT KAROORO BUSINGYE MARY
171.	OLUM ZACHARY
172.	OMACH MANDIR JACHAN FRED
173.	OMODI OKOT
174.	OMWONY OJWOK
175.	ONEK OBALOKER HILARY
176.	OPANGE LOUIS
177.	ORECH DAVID MARTIN
178.	ORYEM HENRY OKELLO
179.	OULANYAH JACOB
180.	OGWEL LOOTE SAMUEL
181.	OWORI AMOOTI OTADA
182.	PATAKI AMASI
183.	RAINER KAFIRE JULIET
184.	RUHINDI FREDDIE
185.	RUKUNDO SERAPIO
186.	RUKUTANA MWESIGWA
187.	RUTAMWEBWA MUGYENYI MARY
188.	RWAKIMARI BEATRICE
189.	RWAMIRAMA KANYONTOLE BRIGHT
190.	SABIITI JACK 
191.	SAIDI OKUTI NASUR 
192.	SEBAGGALA LATIF 
193.	SEBALU MIKE KENNEDY 
194.	SEBULIBA MUTUMBA RICHARD 
195.	SEKITOLEKO JULIET KABONESA 
196.	SINABULYA NAMABIDDE SYLVIA  
197.	SITENDA-SEBALU WILLIAM 
198.	SSEKIKUBO THEODORE 
199.	SSENTONGO NABULYA TEOPISTA
200.	THEMBO NYOMBI GEORGE WILLIAM 
201.	TIBARIMBASA AVITUS  
202.	TINYEFUZA DAVID 
203.	TIPERU NUSURA OMAR 
204.	TUBBO NAKWANG CHRISTINE 
205.	TUMA RUTH 
206.	WABUDEYA BEATRICE 
207.	WACHA BEN 
208.	WADRI KASSIANO EZATI 
209.	WAGONDA MUGULI JOHN 
210.	WAKIKONA DAVID 
211.	WAMBUZI GAGAWALA 
212.	WANANZOFU SIMON PETER 
213.	WANDERA MARTIN 
214.	WANJUSI WASIEBA SYLVESTER
215.	WONEKA OLIVER 
216.	YERI OFWONO 
217.	YIGA ANTHONY 
218.	ZZIWA MARGARET NANTONGO

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the results are as follows: no abstentions, none against, and the ayes are 218. So the ayes have it. (Applause)

(Question agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House report thereto. Those in favour of the House resuming, put up your hands -(Interjections)- but it is I who asked the minister to move the motion so that we can report.

MR AWORI: Madam Chairperson, as a result of the power surge some of us did not hear clearly exactly what we are voting on. What are we voting on? We did not hear clearly, we were in the process of listening to you. I am supposed to say aye or nay to what, and what are the implications of my voting? I want your guidance -(Interjections)- you have a private agenda, I know. I want to hear. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I asked the minister to move a motion for the House to resume so that we can receive the report. That is what I was asking you to vote on. It seems the majority are in favour of continuing with the Committee Stage.  

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, let us proceed.

DR OKULO EPAK: Madam Chairperson, I want to move an amendment. I want to insert clause 33(a) to allow me to amend Article 93. I am moving this motion in collaboration with hon. Kagimu Kiwanuka. The proposed amendment is to delete sub-paragraph (ii) of paragraph (a) of Article 93. I beg to move. The rest of the original proposals have been drafted after serious consultations. So I am moving to delete only sub-paragraph (ii) of paragraph (a) of Article 93.

MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: Madam Chairperson, in this exercise we are acting upon a Bill. Any matter to be considered must be as is contained in the Bill, which we are considering. It is not open to any member to bring any matter unless that matter is in the Bill.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: When we were starting we did say that if a member has gone to the committee to present his amendment and it has been rejected, he may bring it during this stage. Can I know from the chairperson whether the honourable member came to you?

MR OULANYAH: Madam Chairperson, it is true when the committee was considering this Bill hon. Kagimu Kiwanuka proposed to amend Article 93. If you look at page 9 of our report, hon. Kagimu Kiwanuka’s proposal to amend Article 93 to remove the restriction of the private members moving motions or Bills, which have a charge on Consolidated Fund, was rejected as unjustifiable. The committee considered this but it was rejected. So, he had the option of re-introducing it here. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So you can bring it, honourable member.

DR OKULO EPAK: In defence of this amendment, I would like to state as follows. The provision in 93 paragraph (a)(ii) did not envisage that Parliament would be empowered by the Budget Act. We now have a Budget Act, which gives Parliament powers and rights to participate in the budget process.  Parliament can never participate in the budget process effectively unless it can influence the allocation of resources.

Secondly, the major function of this Parliament is to legislate and to allocate resources. It has proved to be very difficult for private members to come up with Bills here and it might even prove more difficult as we open up to Multi-partism for private members to introduce the Private Members’ Bill. This has posed a lot of questions on the ability and capacity of Parliament. If you remember, I think up to now we have only succeeded in moving two Private Members’ Bills. This is very unfortunate. We are supposed to be legislators not the promoters of the Executive Bills, which currently are the main emphasis.

The question of charge on the Consolidated Fund can now be taken care of by the provision in the Budget Act, which says; “Every Bill must be accompanied and supported by a Certificate of Financial Implications”. This is the most appropriate way rather than someone like the honourable minister trying to shoot down a Bill or a motion simply on technicalities. I think even in the courts of law they are now against those technicalities. Cases must be heard and judged on their merits and not simply moving on technicalities. 

I also want to submit that if this paragraph is deleted it will enable Parliament in partnership with the Executive to hold amicable dialogue in order to shift and influence the priorities of Government within the sector and across the sector, a situation we have not been able to do up to now. I have seen a letter from the Minister of Finance from the Commissioner to the Rt hon. Prime Minister saying that ministries always complain to Parliament that they are not allocated enough resources. The impact of that is that Parliament has no powers to increase except to decrease their allocations, and that is really unfortunate.

The essence of the Budget Act is really to provide for co-operative governance. We should promote the spirit of cooperative governance where an issue raised by a private member or a backbencher invokes dialogue and discussion between the Executive and the legislators. At that stage may be there could be an understanding as it has happened previously, that a private member can concede to a Government Minister introducing the Bill. Quite often motions here of Private Members’ Bills are shot down prematurely. 

I am really moving this motion in the interest of Members of Parliament whose primary mandate and duty for which they are elected to come here is to legislate not to say yes to other legislations or other laws. This will increase the capacity of Members of Parliament to know how to bring Bills. 

We have a parliamentary drafting department, which will assist members. Otherwise, this drafting department is currently redundant because no member attempts to bring any Private Member’s Bill because this particular provision or Article has been highly prohibitive and negative. I want to appeal to honourable members that this Bill is to enable them exercise their own right. If they throw it away it means they would have thrown away their mandate to somebody else. I beg everybody to support this motion. It is a humble motion because it is in consonance with the Budget Act. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Seconded?

MS KIRASO: Madam Chairperson, I stand to support the amendment proposed by hon. Okulo Epak basically for the reasons he has explained. However, I also want to remind honourable members that in 1995 when this Constitution was put in place, the Government of Uganda was not budgeting on the basis of a three-year macro-economic plan or the medium-term expenditure framework. They were budgeting basing on that single year. It was a cash budget such that if private members, backbenchers, continued bringing Bills, which would have financial implications and put a charge on the Consolidated Fund, the whole budget would be distorted and disorganised. But now with the medium-term expenditure framework, Government together with Parliament is able to incorporate things into that financial year, if not, in the following financial year. 

Hon. Okulo Epak read section 10 of the Budget Act, he did not complete it, because it says, “Every Bill introduced in Parliament shall be accompanied by its indicative financial implications, if any, on revenue and expenditure over the period of not less than two years of its coming into force.”  So if the implications of that Bill cannot financially be accommodated in the financial year in which the Bill is being moved or the Act is being enacted, then there is a chance in this participatory spirit to accommodate it in the following financial year. So, Madam Chairperson, I beg to support the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Whoever has a telephone on, please switch it off.

MR GAGAWALA: Madam Chairperson, I stand to oppose the motion. Why? It would be very chaotic in a Multi-party situation, which comes out with a clear-cut programme to expect that Members of Parliament are going to come and change that programme against the incumbent Government. Therefore, it is not possible, if we are going to debate in a limited time and efficiently, to actually change this law because this law has been long in our books and other countries –(Interjection)- it is common sense, you know it. You have been a civil servant in many places.  Therefore, I beg that we do not take much time. We should debate specifically the pros and cons. This particular proposal by my elder brother here will cause chaos when we pass it. I beg to oppose the motion.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, this is just a matter of principle. The Constitution allows an ordinary Member of Parliament to move a private member’s motion. If that principle is upheld, it is almost inconceivable that you can move a motion and a Bill that has absolutely no financial implication to the Consolidated Fund. Otherwise, if the intention really were to give the freedom to a Member of Parliament to move a Bill, you would have negated that very principle by imposing a limitation that nothing that he does can have a consequence on the Consolidated Fund.  

Therefore, I support the amendment principally because it is just like if we did not you would give with one hand and take away with the other. The member would never move any motion entailing a Private Members’ Bill. Thank you very much.  

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  This is a provision in the Constitution that has major implications on budget management and discipline. In the Constitution Parliament appropriates monies in a financial year. So the Parliament sits here and appropriates money and Government must follow the appropriation of Parliament under the Constitution.  

What Article 93 is meant to cure - I was there in the Constituent Assembly and this was a subject of debate – what Article 93 is supposed to cure is a situation where after the Parliament has appropriated money, a member comes here and says, “We need - as the example hon. Kagimu gave earlier in this House - a heart machine worth US $4 million”. Of course the House knows we need a heart machine worth US $4 million, so the House says, “Aye, the Government must find US $4 million”. 

The next day another member stands up and says, “I want my county to become a district.” Members say yes and they create another district. All these are matters with major financial implications on the Budget. The implementation of the Budget would not be orderly if –[Hon. Okulo Epak: Point of information]- May I be allowed to develop my point? 

DR OKULO EPAK: I would like to inform the honourable minister that constitutionally Parliament has no initiative on the creation of districts. Districts are created by district councils sent to the Minister of Local Government, discussed by Cabinet and brought to Parliament to approve. I do not see how any member can stand here and say, “I want to create a district in my constituency”. 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, allow me to develop my point. If the example of districts is making hon. Okulo Epak uncomfortable, I can give another example. Although I know the fact that under Article 179 Parliament creates the districts. It is in Article 179, but I can give another example.  

Somebody can bring another motion that the road in such a place is very bad, let the Government do this road by the way of motion and it is aye. The management of the Budget will be very difficult. What, therefore, the Budget Act thought to introduce is –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The clarification I am seeking from the member holding the Floor is two fold. One, we are talking of Private Members’ Bills and not motions. 

Secondly, I was privy to the debates when the Budget Act was being debated here. Why is the minister using a different language contrary to what is in the Budget Act?

MR MUSUMBA: I, as well as other members of this House have the freedom to analyse their understanding of the Budget Act. This is my understanding of the Budget Act. My understanding of the Budget Act is that it was created to ensure that the Members of Parliament participate way ahead in time in the processes that lead to appropriation. Therefore, it is for that reason that section 10 in the Budget Act was written to ensure that a Bill, which comes here, Government is aware of its finance implications and it makes Parliament aware of the depth of the financial implications of that Bill. 

To finalise my submission –(Interruption)

MR ONEK: I would like to ask the minister a question. Why do you think every Bill brought in this House will always bring about cost escalation? A Private Members’ Bill could be tabled to reorganise the other Bill and bring down the cost, not necessarily to raise costs. So, there must be freedom of that legislation to allow for more appropriate and optimise the management of our economy in the country. Thank you.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, if the Bill is coming in this House and it has the effect of being either budget neutral or reduction, it is not inconsistent with Article 93. Therefore, I want to plead with this House that what is put here is to safeguard government from two things: one is the disruption of the Budget by way of unanticipated and unexpected occurrence that may arise of out of new Bill that has been introduced. 

Two -(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: The professional understanding of the Budget Act is that by requiring a certificate of financial implications it will have given an opportunity to the Executive arm of Government to see whether the implication suggested in the Bill has a negative effect on the already appropriated financial resources. Consequently if it has negatively impacted on what is already allocated, it will not be passed. That is the whole purpose. 

Therefore, the disorganisation - I agree with you, honourable minister that as an Executive arm of Government you must be given ample time to look at what is planned and what has been proposed and how consistent these are. Really the essential point here that is being raised is if you give a private member to propose a Bill, which Bill can you really propose that has no financial implications? It will be inconceivable; it would be very difficult. 

All that is said is, yes, in preparing the Certificate of Financial Implications the Executive can say, no, this cannot happen. But if it can happen, surely a private member should propose a Bill that has financial implications on the Consolidated Fund. Otherwise, what is the right for, it will never rise. 

MR MUSUMBA: First of all let me tell this House that the Budget Act, which is being quoted was a Bill that was introduced by backbenchers and Article 93 negated it. So it is possible to bring this Bill before this House that is not inconsistent with the provisions of Article 93. 

However, let me also make this point. The Certificate of Financial Implications in the Budget Act has the genesis of - even Bills that are coming from the Government to this House require that Members of Parliament are made aware so that they pronounce themselves on this Bill aware of its financial implications in its entirety. There were situations when Bills could be brought here for implementation and then the backbenchers were told there was no money to implement them. Therefore, I want to conclude my submission by saying that the issue of taxation is something that can bring down a government or it can make it.

MR KAGIMU: We are talking of paragraph two; we are not talking of paragraph one. We are not talking about taxation. Is the honourable minister in order to mislead the House?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, your amendment is to make a substantial change on how that clause operates. So, let him give submissions –(Interruptions)

MR MUSUMBA: Yes, it is a charge on the Consolidated Fund. The funds that come into the Consolidated Fund are raised by taxes. So, in addressing this House about taxation I am actually addressing myself to the Consolidated Fund. That includes monies derived from taxation. However –(Interjections) 

MRS SSENTONGO: Thank you. The clarification I want to seek from the honourable minister is in regard to the labour laws, specifically the trade union labour law. How much does it impinge on the Consolidated Fund? If this law is being brought here it is not going to go back to the Government; it is going back to the employers. I want to know this.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, if any member has a Private Member’s Bill to present to this House, where does the burden lie to show that this Bill is not one that has the import of imposing a charge on the Consolidated Fund? All you have to do is bring your Bill and show that it is not inconsistent with –(Interruption) 

MRS SSENTONGO: We tried our level best as members representing workers in this Parliament to bring our private Bill and we were stopped because of the cost. I want to know how much it affects the Consolidated Fund.

MR MUSUMBA: I rest my case, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, ever since we enacted the Budget Act we made it a condition that any Bill that comes for the first reading here must have a certificate. So, whether it is private or whether from government, we expect it to have a certificate. So you move your Bill, you gazette it, and then you proceed to the Minister of Finance to get a certificate.

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. It is only unfortunate that Article 93 of the Constitution assumes that when we have Private Members’ Bills, the members of the backbench only rave and, therefore, do not know how government gets money. It is very bad. I am a victim of this. In 2003 I moved a Bill here in connection with the LDUs, the Budget Act indicated clearly by section 10 that a certificate will accompany it after the Ministry of Finance had certified it. When I reached the Ministry of Finance, they told me, “Look at Article 93.” 

But then I told them, “Look at our Rules of Procedure, rule 49”. So, let me read it and told them it was a motion with regard to settlement of financial matters. Article 93 of the Constitution: “Parliament shall not proceed on any motion, including any amendment to a motion, that in the opinion of the person presiding makes provision for any of the purposes set out in rule 99 unless the motion is introduced by a member or a Minister on behalf of the President.”  

I asked them - because LDUs were already receiving money - under what law they were receiving the money. It was an illegal expenditure through the Ministry of Finance to Ministry of Internal Affairs, from Internal Affairs to Defence, to Arrow Boys to Amuka Boys, LDUs anywhere else they were being paid; under what law and what vote? So I said that in order to avoid that irregular expenditure, we should come up with a law that can regulate the expenditure, regulate the behaviour and have these LDUs well known and with a pay roll.  

The other day you must have heard how money had not reached the LDUs for the last six months but you go to Ministry of Finance, that money could have been released. Until there is a law that can assist, it will not be okay. This rule 49 means that if it is a member, the member must get permission from the Executive. After failing to get all this, I communicated to the Executive applying rule 49. I am still waiting for the answer, since 2003. (Laughter)  In other words, we make an amendment to Article 93 to allow private members to bring Bills upon which Government can study and thereafter bring the certificate indicating the financial implications.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Madam Chairperson, hon. Muzoora did appeal to me. I did write to the Ministry of Finance urging them to respond to his request. This was about five days ago; he brought this matter in Parliament. I did write to the Minister of Finance saying it was wrong and irregular to take so long to reply. So really that is another argument because if the Ministry of Finance delays to give you a response, it is wrong. 

I pointed out to the Ministry of Finance that it was wrong but that delay is not attributable to Article 93. Some members of Cabinet have from time to time complained that is why of late we have indicated to Finance that they must get a time frame because they get so many demands and some people may imagine that the proposed Bill has no financial implications, when it has. So they need reasonable time to respond. Let me say that the Minister of Finance had to give hon. Muzoora an answer. As I speak to you the Ministry of Finance is on the brink of complying with my directive. (Laughter)

MR KABAREEBE: I want to conclude. I must thank the Prime Minister for his expeditious and sagacious response because immediately he knew it; the next day I received a copy of the communication, but shall we always complain here for anything to be done by ministries? 

I want to conclude by saying that let the law indicate that any Private Member’s Bill should not exceed a certain amount. When you say that a Private Member’s Bill shall never come here so long as it has some financial implications even if it is one shilling, it will never happen. Even if it is only the law that wants you to buy a ream of paper, so long as it impacts on the Consolidated Fund, then it will never happen. So what is our role here if we cannot generate the roles? I thank you very much.

MR MWONDHA: Thank you very much. I stand to support the amendment of Dr Okulo Epak and Mr Kagimu. I am now reminded that hon. Kutesa was once DP and he wants me to include Kagimu. You see the situation as it is now is extremely restrictive. It is so restrictive that we cease even to serve the legislative function, which is part of our mandate as Members of Parliament. Mr Minister of Finance, we are not about to amend the Budget Act, we are saying that the provisions of the Budget Act will still be in place. You will still be able to give us a Certificate of Financial Implications.

MR KUTESA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, and thank you hon. Mwondha for giving way. I want to seek clarification. There has been consistent reliance on the Budget Act. It provides that the Ministry of Finance must give a certification of no objection that the Bill being brought forward does not have financial implications. It is being argued now that you amend Article 93 to give express right to Members of Parliament or backbenchers to bring a motion. The clarification I am seeking is: once you have passed a constitutional amendment giving an express right to a backbencher to bring a motion or a Bill, automatically that right in the Constitution supercedes the provisions of the Budget Act. In other words, it seems to me that any reliance therefore on the provisions of the Budget Act is faulty because the Budget Act would be inconsistent with the Constitution and to the extent of that inconsistency, it will be null and void.  

The clarification I am seeking is, if you create an express right, do you really have any capacity to rely on the Budget Act? Would it not actually require that the Budget Act becomes amended to be consistent with the Constitution?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, I want to further clarify that the requirement in the Budget Act for the Minister of Finance to issue the Certificate of Financial Implications to the Bills intended to be brought to the House does not in anyway say that if the financial implications envisaged in the Bill is more than what the Executive may afford, that the Ministry of Finance should decline to give the Certificate of Financial Implications. All it says is that a certificate will be issued indicating the output, the input, and the expected outcomes of the Bill. That is all; it is not a bar. It does not say once Government finds that it cannot afford to accommodate the financial implications of the Bill then it should decline to give the Certificate of Financial Implications.  

When you are raising this point we should raise it knowing that the Certificate of Financial Implications per se is not a bar to a Bill. Honourable members  -(Interruption)

MRS SSENTONGO: Yes, labour laws of this country have been derailed for over 15 years. On the basis that they have that financial implication, it is clear. We have had so many ministers in the Ministry of Labour and they have gone and come. They all say the financial implications have made the labour laws difficult to be brought to the House. This is a reality. Let us be clear.

MR MWONDHA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When I talked about the requirement for a certificate, I was trying to answer what hon. Musumba had said that it will be disruptive. The Act allows us to plan, to move in an organised manner by requiring us to consult with the Executive when we are moving so that the Executive can plan. In any case, we are not even saying it is a no objection.

MS KIRASO: Thank you very much, Mr Mwondha for giving way. When a law is passed and it has been assented to, there is what they call a commencement date, or the date at which that law will come into effect. The financial implications certificate is to facilitate this Parliament with enough information on whether that law can be made effective immediately or not.  

This is information for hon. Kutesa. The Certificate of Financial Implications is not a no-objection certificate. It is a certificate showing what it will cost government to implement that law so that Parliament takes a decision on passing that law well knowing what that law will cost this country. It is no objection, not at all.  

Finally, the spirit with which hon. Okulo Epak moved this is that, fine, maybe there was fear that members could be erratic when they asked for the kind of things, which hon. Musumba has dramatically tried to talk about. You know dramatizing the whole thing that somebody will ask for a heart machine! Fine, but he is saying now that there is a safeguard –(Interruption)

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, during the general debate on this Bill hon. Kagimu did state before this House that he wants a heart machine worth US $4 million. Is it in order - when I am only reminding this House what hon. Kagimu told this House - to be labelled a dramatist, a Shakespearian or a katembarist. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, she was only saying that you do gesticulate when you are making your presentations. That was all. 

MR MWONDHA: Thank you very much –(Interruption) 

MS KIRASO: I am just finishing this small point, hon. Mwondha. I was saying that section 10 of the Budget Act is the safeguard that this House has not taken on. 

Finally, to remind members that section 10 of the Budget Act says, “Parliament shall analyse programmes and policy issues that affect the national budget and economy and where necessary recommend alternative approaches to Government.”  So tell me, how you are going to recommend alternative approaches to Government if you cannot put a charge on the Consolidated Fund?

MR MWONDHA: I think all has been said. But let me add, who knows there might be emergencies in the country that require intervention and MPs may be in a better position to understand these emergencies? An earthquake in Kabarole or a volcanic activity on Mt Elgon and all these might require intervention of MPs. This can only be done if MPs have the capacity to come up with Bills; or in any case to come up with bills to charge the Consolidated Fund, which this Article cannot allow now.  

We are just broadening the scope of our contribution. I do not see why anybody would not welcome worthwhile contribution especially from members coming to his House with various experiences from various walks of life. We have people here who have since retired from the civil service but with a lot of experience, which they can impart to this House and to the process of government especially if this amendment is carried.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Chairperson, let us not imagine hostility between government and members of the backbench. In normal, Multi-party democracies when a private member has a matter of importance deserving to be translated into a Bill, there is consultation with the relevant minister for the matter to be taken up. And if it is of such importance that the minister can accommodate it in his programme then government adopts that idea. 

Secondly, it is also known that a matter brought by a private member impinging on the expenditure from the Consolidated Fund can actually be accommodated. Government accepts it like it adopts a motion or accepts an amendment on a Government Bill. So, let us not take it that when a matter comes from the backbench it must be rejected. In fact the provision –(Interruption)

MR LOLEM: I did not want to rise on a point of order to my elder but there is only one thing. When he said it is not a must to be rejected, there are so many things that happen in this world. Since August last year Karamoja has never harvested any food. We have been telling the ministers the people are dying in Karamoja but they have never responded up to today. So is he in order to say that even consultation is not a must, that it will bounce and yet they have been bouncing every time?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The Legislature and the Executive are supposed to co-operate. That is why a motion to separate us was rejected so that we can remain together and co-operate. So it is important that consultations do take place. I hope the honourable member will be attended to if he has been waiting for a very long time.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Chairperson, I want to thank the minister for those two points but I would like to get some clarification from him because we have empirical evidence at least in the Seventh Parliament whereby hon. Abdu Katuntu tried to move a Private Members’ Bill on Access to Information. This Bill was eventually taken over by the ministry and therefore we did not have a Private Member’s Bill passed by this House.  

Then thereafter we also had the Pensions Bill. This Bill is in the process of being taken over by the Government. This means that again we will not have a Private Members’ Bill, and we are in the fifth year. Recently I moved a Private Member’s Bill on behalf of the Equal Opportunities Committee for persons with disabilities. One of the very first people who objected to a clause, which was establishing a fund in this Bill, is hon. Isaac Musumba, the Minister. I would like to thank the Government that after a lot of talking and negotiation and consultations we now have the Certificate of Financial Implications signed by the honourable minister, which means that this impossibility could be overcome.

The point being made by this House is very clear. We have a mischief in the Constitution whereby when Members of Parliament have good ideas, which may come in form of a Bill, these very ideas may not pass Article 93, which means that –(Interjection)– let me just conclude –(Interruption) 

MRS MUKWAYA: Is my good sister in order to forget that hon. Oulanyah moved a Private Member’s Bill when I was Minister for Justice and I endorsed it? Yes, the copyright law? Is she in order to forget? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: With regard to hon. Oulanyah, that was a success story. I am also aware that members have been coming to complain about the delay in receiving these certificates. That is a fact. At least there is one success story of hon. Oulanyah.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Chairperson, let me conclude very shortly. I take that in good faith, to forgive is divine. So I hope I have been forgiven. I was just giving examples.

What we are saying here is, when you have a prohibitive Article in the Constitution and it says; “Parliament shall not, unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of the Government, proceed upon a Bill, including an amendment Bill that makes provisions for any of the following …”. 

This prohibition is clearly understood but the prohibition does not take into account that we as legislators are in conformity with Article 79. As representatives of the people we have moved motions and Bills and it has become impossible to come up with a Bill or a motion that does not impose a charge on the Consolidated Fund. So what we are pleading for is that we cure this mischief by supporting hon. Okulo Epak’s motion. By doing so we shall leave the Budget Act intact and in position to check the excesses that have been said on the Floor of this House. I thank you. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Chairperson, hon. Byamukama has given a catalogue of a receptive government reaction to the private members’ interests. Given what is here, she has said in three cases that what a private member moved government took it over and the effect was positive. All she wants is that a private member should get the credit. I think that should be said that credit must be given to a private member for bringing a Bill. But what is being said here is that when you are going to spend money from the Consolidated Fund then you must have the backing of Government. This is correct because what is a budget? A budget is an expression of a government’s programme.  

If you are going to spend money on that budget then you must have the consent of government. Therefore, this clause remains authentic. What hon. Byamukama has said can be achieved within the context of this. Otherwise, if you say a private member is free to move a Bill that encroaches on the expenditure from the Consolidated Fund with impunity, you are interfering with the running of government -(Interjections)- yes, government is a programme of a winning party. Let us not just simply say -(Interruption) 

MS KIRASO: Madam Chairperson, is the hon. Kabwegyere in order to depict us who are supporting deletion of this provision in the Constitution as people who are crazy and are doing this with impunity? I guided people like hon. Kabwegyere who did not know about the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF). I said that if in that financial year that law cannot be implemented, it could be carried into another year. Is he in order, therefore, to behave as if all we have said is really not important? He goes ahead to use words like “impunity”, which nobody has used in this House. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let me say this for the record. In the Sixth Parliament the Administration of Parliament’s Act took about one and a-half years and the Budget Act took about three years to come back here, because of Article 93. This is our fourth year; we have received certificates for copyrights in the fourth year. Hon. Muzoora’s is still there, since 2003. The members are saying that this law causes a delay in their capacity to move a Private Members’ Bill -(Applause)- yes, hon. Musumba, you struggled with the Budget Act. I was here, yes, it took you two years. So let us find a way of simplifying the process how members can move Private Members’ Bills, because we have not done any.

MR MWONDHA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Let me conclude. Hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere was talking of a situation whereby the minister and the member supposed to move the Bill agree. In case they did not agree then we are making it simpler for the member to move his or her Bill without necessarily agreeing with the minister. We are also saying that -(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: If this House passes a Bill and the Government does not implement it then what happens if they do not agree with the decision of Parliament?

MR MWONDHA: The minister seems to forget that this Parliament legislates for the good governance of this country, and that is our mandate. If it becomes law from this Parliament and the Government fails to implement it, Government will have miserably failed this country. I am saying that these restrictions, if they become too many then efficiency of this House is reduced and the cross-pollination in this House between the backbench and government is stifled. How many stories have we heard of unsuccessful ventures? 

My neighbour hon. Muzoora is next door. Hon. Byamukama is coming to the end of the Parliamentary session. She has never been successful. Therefore, the workers are saying 15 years –(Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Is it in order for my colleague to say that I have never been successful? I have just reported that I have the Certificate of Financial Implications and the Persons with Disabilities’ Bill will soon be published and brought to the Floor of this House. I assiduously used the Prime Minister’s words - I was pursuing a Private Members’ Bill. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, you have been successful.

MR MWONDHA: Congratulations! You have been successful, at the very end of the session. After four years, I congratulate you. However, I hope my colleagues will agree with Dr Okulo Epak, hon. Kagimu and those of us who supported this amendment to the end.  

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I do not rise to debate the merits of the motion but to appeal that this is the first time I have heard about a motion being moved by hon. Dr Okulo Epak. This motion and its content have never been discussed in Cabinet, which is a partner in this very important Constitution-making process. 

It is, therefore, important that the amendments we seek to introduce are exhaustively discussed both in the Government and in this Parliament. It is my appeal therefore that we stand over this amendment so I may go back not only to consult Members of Cabinet, but also technical people on financial and economic matters. I will bring a feedback to this House on this amendment so that we have a harmonised position. I, therefore, beg your indulgency that we stand it over and debate it when we are better informed.

DR OKULO EPAK: Madam Chairperson, I had moved this motion in very good faith and in accordance with the requirements for the Legislature to fulfill its constitutional mandate. You cannot have a mandate given to you in the Constitution only to be frustrated by the Executive. 

The reason the honourable minister has given that Cabinet had not received this motion in advance and discussed it is even more awkward. When we were in the general debate here government had presented a White Paper. We wasted time on this document in the committees. Many proposals were brought here, but what did we get? When we got the Bill, none of the contributions made by the invited people and Members of Parliament has come out of all our efforts.

Therefore, this is already a partnership we are looking for. Nevertheless, hon. Mwesige is my very good friend and I consider him a very considerate person. I do not consider his request unreasonable; except I am worried this could be a deliberate move against the motion. (Laughter). I want to assure Hon. Mwesige that if that is the intention, this will be the last time I ever concede to his request. Thank you very much, I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that amendment is stood over for the time being and we expect to hear from the minister soon, since hon. Dr Epak has agreed.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there are no abstentions, there are 25 against, and 131 are for the motion. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered clause 32 of the Bill and decided to delete it, and considered clause 33 and adopted it with amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the Report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I understand the Minister of Foreign Affairs wants to give a statement.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

5.46
THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Kutesa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, as you probably know, yesterday morning there was a terrorist attack in the City of London, United Kingdom, Great Britain and Northern Ireland.  

Over 50 people were killed and several hundreds were injured; among those injured was a Ugandan lady bus driver. I want to inform the House that the Government of Uganda has extended its sympathies and condolences to the Government and people of the United Kingdom for this tragic and cowardly terrorist attack.  

I would also like to inform Parliament that we have urged the international community in our sympathy letter to redouble its efforts to fight terrorism where it surfaces, including what we have been suffering in Northern Uganda. We would also like to urge the international community to make concerted efforts to fight terrorism.  

We express our sympathies to the families, friends and relatives of those who have died and those who have been injured, and we pray that the Almighty God comforts the families of those who are bereaved.  

I want to mention this to you so that Parliament may know that the Government of Uganda has taken action in sending our condolences and messages of sympathy to the Government of the United Kingdom. Thank you.

5.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Monday the 11th of July 2005 is the World International Population Day and –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, after listening to the statement by the hon. Minister of Foreign Affairs, I thought that it would be procedurally right for the members to stand and observe a minute of silence in honour of those who died in the terrorism attack.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall do so.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Monday the 11th of July 2005 is the World International Population Day and the whole world does observe this day to re-dedicate itself to population matters. The theme of this Population Day is “Gender Empowerment and Fight Against Poverty.” 

In Uganda we are going to observe it and the ceremonies will take place in Kamuli at the Boma Grounds so I would like to take this opportunity to invite the hon. Members of Parliament to attend the function. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Boma Grounds is in Bugabula North in Kamuli town, not in Buzaaya.  

As has been requested and as we mentioned since yesterday, let us stand and observe a minute of silence in memory of the victims of the London bombings.

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

MR KUTESA: May their souls rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to thank you very much for the work you have done throughout this week. I would like to invite you back on Monday –(Interjections)- okay, yesterday we had indicated that we shall deal with the districts on Monday but since you are coming to Kamuli, let us adjourn the House to Tuesday at 10.00 a.m. 

First we shall deal with the districts and then we shall continue with the other business. I would like to encourage you to have the stamina to sit for many hours as we have been doing. So, until we finish this exercise we shall call upon your resources to work for long hours before we can revert to our ordinary schedule. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 10.00 O’clock in the morning.  

(The House rose at 5.50 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 12 July 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)

