
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Thursday, 29 July 2021

Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you to today’s sitting. I am pleased to inform you that this morning, the Speaker of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, visited us. He is in high spirits and good shape, ready to take up the mantle. He will be here to chair this House very soon. I hope that can clear the questions raised by hon. Ssewungu. 

I am happy that he is back. He greets all of you and he equally congratulates you upon your election to the 11th Parliament. He has pledged to fulfil his promise that he will make the 11th Parliament a people’s parliament and he is ready to work with everyone.

I am also glad to inform you that the iPads for Members are now available. They will make our work easy. They will be given out during the course of the week.

As you are aware, on 28 and 29 July 2021, the Inspector General of Government (IGG) conducted an online meeting with Members of Parliament on the Leadership Code Act and the online declaration of income, assets and liabilities by public officers. This was done to prepare you to declare your income, assets and liabilities, and the deadline is on 12 August 2021.

For the new Members, I would like to inform you that we always declare our income, assets and liabilities to the IGG and there is always a deadline for submission of the declaration. Therefore, the deadline for submission is going to be 12 August 2021.

Honourable members, the Business Committee met on 15 July 2021 and formulated a parliamentary calendar for the First Session of the 11th Parliament. In order to enable the Legislature attain its milestone, which is in the parliamentary calendar, I urge all committee chairpersons to make appropriate work plans. When the Business Committee met, we asked for the work plans for each committee but to date, we have not received any work plan from the different committees.

The Tokyo Olympics are ongoing and so far, Ugandan athletes have had mixed fortunes in boxing, swimming and rowing. However, beginning this Friday, on 30 July 2021 until 8 August 2021, our track and field athletes will be in action in the various categories. Let us pray for our athletes; you know they are always winners.

Honourable members, physical fitness is now very important especially in the era of COVID-19. I saw the Rt Hon. Prime Minister doing some boxing. The parliamentary fitness instructor has organised a virtual fitness exercise, which you can attend. I would like to request that you exercise always so that you remain fit like my sister, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

Honourable members, once again, I would like to thank you for coming in big numbers. The whole of next week, we will be having a session on the response to the State-of-the-Nation Address and we will allow everyone to speak.

I have heard complaints that I do not seem to see Members who sit behind. Now, we will design a formula to register Members so that even if I am not able to see a Member, I should be able to get their name and allow them to speak. At least, your voters need to hear you speak. Now that we are going to have the iPads, you will have all the information available to you. On that note, I encourage Members to carry out enough research in order to legislate well in the House. Thank you very much.

2.42
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your communication, which has aroused my curiosity especially when you communicated about the availability of the iPads. It is one of the mechanisms Parliament adopted to ease communication and the work of honourable members.

In the same vein, Parliament adjusted the rules to accept virtual participation of Members in House deliberations. Just before the House commenced, there was a pre-test to see whether the Zoom arrangement was working normally. I saw a very disturbing picture of an honourable member preparing to participate but appearing in a manner that could easily compromise the dignity and decorum of this House. 

Madam Speaker, probably, we never had an occasion to orient ourselves on the workings of Zoom. Therefore, I would like to implore the party whips and leaders at various levels in the committees to try and take Members through how this technology works. Otherwise, we are about to get scandalised, if we do not orient ourselves.

From what I saw a few minutes back, we could wait for a Member on Zoom and they are in a very compromising situation. I thought that I should bring this out today.

2.44
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the information you have given us about our Speaker.

However, the guidance I am seeking is from your communication. As you have stated, one of our youth who went to the Olympics was arrested because he was found incompetent; so, he could not qualify for the sport. After this young man failed to participate, I think he looked for other means of sustaining his life somewhere else. Indeed, they say he had disappeared but the other country got him through Interpol and brought him back to his home.

Recently, I saw the Shadow Minister for Sports going to Jinja Road Police Station. This person was arrested on arrival. When someone is deported, he has no offence here. So, we are wondering why he is being kept at Jinja Road Police Station under arrest, yet he came back home. Can we get an explanation from the Minister of Internal Affairs?

This fellow has no offence here. He went to participate - We know what sportsmen go through in this country and how they earn us medals out of their sweat. Why are they keeping this young man? He simply did not qualify. Government failed to help this person so that he qualifies but you keep him under arrest over nothing.

Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence. This man should be set free and he goes back. The mother is crying –(Interjections)– why did they arrest him on arrival yet he was coming back home? The minister should explain this. What was the Government's input into this young man’s excelling in sports, to the extent of going to Europe? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you heard from the Leader of the Opposition, if you are to participate in the debate on Zoom, organise yourself. Do not start dressing up when you are on Zoom. You need to organise yourself like you are going to a quorum. You need to get ready like you are going for the meeting but not this business of getting on Zoom because you feel the House is sitting.

On the issue of the young man who was arrested in Tokyo - that is why we sent the minister to go and find out what happened. We do not know whether the young man was incompetent or otherwise, but if he has come back home, can the Minister of Internal Affairs tell us the charges against him.

2.47
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been guided by the Leader of Government Business on this matter. First of all, Mr Ssekitoleko was released yesterday.

Secondly, the moment you go with a Ugandan delegation, there are visa conditions for your travel. When you get a visa as part of the delegation of Team Uganda, but you behave contrary to that visa when you reach abroad and then get deported, the Government of Uganda has to follow up on the case to know what the issue was. They question you and ensure that this does not happen again. 

Madam Speaker, you have seen situations where our athletes are denied visas because some of them escape and remain there and this was the issue. 

The minister will come with a full statement in regard to that issue. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tayebwa, was Mr Ssekitoleko one of the athletes?

MR TAYEBWA: Yes, he went as part of Team Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I am asking is, was he participating in the sports or he just joined the team to cheer?

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, he was among the people sent by the Government of Uganda to Tokyo; so, he did not go on his own. He was part of Team Uganda. Therefore, he had to –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am asking a very simple question. Was he part of the athletes or was he just going to cheer?

MR TAYEBWA: He was part of the athletes.

2.49
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the response. However, our dear Government Chief Whip must know that we are in a situation of lockdown; so, things are not normal. When you see people behave abnormally, it is because things are not normal. (Laughter.)

The press helped us and reached out to the family of this gentleman. Look at what was happening there. The girlfriend was being evicted because they had not paid rent. The mother was complaining –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Aogon, let us not mix criminality with COVID-19. We would like to know what crime the boy committed for him to be arrested.

MR AOGON: Thank you for your guidance. Therefore, I do not see any crime committed by this gentleman. He was only trying to look for survival. I beg to submit.

2.51
MR HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One of us, hon. Julius Acon Bua, Member of Parliament for Otuke County in Otuke District, is one of the medallists. Currently, he is in Tokyo, Japan for the Olympics.

Hon. Acon is one of the persons who have never been awarded yet some of his colleagues who are also medallists have already been rewarded. Hon. Acon who got two medals –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Hillary, can you bring a motion to that effect; for hon. Acon Bua to be rewarded? For now, we are talking about the young man who got lost and was deported. He came back and was arrested. Now, can we have a report from the minister regarding that?

MR LOKWANG: Thank you. I thought it is also related to that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have a report from the minister. We will debate that to see what could have happened and why the boy disappeared while he was in Tokyo - we have a long agenda. Item three is still about sports. You can talk about it.

Hon. Kabanda, please take your seat. You will be the first person to contribute on the next item. 
	
MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO CONGRATULATE THE MEN’S NATIONAL BASKETBALL (SILVERBACKS) AND U-16 BOYS AND GIRLS’ NATIONAL BASKETBALL TEAMS

2.54
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Madam Speaker, I rise under rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to congratulate the men’s national basketball team, the Silverbacks, and the U-16 boys’ and girls’ national basketball teams. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded by hon. Gilbert Olanya, hon. Aogon, hon. Asuman, hon. Asuman Basalirwa, the Government Chief Whip and the elders. Okay, the motion is seconded. 

MS ALUM: Madam Speaker, the motion reads as follows: 
“WHEREAS the men’s national basketball team, also known as the Silverbacks, qualified for the FIBA African Cup of Nations (AfroBasket) finals to be held in Kigali, Rwanda, between 24 August and 5 September 2021 after defeating Morocco;

AND WHEREAS the U-16 boys’ and girls’ national basketball teams also qualified for the FIBA African Cup of Nations (AfroBasket) finals to be held in Cairo, Egypt, between 5 and 6 August 2021; 

AWARE THAT the senior men’s national basketball team, the Silverbacks, was initially facilitated by the Government through the National Council of Sports for the first and second qualifying windows, whereupon they managed two wins out of the three games played, to a tune of $200,000; 

FURTHER AWARE that the senior men’s national basketball team was not facilitated for the third qualifying window in Morocco, forcing them to borrow US$ 100,000 to save the face of the country; 

NOTING that all teams, except for the Ugandan team, are already in camp preparing for the FIBA AfroBasket finals; 

FURTHER NOTING that the national ladies team had also earned qualification but forfeited their slot due to lack of funding; 

APPRECIATING that the total budget of the team is $177,359 yet the team has put in considerable effort to qualify and as a consequence promote the country through the continental tournament, a feat only previously managed in 2015 and 2017 for the senior men’s team and the Junior (U-16) Gazelles women’s team where they returned second; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:
  
    1. This Parliament collectively congratulates both teams on their qualification for the FIBA AfroBasket finals. 

    2. The Government of the Republic of Uganda raises the funds to facilitate both teams for the continental basketball tournaments. 

    3. The Government of Uganda urgently facilitates both teams to report to camp in selected locations to sharpen their preparation for the continental tournaments.” 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Santa Alum, the mover of the motion. The seconder is hon. Moses Magogo. 

MS ALUM: Madam Speaker, may I speak to the motion?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, she wants to speak more about the motion. Let the seconder hold on a minute. 

MS ALUM: Madam Speaker, I would like to start by saying that I am the manager of the Parliamentary Sports Club. I would like to thank you for that and for also giving me this opportunity to move this motion. 

In sports, it is very important to encourage and facilitate the players. In this case, I would like to congratulate both the national men’s team and the U-16 junior team. The men’s team managed to qualify for the FIBA Africa Cup of Nations after defeating Morocco. The finals will be held in Kigali from 24th August up to 5 September 2021. I congratulate them. 

Even with limited funding, the Silverbacks are ranked among the best 11 teams in Africa. They have managed to qualify for the finals not only once but for three consecutive times, that is, in 2013, 2017 and now in 2021. This is a remarkable achievement, which cannot be taken for granted. 

It is also important to note that our ladies national team, the Gazelles, also qualified for the African Cup of Nations. Unfortunately, they had to pull out because of lack of funding. In this era of gender parity, it is very unfortunate that the ladies, because of funding, had to pull out of the competition. 

Madam Speaker, allow me appreciate the Government, through the Ministry of Education and Sports, and the National Council of Sports for enabling the team to play during the first and second window. The Government facilitated the national team during the first and second window. 

It is unfortunate, though, that the Government was unable to facilitate them for the third window. I would like to salute the Silverbacks because when they were faced with this problem, they were resilient enough and went and borrowed a total of US$ 100,000 to enable them participate in the tournament, which saved the face of the country from embarrassment. In that game, they managed to secure victory by beating Morocco. Unfortunately, up to now, this borrowed money has not yet been paid back. 

I call upon the Government - The national team represented the country very well. They defended us and lifted the image of the country and saved the country from embarrassment. I think it is only prudent for the Government to find money and fund our national team. 

I would also like to note that the U-16 boys and girls also qualified for the AfroBasket and their games will be played in Cairo, Egypt. Unfortunately, the team has not started the residential training. They are still at home and they do not know what their fate is. 

In the same vein, the male national team - the Silverbacks, as I have already noted - has already qualified. They are with Senegal, Cameroon and South Sudan in their group. All these teams are already in their training camps except Team Uganda.

Madam Speaker, Team South Sudan is already in the United States of America fully training and waiting for the tournament and yet Team Uganda is still waiting for the Government to facilitate them. 

Madam Speaker, the U-16 boys and girls who qualified for the African Cup of Nations in 2019 also did a commendable job. For example, in basketball, a one Maria Najjuma was voted amongst the top five players of the tournament.

Madam Speaker, this is the potential that Uganda, as a country, has in sports which can go a long way to help us address issues of redundancy, unemployment and so many other things as far as sports is concerned.

Furthermore, the women’s team had earlier on qualified but they did not participate because of lack of funding. It is in this spirit that I request Government that when a child performs well, it is only prudent that, that child is rewarded. In this case, it is in sports that we have very many of our young people engaged and participating. The national basketball team saved the face of the country.

I call upon Government to find it prudent enough to facilitate this team so that they continue lifting and representing the country just like other countries are doing with their teams. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Alum, for this motion regarding for the U-16 boys and girls. Can we have the seconder? You have five minutes.
 
3.06 
MR MOSES MAGOGO (NRM, Budiope East County, Buyende): Madam Speaker, I rise under rule 60 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda to second the motion on the Floor.

In my other life, I am the President of the Football Association of Uganda; so, I come from sports and I understand what I am seconding.

Playing at international stage means a lot for our athletes and for our country. The games at this level are live on television and the world is the audience.

This particular team will be on Star Times Television for the whole of Africa and be in SPORTS for Europe and a lot of worldwide social media platforms. This creates a lot of exposure and opportunities for our athletes and many of the basketball players have received –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure - 

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Under our rules, ministers are supposed to attend Parliament. Part of the reason they are supposed to attend Parliament is to answer specific questions -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, can you hear hon. Ssemujju? Today, he is speaking like a lady. Hon. Ssemujju, somebody behind there is not hearing you.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our rule 50 requires ministers to attend Parliament to answer specific questions but of course also to attend to issues that keep arising.

The Minister for Education, hon. Janet Kataaha -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There are three ministers in the Ministry of Education and I am aware -

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, if you can allow me to raise the question -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe I can answer you. My Office was informed that hon. Muyingo would be in the House to respond to that.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the question I am raising is not that hon. Muyingo is not here. The question I am raising is that this particular minister does not attend Parliament and uses hon. Muyingo as a representative all the time. (Laughter)

I wanted to raise a point of procedure whether this Parliament - She did it in the last Parliament; she came here only once when Parliament demanded that she must be here in person. She has turned hon. Muyingo into (Text expunged).

Therefore, the procedural issue I am raising is whether we have super ministers who are not supposed to attend Parliament and will keep sending their colleagues here. That is the procedural issue -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you withdraw that statement? Hon. Muyingo is (Text expunged) an honourable minister.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I said he is being used as –(Interjections)– the hon. Muyingo in Buganda here is highly respected; so, we get offended when we see him coming here to answer on behalf of other people all the time. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, I want you to refer to hon. Muyingo as a minister -(Text expunged).

MR SSEMUJJU: I know hon. Muyingo is a junior minister in that ministry and my issue was not to offend him; it was actually to empower him. If he is offended, Madam Speaker, I am sorry but my procedural issue remains; is hon. Kataaha a minister in another country or Uganda?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We amended these Rules of Procedure that you can attend the session virtually. Hon. Kataaha Janet Museveni is attending on Zoom. (Laughter) Can I have the seconder of the motion?

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, since we have found the language that my colleague, hon. Ssemujju, has used very improper as provided for under rule 84 of our Rules of Procedure, I move that we expunge his submission from the record of Parliament. It is wrong -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju withdrew the statement.

MR TAYEBWA: Yes, but it remains on the record of Parliament belittling a Member of Parliament and a minister. I move that we expunge that record from the record of Parliament.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, you have rightly ruled. You asked the honourable member to withdraw and he did so. That is how we conduct business. Is the Government Chief Whip in order to defy your directives in front of this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, hon. Ssemujju withdrew the statement so it is not on the record. It is withdrawn from the record.

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, it remains on the Hansard that he withdrew but the statement remains. What we want, Madam Speaker, is to ensure that this record is expunged.

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to our rules, a statement is only expunged if it is not withdrawn. Once a colleague accepts to withdraw a statement, the record will capture that the statement was withdrawn and the Member was even apologetic. I do not see why you proceed to ask for the statement, which was withdrawn and an apology was offered, to be expunged. That is not how you should operate. It would be different if he had declined to withdraw the statement. 

Madam Speaker, I think your guidance in this matter is proper and my brother, the Government Chief Whip, should not take offence. Otherwise, the risk you take is that people will decline to withdraw statements and the next effect will be that such statements will always be expunged. Now, a statement that has been withdrawn is inconsequential and stale; you cannot insist on it being expunged.

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, in the Tenth Parliament, I remember there was a statement I made and I withdrew it and apologised. When I apologised –  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is an apology from hon. Ssemujju. Government Chief Whip, first listen to the apology. The apology goes to the minister.

MR SSEMUJJU: Hon. Tayebwa, formerly of FDC, I am your senior –(Laughter)– Madam Speaker, I said that hon. Muyingo is highly respected and I am sorry. I want to apologise to the extent that he may have felt offended by my statement and I want to apologise unreservedly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR SSEMUJJU: My procedural issue about hon. Kataaha not attending Parliament remains.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I responded to the procedural matter. As I have said, any of you can stay at home and attend virtually. Can we first have the motion seconded? 

MS AISHA KABANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a matter of privilege, I would like to know whether being virtually present is not representative enough. I do not know why the honourable minister, who is virtually present, is being represented here by hon. Muyingo.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, can we have the motion seconded and then we finalise this?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I beg for your indulgence; I saw hon. Santa Alum present this motion and one of the seconders was hon. John Chrysostom Muyingo, the honourable Minister of State for Higher Education. 

However, the import of the motion itself is offending our rules and the Constitution because it is requesting for the financing of the Silverbacks team as the final culmination of the motion. The honourable minister should have been the one to move this since it even touches on Article 93 of our Constitution concerning any charge on the Consolidated Fund. It cannot be the duty of a backbencher to raise such a motion on the Floor of this House. 

Wouldn’t it, therefore, be prudent that instead of seconding the motion, hon. Muyingo rises to the occasion and takes his turf and brings a motion? This is because at the end of the day, this affects the Consolidated Fund. 

I beg for your indulgence, Madam Speaker, that we proceed in a manner that does not offend our rules in the first place, and even the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. It does no harm for the minister, instead of taking the back seat, to take up his role. This is his docket but he is happy to second the motion and at the same time, he is not man enough to stand and move the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, you are debating a motion, which is not even seconded. Those are issues you would raise in the debate. Now, you are debating in anticipation. Can we have the motion seconded and then you bring up everything you want? Also, be mindful that the prayers are not only financial. Congratulating a national team does no harm to this country.

3.19
MR MOSES MAGOGO (NRM, Budiope East County, Buyende): Madam Speaker, I would like to proceed by also saying that sports, which is an engagement of over 70 per cent of our population that is below the age of 30, always gets meagre resources in terms of money and time. As exemplified here with the little time we get in this Parliament to discuss sports, there are more engagements in terms of points of order and procedure instead of giving the attention to the cause that the motion is about.

I had already mentioned that this exposure gives opportunities to our athletes and our country. Many basketball players have received basketball scholarships in the country and in the United States, among others. Many schools in Uganda are now offering such scholarships. This success has been achieved under several challenges. 

On matters of sports, sports as an industry is a $600 billion global economy, standing higher than even the aviation industry. However, Uganda is not partaking in that global economy. Sports is the only unifier for our country, irrespective of the shades of tribe, political affiliations and religion. Whenever a Ugandan athlete achieves international excellence, it is the pride of all of us. 

International teams represent our country, our national anthem and the national flag. It is one of the few occasions that cause our anthem and flag to be raised in countries outside Uganda. An organised professional sports industry is a new tax base that would generate a lot of money, as it is working elsewhere, and employment opportunities for many youth. 

It is, therefore, important that the Government of Uganda addresses, amongst others, the following:

    1. Acquire, rehabilitate, maintain and construct sports infrastructure of national and international standards across the entire country.

    2. Fund national athletes and teams that compete at international competitions representing Uganda, starting from talent identification, development, preparation, presentation, motivation and reward for excellence.

I also wish to bring to the attention of this Parliament that the sports law of this country is archaic. It was enacted in 1964 and it is out of touch with the current challenges. It is, therefore, also important to note that once this law is amended, it will create an avenue for generation of revenue for sports from the private sector, the way it is done elsewhere.

Madam Speaker, I beg to second the motion.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, seconder of the motion. I am also informed that the president of the federation is here and some players. They are in the gallery. Can you stand up for recognition? They include: the President of the federation, Counsel Nasser Serunjogi and some players. Thank you very much, for coming to the Parliament of Uganda; this is your Parliament.

Honourable members, I now put the question that the House do debate the motion that has been presented by hon. Alum and seconded by hon. Moses Magogo and hon. Joseph Ssewungu.

(Question put and agreed to.)

3.24
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to also support this motion. I thank the Federation of Uganda Basketball Association, headed by Counsel Serunjogi, because basketball in Uganda was very weak yet as we speak, this game is growing.

Madam Speaker, one of the credits I give this association is the fact that they have been working to promote this game using their own funds. In countries like America, it is one of the main games that gives a lot of money to individuals.

However, as the seconder, hon. Magogo who is also the FUFA President stated, the issue of the National Council of Sports Act, 1964 has taken time. It is because the responsible ministers have refused to table its amendment Bill. Actually, I was in the committee and warned them that I might be forced to bring it as a Private Member’s Bill at some point in time. 

Madam Speaker, when I come to your office, kindly support my request to table this Bill. This is because we cannot continue supporting sports in this country by only going to the President, Mr Museveni, to give offers to sportsmen.

These Members already know that there is a battle between the National Council of Sports and other games because of the Shs 10 billion that was given to FUFA. FUFA says, “The money is ours.” National Council of Sports says, “This money must be given to us and we share it amongst all the other sports entities.”

We need Members of Parliament to inject money into sports. Sports activities bring in money; games bring in money. You can already see the basketball team already giving us success but they are crippled; they do not have money. We then come here and continue crying - we waste money on other nugatory expenditures. 

Normally, when the President is going to State House, I see the whole of Entebbe Road full of soldiers. Who is paying them? God knows! For security from Kampala to Entebbe, he has 45 vehicles leading him to State House, Entebbe. That money must go to basketball; it must go to football.

That is why we have our young men like the Ssekitoleko being deported. Once they are denied something, they say, “The moment I board a plane, I will remain in Japan; I will never come back.” You then bring them here and keep them in prison for over 48 hours.

As I conclude, Madam Speaker, I pray that we support this motion to give money to the basketball federation so that they can continue winning for us trophies. This will enable us continue tabling and debating motions of good performance here, but after Parliament has made an input in their success. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have heard about the pending Bill that the Member intends to table. You better bring the Bill yourself before we allow a private Member to do so.

3.27
MR DAN KIMOSHO (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to also support this motion. Our country has over 70 per cent youths. I think in the spirit of promoting sports and ensuring that we engage them, some of whom are unemployed, we should also encourage more to join the sports sector. This will see them promote the country internationally and earn us a better name in the outside world. 

I think, as Parliament, we should stand in solidarity to support such teams and whatever is required for us to give, we should give. After all, it is in the spirit of promoting Uganda. I beg to support, Madam Speaker.

3.28
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues to second the motion and congratulate the Silverbacks. 

Madam Speaker, we really need to support sports activities in this country. We have so many interest groups, especially the youth, who would be beneficial to this country through revenue generation, if we supported the growth of sports. 

As I speak, we have the FestoWeb that was launched by His Excellency the President, in Tororo. A team has been assembled in the name of Fundi and Team Fundi has been invited to Spain, where over 200 scouts from across Europe are going to watch its activities. They are going to play and sell this country, in terms of not only earning us revenue but also raising our flag high.

Madam Speaker, the team is scheduled to travel in August and it is now at the tail end of its preparations but still waiting for commitment on funds in order to enable them move. The organisers in Spain have even pledged to build a fully-fledged academy in Uganda to help us build talent and promote sports, which will help us find opportunities for the youth in Uganda in the European market and other football-leading countries. 

Madam Speaker, when the call from the House, especially leaders of football like hon. Moses Magogo rise up to speak, then you must know that the potential is abundant. As a country, we only need to put ourselves in order, to benefit from this.

I also want to thank the President - the commitment from the President, especially to FestoWeb is high but we need to support him if we are to see our talented young people bring revenue to this country as well as flying our flag high. I thank you very much.

3.31
MR GEOFREY FETA (NRM, Ayivu Division East, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion because of a few reasons.

First, this country has a challenge of youth unemployment. This could easily be resolved if we funded sports very well and to that end, I thank the mover of the motion. I thank hon. Moses Magogo. I also thank the President who has consistently been rewarding our medalists. 

However, this Parliament has a responsibility of giving more money to have these skills impacted onto our children. Where I come from, there is a club that stormed this country recently and it is called Onduparaka Football Club. The whole country follows the activities of that club.

There is a lot of talent down at the grassroots but funding for sports has been a challenge in this country. I, therefore, thank the movers and appeal to colleagues to support this motion so that we can secure more money for sports. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Shadow Minister for Sports, please say something.

3.32
MR GEOFREY KAYEMBA-SSOLO (NUP, Bukomansimbi County South, Bukomansimbi): Madam Speaker, I thank you for accepting this motion that is congratulating the basketball team, to be tabled. It has been a hustle for such teams to qualify, yet they hold the Ugandan flag high. The money that the basketball team used to qualify was borrowed and since then, they have paid it back.

Therefore, it is not in good faith to always congratulate these people here, when the Government has done nothing for their qualification. In 2019, Uganda Cranes played well in Egypt and when they came back, the President promised them $1 million but up to now, the money has never been seen. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I request this Government to stop taking sports as an option. Instead, they should prioritise it. 

As for the 1964 National Council of Sports Act, I am going to come up with a private Member’s Bill to amend it for the good of our sports. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.34
MR BUMALI MPINDI (Independent, PWD Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I represent persons with disabilities but I also happen to be the President of the Uganda Paralympic Committee, a national body that is in charge of sports for persons with disabilities.

First of all, I congratulate our national basketball team for registering that victory. I also, however, would like to say that there is a lot that needs to be done in the sports sector. The National Council of Sports presented a budget of Shs 38.1 billion for the Financial Year 2021/2022 but that budget was cut down to Shs 17 billion and later, it was further reduced to Shs 10 billion.

You will realise that the National Council of Sports has 51 federations and basketball is just one of them. So, if you allocate only Shs 10 billion to the federation, which needs to take athletes to different countries for qualifier games, nothing much can be done by the federation. 

The Shs 10 billion that was allocated also has to cater for the salaries and other wages of the council. Next year, we have the Commonwealth Games. There is a qualification pathway to the Commonwealth Games. Different federations have to go through those qualification pathways to present teams for the Commonwealth Games that are going to be in Birmingham. The federation can do nothing with Shs 10 billion to help athletes qualify. 

There are a lot of things that we need to do. I want to –(Member timed out.) Allow me just a minute to share with you a scenario which I experienced. Our women with disabilities qualified for the world championships in the USA and they failed to attend because of lack of funding.

Therefore, I appeal to this Parliament to consider reasonable funding for the sports sector if we are to make this country proud in the sports arena. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.37
MS LILIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion that has been moved. 

Before I came to this Parliament, I was the Chairperson of the National Youth Council. I can assure you that if the country takes the funding of sports seriously and invests money in it, we shall be able to address quite a number of challenges. 

As you know, it has been proved worldwide that sports is not only about games but sports can be a source of revenue that can support the country. It can also be another tourist attraction that can generate a lot of income for our country.

I support the funding of not only basketball but all the sports activities that take place. There is a challenge that every time we see a successful sportswoman or sportsman, we imagine the person has just risen out of the blue like wildfire that emerges out of nowhere. We need to prioritise the funding of sports if we are to achieve a better name for our country.

Today, most of our young people are unemployed. Their positive energy, when channelled through a structured well-funded sports sector, can help. Many talented young people are in Kitgum District, Napak District and many other places. If they have somewhere to place their talents and positive energy, it will support them to emerge as world victors. I thank you.

MR SIMON OPOLOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise in support of the motion. However, before I go ahead, I would like to seek your guidance. 

First of all, I would like us to hear from the Minister of Education and Sports on what arrangement they have to support this team we are talking about. We are proceeding here without knowing the arrangement the Government has. Remember, this motion was brought from the Backbench. I seek your indulgence on this. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Education and Sports will speak after the debate.

MS AVUR: Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me the opportunity. Whereas I support the motion, picking from the previous Member of Parliament who has just contributed, would it not be procedurally right to ask the Minister of Education and Sports what strategic plan they have for this country to promote sports right from national to regional and district levels? I beg to get that clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is going to give us the plan he has for all the sporting disciplines. Let us first hear from hon. Olanya and other Members before the minister speaks.

3.41
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion raised by hon. Santa Alum. As a country, we need to be very serious about sports. We have many talented youths in this country but we are not taking care of their talents. 

I would like to raise a very important concern, especially when it comes to the motivation of our talented youth in games and sports. Currently, we have a team called the Uganda Hippos (U20) which represented Uganda at the 2021 Total AFCON U20 final. As a country, we have forgotten all those players who represented Uganda up to the final. A case in point is the goalkeeper for that team. The boy comes from Lamogi sub-county in Amuru District. He is being wasted at home. The country has forgotten about him, totally.

We need to start motivating our people. If we are to ask: where is the Uganda national netball team? They normally perform so well but we tend to forget about them afterwards.

Madam Speaker, let the minister come up with a serious budget; let the players be followed right through to the time of games. We tend to forget about them until the time for games, when we then start looking for them. It is then that they are given some little facilitation.

Madam Speaker, let us make games and sports one of our priorities in this country. This is because we are capable of bringing so many trophies to this country. I beg to move.

3.44
MS CATHERINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Regarding parliamentary sports, I play netball, basketball and I am the captain of the volleyball team.  Madam Speaker, this has been a concern in the entire country. Uganda has reached somewhere in sports but not where we would like it to be.

Madam Speaker, allow me to thank the minister in charge; who is also the First Lady. She has pushed us to a certain level, although we still need some more funding. Allow me to add my voice and appreciate the team that has put Uganda on the highest table. Allow me to appreciate the Silverbacks for what it has done and we are proud of the team.

Madam Speaker, Rwanda is set to host the 16th Nation, 33rd Edition Tournament, in Kigali. This is from the 24th August to the 5th September, 2021. This is only a few weeks from now. However, Uganda is not involved yet. I therefore, would like to add my voice and urge the Government of the Republic of Uganda, to raise funds and facilitate these teams; for the Continental Basketball Tournament.

Madam Speaker, the motion has highlighted the current crisis the teams are facing. In spite of their wins, they are curtailed by funding. This has affected the entire sports activities in Uganda. It is embarrassing that all other teams are at camp; gearing up to play the FIBA Afro basketball finals but the Ugandan team is not on the site, due to lack of funds.

Madam Speaker, it must be further elaborated that the national ladies team had also qualified, but forfeited their slot due to lack of funding, leaving the men’s team to represent the country. As a woman/lady, I feel so touched. 

Madam Speaker, the Ugandan Government needs to set aside only $177,359, for the team to represent this country; and that would make us proud as a nation. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. We have some matters of national importance and also, remember that we have Prime Minister’s Question Time. You need to get feedback from the questions you asked. We could hear from the Prime Minister after hon. Fadil.

3.48
MR FADIL TWALLA (NRM, Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. Sports is an aspect in this country that has made Uganda shine world over. I come from an area where most of these athletes come from; Joshua Cheptegei, Jacob Kiplimo and currently, they are in Tokyo. I know that they will soon come with more medals because they are running tomorrow.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, funding of the sports sector in this country needs to be well fast-tracked, so that we improve on the sports sector. For instance, sometimes when these athletes are training, they also call on our support as Members of Parliament. You can find that when most of these athletes are training, they even lack the training kits, among other things. 

Madam Speaker, as we look at supporting the sports sector, we also need the Teyret High Altitude Centre to be fast-tracked. This is because this field started in 2014 and up to now, we have not yet started using it. Therefore, as we support the other side, we also support the entire sports sector in the whole country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Members. I would like to remind you of one issue of sports; it does not know political parties. It is sports that brings everybody together; it is more of a mobilisation tool. Therefore, if we talk about sports, we are talking about how we can mobilise our youth and bring them together.

There was an aspect of the $1,000,000 promise by the President; that will be handled. We are still in the COVID-19 crisis. We will make a budget for that and of course, a promise will be fulfilled at one time. It does not have a timeline. We have the Vice-President in the House. She is going to make a commitment on behalf of the President. 

3.52
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I would like to make an amendment. I have listened to the views expressed on this motion and it appears that the movers of the motion left out the critical area of this matter. 

I would like to move an amendment on item four of the prayer, to say, “That Parliament urges the Government to bring to Parliament a programme on how the ministry will prioritise sports.” 

The justification for this is that most of our sportsmen and sportswomen who have done well at the international arena have done it on individual initiative. This Government has not shown us that it wants to invest in sports, as a national priority.

Therefore, it is important that we add as amendment No.4 on the prayer, so that the Government can come to Parliament - either through the budget or supplementary - so that it can be seen facilitating and investing in sports. I beg to move that amendment if the movers of the motion can allow it to go through.

The Deputy Speaker: Is the amendment allowed? Honourable minister.  

3.53
The Minister of state for Education and Sports (Higher EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to educate my brother, Ssemujju, by informing him that I am a Member of Parliament and I took oath. I have all the qualifications to be here. I took oath as a minister of the Republic of Uganda so I would like to demand that he stops addressing me as “PA” –(Interruption)

Mr ssewungu: Madam Speaker, it is –

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ssewungu, aren’t you ashamed of raising a point of order against an elder like him? 

Dr muyingo: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleague to thank hon. Santa Alum for this motion to congratulate the men’s national basketball, the Silverbacks, and the U-16 boys and girls national basketball teams. This motion and the ideas that have been floated this afternoon confirm the love, care and support Parliament has for the development of sports in this country.

My ministry is very pleased to see that our long running commitment to develop sports in this country is continuing to bear fruits. The qualification of the men’s national basketball team and the U-16 boys and girls national teams for the AfroBasket championship is a great pride for all Ugandans, especially those who are associated with the Ministry of Education and Sports. I salute and congratulate the gallant players on this great victory and, of course, challenge them to continue winning wherever they will go for the championship.

Regarding funding and facilitating sports activities and teams, this is a budgetary matter. Parliament knows very well how much was appropriated for our sector and the arguments that took place. I have taken note of all the comments. I will go back to the ministry to study this matter and I will get back to you. 

About borrowing, I know very well that even if it is Cabinet that wants to borrow money, before anybody commits Government, Parliament has got to authorise. This is another matter we need to understand. Otherwise, I will go back, study and get back to you. Nonetheless, sports is one of the sectors that are underfunded.

About the strategic plan, the sector has one. At an appropriate time, we will come back and share it with you. I beg to submit.

3.57
The vice-president (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank colleagues who have vehemently supported this motion and I join them.

The sports department in the Ministry of Education and Sports has over the years made Uganda proud by bringing in all categories of medals whenever they go to participate in the region or even outside Africa.

I would like to congratulate the Minister of Education and Sports, Mama Janet Museveni, and my brother here, hon. Muyingo, for the commitment that they have in promoting sports in the country. I also thank the Members of Parliament who thought it wise to bring this motion to the House. Thank you for being very well spirited in bringing up matters of sports.

I have a point to make. While I was the Minister of Education and Sports, we were operating under the National Sports Act of 1964. By that time, as you may note, many of the Members here were not yet born. At that time - hon. Bakkabulindi was always reminding me - sports was considered as amateur and not professional as it is now. The sports federations were not as well constituted as they are now. Therefore, the ministry took a decision to amend that Act. 

Right now, with a strategic work plan of course, which the minister has alluded to, the Bill of the Ministry of Education and Sports that can match the standards of sports now and can cure many problems that we are talking about is already in the ministry. I stood up to implore this House to support the Bill when it comes to Parliament because it has very many solutions to the challenges of sports that we have been talking about.

Finally, you asked me to make a commitment on behalf of His Excellency the President. What I can say is that he will hear about this message in a formal manner. I can bear witness that he has always supported the sports federations. It is not the first time that he will be supporting this team to go on. I am very confident that he is going to support this team and many more teams that come up. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you. Now that we have a commitment even from the Vice-President, what else are we left with apart from putting the question?

Mr ssemujju: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The motion is two-fold. The first is to congratulate the basketball teams and the second is begging for money. I have failed to understand what hon. Muyingo, who is representing the senior minister, said about the money. 

The Vice-President is dealing with matters that are emerging. The matter of the National Council of Sports is one that emerged during the debate. The specific issue of this motion is to congratulate the team. The second leg of the motion is to provide money for the team to go and participate.

The procedural issue I am raising is whether the two senior Government officials should hide under generalities and avoid addressing the specific issues of the motion, of facilitating a team to go and participate in this tournament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Sports, standing in for the Minister of Education, the National Council of Sports told them to borrow money and we need that money to be refunded. 

In the next budget, we need to also improve on the funding of sports so that we do not have these scenarios of borrowing money all the time or running to the President. We need to improve on funding for the whole sports discipline. We need the money that was borrowed by FIBA to be refunded. 

We also need the law, which has been talked about by the Vice President, as soon as possible. We need it to be presented to this House. 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I think the most important thing is that we need US$ 177,359 to enable our team to go and participate in the forthcoming tournament. That is very important and urgent. We should not bury our heads in the sand that it is because of COVID-19 because other countries are participating and they are also faced with COVID-19. 

Therefore, it is important for Uganda to send its team. We need US$ 177,359 urgently, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have heard that the team is supposed to travel so it needs to be facilitated. 

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Government works as a team. I would like to assure you that the law will be presented before Parliament very soon. Like my senior, H.E the Vice-President said, that law will address quite a number of challenges that we face in the sports sector.

On the need for more funding to the sector, particularly for this team, I have taken note. When the budgeting period comes, we will take care of all the issues that have been raised in Parliament today. 

As for whether we will be able to give money now, Madam Speaker, I said that is a budgetary matter. The money that we are utilising now was appropriated by Parliament. That is why I said that I will go back to the ministry, look through and get back to you later, Madam Speaker. 

I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you get back to the House on Tuesday on the issue of whether the team is going to travel or not? 

DR MUYINGO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, you have heard the debate and virtually the whole House has seconded the motion. I now put the question on the motion for a resolution of Parliament to congratulate the men’s national basketball team - the Silverbacks, and the U-16 boys’ and girls’ national basketball team. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, we are mindful of the Prime Minister’s Question Time at 4.00 p.m. but we have some burning issues, which we need the Prime Minister to capture from matters of national importance. Let us have at least four or five Members and then we shall go to Prime Minister’s Question Time. 

4.08
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bukimbiri County, Kisoro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to raise issues of national importance and they are in two parts: First, how does Uganda manage its foreign policy? Is the East African Community Treaty still relevant to the prevailing conditions? 

Madam Speaker, our national foreign policy is guided by newspapers, bloggers and the press. When some issues take place between some states, some of them react differently and you find that we are being endangered as a result. 

I wish to thank His Excellency the President for the efforts he has been putting in regional integration but if you check the treaty, you will find that regional integration is number four and none of the core items have successfully been implemented. 

It was supposed to start with the Customs Union followed by the common market, the Monetary Union and then the political federation. However, none of the three have been successfully implemented. These are 22 years of the existence of the East African Treaty; so, we do not know whether it is still relevant now or if the Government can come here and tell us what it is now. 

When you go to some of these countries, for example, between Rwanda and Uganda, there are no movements. The people I represent in Kisoro cannot move between the borders. However, it is very unfortunate that those who are very rich can move from Kigali by air and come to Entebbe. If Kigali cannot allow us to cross their border under foreign policy and cannot allow diplomacy to move between our borders and trade normally, the way we used to do before the formation of the East African Community, why is it that we allow planes to land in Entebbe or take off from Entebbe and go to Kigali? The people I represent deserve an answer. 

Secondly, the closure of the borders has not only affected Uganda and Rwanda. The same has been applied between Uganda and Kenya. Today, the print media reported how the Minister of Agriculture lamented about Kenyans not importing some of our products like milk yet the treaty is supposed to address the issue of the common market. 

Madam Speaker, on the East African Community, who manages our national policy? May this House be honoured to get a statement and be informed on how we can rate these countries? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MR KWIZERA: Number two – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One question is enough. There are so many people that have questions to ask. 

MR KWIZERA: No, I have another issue. I had stated that this issue has two parts.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. 

MR KWIZERA: This issue is on Article 21 of the Constitution, which is against the discrimination of some citizens because all of us are equal before the law. 

In Kisoro, we have people under the Third Schedule of our Constitution called the Batwa and they are number 35. They are Ugandans and not refugees but they are discriminated against. The people we represent deserve to get an answer as to why the pygmies or the Batwa continue to be discriminated against and are now becoming a danger to society. Madam Speaker, I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Prime Minister, take note. 

4.12
MR TONY AWANY (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. As matter of national importance, I wish to bring to the attention of the House that there is an outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease in the village of Funu Pa Min-Owot, Patira Parish, Purongo Subcounty in Nwoya District. Five major kraals consisting of about 1,500 herds of cattle are at risk of being decimated. Already, 35 animals have died with hundreds infected. There are already some cases of disease reported to be in Anaka Town Council, the seat of the district headquarters.

We implore for the intervention of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries - to intervene and vaccinate all the cattle and treat the affected animals expeditiously.

Madam Speaker, two weeks ago, another issue of national importance was raised by my brother, hon. Gilbert Olanya, about marauding and ravaging elephants moving from Murchison Falls National Park. We bring this to the attention of the House and to the attention of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to try and cause the concerned ministry to get some mitigation measures concerning the ravaging elephants. 

Farmers are already complaining of extensive damage that has been caused by these elephants. They have gone as far as Amuru, the neighbouring district, and there are concerns that coupled with the bad weather, these elephants are going to cause much more havoc to the crops that have been planted. 

I beg to submit and request that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister tries to come up with some statement on these matters.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that is for you.

4.15
MR NELSON OKELLO (UPC, Maruzi North County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I rise in accordance with rule 54 of the Rules of Procedure. -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okello Nelson, speak up.

MR NELSON OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Government for creating road connectivity and improving accessibility in northern Uganda in particular. However, in Lango subregion, particularly Apac, road connectivity in terms of a paved road network has been a problem -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Member is going to put his question writing. Honourable member, put you question in writing and forward it to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

MR NELSON OKELLO: Madam Speaker, Apac is one of the oldest districts in Uganda but has never benefited from any kilometre of paved road network.

Madam Speaker, in 2020, His Excellency the President commissioned Rwekunye-Apac-Lira-Puranga Road totalling to about 191 kilometres, to be upgraded from class -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have already told you to put your question in writing. Can we have the next item. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY TASKFORCE ON THE NATIONAL COVID-19 RESPONSE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I still have issues of national importance. We are going to handle them. Let us first listen to this.

4.20
MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, you did direct that this matter should be put on the Order Paper such that the taskforce presents its report today. 

As I informed you, Madam Speaker, the teams that had gone to the field were coming back over the last weekend and that is what happened.

On Monday, we were supposed to interact with the ministers of health, finance and gender. Unfortunately, all the ministers said that was Cabinet Day and they were not available. We thought we would meet them on Tuesday but they said they had other prior engagements. Madam Speaker, the day they gave us to be available such that we have the exit meeting was yesterday, Wednesday.

The Minister of Health wrote to us and said she would be ready with her team at 9 o’clock. However, yesterday, they had a National COVID-19 Taskforce meeting and she managed to come at 3.00 p.m. We did meet with honourable minister from 3.00 p.m. up to 7.30 p.m. It was not possible, therefore, to have the report ready between 8.00 p.m. yesterday and this afternoon. We therefore -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t you listen? Who said there is a report? He has not finished his statement. He is still giving you a preamble of his –

MR KATUNTU: I do not know whether this is slightly better. Well, if you are the Chairperson of the COVID-19 Task Force and you are the one removing the mask, then what sort of example would you be giving to the others?

Madam Speaker, as I was saying, we had our exit meeting yesterday with the Minister of Health. It started at 3.00 p.m. and ended at 8.00 p.m. It was not possible, therefore, to do our final tidings to the committee report. The committee report, therefore, will be ready within the next two days and we shall be ready to present it on either Monday or Tuesday, next week.

However, let me emphasise that when we embarked on this task, we did not know how enormous it would be. Colleagues, it turned out to be quite a big task. 

I, therefore, request, Madam Speaker, that if you put us on the Order Paper, we may need a minimum of two hours to present the report because it covers the entire country plus what is happening at national level. If we are going to have other items on the agenda, I do not think my colleagues will do justice to this report. Otherwise, we shall be ready in two days. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Katuntu. We now push the report to Tuesday. Let us move to the next item. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, this is not a normal committee. In your wisdom, it is a committee that was constituted to handle a matter of emergency. For us to allow the two days, well aware that tomorrow is a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, Monday and Tuesday, a lot of issues would have arisen and the report itself, bearing in mind the dynamism of the COVID-19, will be stalled. So, I am afraid it could be overtaken by events.

Secondly, well aware that even the Executive arm - the President, is also making efforts to address the same, it is critical that this report is tabled so that the President can have an official record such that when he is communicating to the country, it is a synchronised assessment of the situation. This will ensure that the efforts of the committee are not in vain. This Parliament is contributing to the wellness of this country. We are all trying to find out how we can overcome the COVID-19 surge and it is the very matter that a lot of things are happening in the morning and evening. 

I bet if the chair takes this committee to Tuesday, it will be overtaken by events and the report will be stale and we might need another report again. 

Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence and that of the chair of the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, the report will not be stalled. Secondly, COVID-19 would have not stopped; it will still be there.

Third, if we have people who have made any mistake, we will take them on because the law is there. So, the aspect of being stale is not an issue. If the report is not ready, what do you want them to present? Can we go to the next item?

PRIME MINISTER’S TIME

MR SSEKIKUBO: Do I have the Floor, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, I thought you are a senior Member of this House; you should be the one to train the rest of the Members on how to handle the proceedings in the House. We have already moved to the next item. So, unless you are the Prime Minister; we are now on the item on Prime Minister’s Time under Rule 41(3).

MR SSEKIKUBO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Please have a seat, hon. Ssekikubo.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I thought I had caught your eye.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said the other day, kindly stop sending me chits; COVID-19 is real. If you want to bring up a matter of national importance, come and register it with my office. If I do not read your chit, do not say that I do not like you; I am not going to read them. Let us listen to the Prime Minister.

4.30
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Your Excellency the Vice President, honourable colleagues, I am ready with the answers. I am just waiting for Members to ask some questions before I begin responding.

Those that submitted their questions know themselves. This time round, we got six questions and one of them came from hon. Abubaker Kawalya of Rubaga.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Abubaker Kawalya, please read your question the way you wrote it.

4.31
MR ABUBAKER KAWALYA (NUP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Pursuit to Rule 41 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I hereby submit my question to the Prime Minister.

The question reads: “The Traditional Rulers Act of 1993, returned assets and properties stipulated in its schedule to traditional rulers. The Act specified that those not included in the schedule be returned following negotiations between Government and traditional rulers. In the case of Buganda Kingdom, the properties meant for negotiations for return by then included the 9,000 square miles, the 1,500 square miles of forests and the 160 square miles of official estates of county and subcounty headquarters all over Buganda, which were impounded by the central Government in 1967 and vested in the Uganda Land Commission.

In the Uganda National Land Policy released in 2013, it was emphasised that it is necessary to expedite the conclusion of this legal process, based on agreed principles with the central Government, not only for Buganda but for all kingdoms, including Bunyoro and Busoga that had not put forward demands.

The Prime Minister, according to Article 108A (2) (a) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, is the Leader of Government Business in Parliament and responsible for the coordination and implementation of Government policies across ministries, departments and other public institutions. Therefore, my question to the Prime Minister is: how far has Government reached on this commitment and legal process?

I beg to submit.

4.34
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, Your Excellency the Vice-President and honourable colleagues, Government is determined to redress the injustice that the confiscation of the assets and property of kingdoms or traditional rulers in 1967, represented. 

The NRM Government, in 1993, enacted the Traditional Rulers (Restitution of Assets and Properties) Act, Cap. 247. The purpose of the Act was to restore the traditional rulers’ assets and property previously owned by them, or connected with or attached to their offices but which had been confiscated by the state, and to make other provisions relating or incidental to, or consequential upon the foregoing.

Madam Speaker, consequently, section 2(1) of the Traditional Rulers (Restitution of Assets and Properties) Act, Cap. 247, provided for the return or transfer of any asset or property previously confiscated by the state from, or in respect of, or in relation to any traditional ruler under the Constitution of 1967, to that ruler on the commencement of the Act without any further assurance than this Act.

For the case of Buganda, the assets and property to be vested in the traditional ruler for the same estate or interest as was then held by Uganda Land Commission on commencement of the Act were listed in the schedule under subsection (4) of the section of the Act.

Sub-section (5) provided that in the case of traditional rulers, other than the traditional ruler of Buganda, the Government would hold negotiations with the traditional rulers concerned, with a view to returning to them such assets and property as may be agreed.

Madam Speaker, sub-section (6) provided that the foregoing provision – sub-section (5) - applied to the traditional ruler of Buganda in respect of any asset or property other than those specified in the schedule to the Act.

Finally, sub-section (7) provided that where it would be agreed to transfer any asset or property to a traditional ruler under sub-sections (5) or (6), subsection (1) would apply to the asset or property with effect from the date approved in the agreement.

The said schedule to the Act listed the following assets and properties for the immediate return to the traditional ruler of Buganda: 

    1. The Bulange; 
    2. The Lubiri at Mengo;
    3. The Butikkiro;
    4. The Buganda Court Building; 
    5. Kabaka’s official 350 square miles of land;
    6. The Namasole’s 10 square miles of land;
    7. Ba Nnalinya’s land; 
    8. Kabaka’s Lake;
    9. Former Omulamuzi and Omuwanika’s official residences of Mengo;
    10. Land adjacent to Lubiri on which three Buganda ministerial houses used to stand;
    11. All Bassekabaka’s tombs; 
    12. Buganda Works Building at Kakeeka;
    13. Basiima House; and 
    14. Nalinya’s house at Lubaga.

As per sub-sections (5) and (6), the rest of the assets and property were to be returned on the basis of the outcome of negotiations held between the Government and the traditional ruler of Buganda.

Accordingly, on 1 August 2013, following negotiations between the Government of Uganda, led by H. E. the President, and Buganda Kingdom, led by the Kabaka of Buganda, a memorandum of agreement (“the Agreement”) was concluded between the two sides, pertaining to the return to the Kabaka the former estate of Buganda Kingdom. 

Under clause A(1), the Government agreed to return to the Kabaka of Buganda –

(a) 	land in urban centres/towns;
(b) 	land where former administration headquarters, that is, Gombololas and Masazas, were situated;
(c) 	land not claimed, utilised or occupied by any lawful or bona fide occupant as defined in the 1995 Constitution and the Land Act in the rural and peri-urban areas. Where a rural or peri-urban area was occupied by many people who did not qualify as lawful or bona fide occupants, the Government and the Kabaka would negotiate and amicably agree on the manner of handling the occupants, such as Government compensating the Kabaka;
(d) 	land on Mityana Road (Jeza Farm); and
(e) 	former Buganda Kingdom markets.

The Government also agreed to compensate the Kabaka for land comprised in Plot 52, Kampala Road, and Muteesa House in London (42 Queen’s Garden Road, London, SW) and to return or compensate the Kabaka for properties that formerly belonged to the kingdom but were transferred to Government. 

All the above properties were to be verified by the relevant Government agencies before their transfer to the Kabaka or compensation was effected.

Finally, the Government was to pay to the Kabaka a total of Shs 20,389,206,000 in agreed instalments, to cover all rental arrears, dues, court awards, interest accrued, etcetera. This amount, however, was to be verified by the Government Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) or a team that was set up by both parties to the agreement before payment was effected. 

The Government was, however, to immediately mobilise Shs 2 billion, as part payment, which it indeed mobilised and paid to the Kabaka upon the signature of the agreement. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to thank the NRM Government because by the end of 2014, a total of 312 certificates of titles had been handed over by His Excellency the President to the Katikkiro of the Buganda Kingdom. These have been acknowledged by the kingdom. 

In addition, the Government, between 2013 and 2015, paid to the Kabaka a total of Shs 14 billion out of the documented Shs 20,389,206,000 towards the arrears, premiums, dues, court awards and interests that had accrued since the date of the agreement. 

Further, pursuant to clause 3 of the agreement, the Government, in 2018, constituted an inter-ministerial committee on the implementation of the agreement. The inter-ministerial committee, on 10 April 2018, established a technical and verification team to assist in verifying the Buganda Kingdom’s claims and come up with a recommendation. 

The inter-ministerial committee comprises the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, the Attorney-General and the Minister of Local Government. 

On the other hand, the technical and verification team is wider and comprises representatives from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, the Attorney-General’s Chamber, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, the Ministry of Local Government, the Ministry of Health, the Judiciary, the Ministry of Education and Sports, the Uganda Police Force, Uganda Prisons Service and the National Water and Sewerage Corporation.

The team was given the following terms of reference:

    a) To verify Buganda Kingdom’s claims and make recommendations to the Government;
    b) To identify Government’s MDAs occupying land belonging to the Buganda Kingdom;
    c) To demand documents regarding Buganda Kingdom’s claims and cause compliance from all MDAs;
    d) To handle any other matter incidental to the claim of Buganda Kingdom;
    e) To accomplish the task within one month, and in any case, not later than 16 May 2018, and submit a report to the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

The technical and verification team verified certain assets and submitted an interim report dated 18 July 2018, with recommendations to the inter-ministerial committee.

Basing on the report, the Government, between 2018 and 2020, paid a total sum of Shs 18,700,000,000 towards the compensation of the Plot 52, Kabaka Road; that is King Fahad Plaza and Plot 42, Queen’s Gate Gardens Road, London; that is Muteesa House, which left a balance of Shs 33,361,825,200, that the Government should be able to pay, once the economic situation normalises after the COVID-19 pandemic. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to inform you of the present status. 

    1. There is an outstanding verified debt of Shs 33,361,825,200 that the Government will clear, once the situation normalises. 

    2. There is a number of certificates of title whose verification is ongoing. The challenge has been the nature of the land involved in view of the passage of time since their confiscation. While the lands exist, there are people that are occupying them other than the Government. The Government, as indicated above, has already returned those under its control.

    3. The Government intends on regularising its occupancy of various Buganda Kingdom’s land through either paying rent or obtain leases, as recommended by the technical and verification committee. These institutions include the Judiciary, Uganda Prisons Service, the Uganda Police Force, the Uganda People’s Defence Forces, local government schools under the Ministry of Education and Sports –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime minister, there is a procedural matter.

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I am about to conclude.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think there is a problem with the microphones. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is for your own good. We are not hearing you clearly. I request that the technical team works on the public address system. The wordings are not clear and Members are not understanding what is being said.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think it is a problem of the rain. 

MR OLANYA: It is not necessarily the rain. You know the public address system has nothing to do with rain. Let our technical team do their work. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, Members are not hearing. Can you check what the problem is?

MS NABBANJA: Some Members are saying they are hearing. 

    4. The survey and opening of boundaries of Kigo land will soon be carried out by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, as recommended by the technical and verification team.

    5. The technical and verification team shall complete its work and submit its final report to the Government as soon as the conditions brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic ease. 

Other kingdoms

On 2 September 2019, the Government and the Kingdom of Toro entered into an agreement similar to the one with Buganda. The agreement provided for a joint implementation committee comprising representatives of the Government and the Toro Kingdom under the chairmanship of the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

The team held preliminary meetings in the late 2019 and early 2020. However, the advent of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 led to the suspension of the activity. Bunyoro and Busoga kingdoms have also initiated discussions with the Government. Negotiations with these two kingdoms will be held as soon as the situation gets better. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Hon. Kawalya, you have got your response. 

4.51
MR ABUBAKER KAWALYA (NUP, Rubaga Divison North, Kampala): Madam Speaker, let me first appreciate the Prime Minister, although, I am not satisfied with the response. What I expected her to do is to at least give us a commitment; first on the amount of money that the Buganda Kingdom demands from the Central Government for using its properties that totals to Shs 147 billion. We expected to receive a commitment from the Prime Minister which she has not given. We all understand that the Government of Uganda occupies most of the properties that belong to Buganda Kingdom –(Interruption)

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rule 41 of our Rules of Procedure clearly guides us on how the Prime Minister’s Question Time should be done. It does not provide for a debate on the submission of the Prime minister once he or she answers a question.

Madam Speaker, are we following the right procedure when a Member asks supplementary questions to a question that was clearly answered by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, supplementary questions are allowed. If the Member wants a clarification, it does not cause any harm. That is an aspect of budgeting. It can be budgeted for. If he wants confirmation on how much money they are demanding from us - He is just seeking clarification and supplementary questions are allowed.

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, under rule 41 of our Rules of Procedure –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister is comfortably listening to the questions raised to her as supplementary questions. She is not complaining and indeed, I know hon. Nabbanja is interested in settling these questions. Now, the Government Chief Whip wants to usurp the powers of the Prime Minister.

Is it in order for him to interrupt, yet the Prime Minister is ready to answer our supplementary questions following the question raised by the Member? I know that hon. Nabbanja is ready to sort out these problems and we are very comfortable with her doing so. Therefore, what is the worry of the Government Chief Whip at this juncture?

MR KAWALYA: To add to what hon. Ssewungu has said, these concerns have been there for a long time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, hon. Kawalya would like clarification; maybe he has not understood – Honourable member, you have a right to reply; you will reply as the Leader of the Opposition.

THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, if my counterpart, the Government Chief Whip, would want to demonstrate to us that there should be strict adherence to the rules, then he has not read rule 41(5). It requires the Prime Minister to have made her written responses and copied to the Members, which she has not. That is why the Member is complaining. 

MR KAWALYA: Madam Speaker, I have not received any copy of the response. Actually, it is news to me from the Prime Minister herself that she gave me a copy because I have not seen it even in my pigeonhole.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It could have been an oversight.

MR KAWALYA: Before she responds, when someone talks about Shs 147 billion –(Interruption)

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I know the procedure is that I submit my responses to the Clerk, which I did. Therefore, is it in order for the Member to start questioning me here when I submitted the responses to the Clerk?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am told that the document was uploaded because they did not want Members to get hard copies because of COVID-19. However, from Monday, you will start receiving your iPads and I do not want to hear any excuse that you did not receive documents.

4.57
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Prime Minister for elaborately answering these questions. However, I have a supplementary question. 

Buganda Kingdom’s assets were taken by the regime by that time and they were taken at once. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what is happening now is that you are doing what we call “piecemeal return”. If you steal my clothes, why do you start by giving me a shirt and then after another election, you give me a pair of trousers, yet you know I am demanding from you these things? 

Buganda is demanding from the central Government Shs 147 billion in rent. There is also money they are supposed to give as compensation. The Prime Minister is not mentioning all this money. As the vice-chairman of the Committee on Government Assurance and Implementation, I want to hear the Prime Minister pledge on the Floor of Parliament - as a Government assurance - that Buganda Kingdom and its establishment will be paid back all this money as it was stated sometime back by the minister. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you give us an assurance that Buganda Kingdom is going to get back its assets, not in piecemeal, plus all the money it is demanding from you in the next financial year?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, you need to appreciate one thing; we have priorities in this Government and the Buganda properties is one of them. Therefore, at least you are getting your property, even if it is in piecemeal. What is important is that you get your properties; you will find another kingdom saying that they never got anything. 

5.00
MS LILLIAN PAPARU (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua): Madam Speaker, if you access West Nile from Pakwach, you can use two routes. One route is through Karuma-Pakwach and the other is through Masindi-Pakwach via Para.

Madam Speaker, as of now, a new bridge was constructed along Masindi-Pakwach Road and this road was opened for use to the public. This road passes through Kabalega or Murchison Falls National Park. However, the people who use this road right now are being charged even when they are in transit. Every person is charged Shs 20,000 and vehicles Shs 30,000.

In summary, when you are three or four persons in the vehicle, you end up paying Shs 80,000 and Shs 110,000 inclusive of the vehicle. If you are a regular traveller, you part with over Shs 100,000 every weekend you travel. 

However, there are similar roads that pass through national parks and those on transit are not necessarily charged except those on tourism.

Therefore, I request the line ministry to clarify to us why people are charged for using this public road yet it is even a shorter route to access West Nile.

Secondly, following the creation of cities, some parent districts remained operating from where they were. A case in point is Arua District that currently has its headquarters in Arua City. This has made services more expensive because the headquarters are currently located outside the geographical location of Arua District. 

Since the assets (offices) and the personnel sit in Arua City, accessing these offices has become very expensive for the ordinary person. 

I would like to know whether the Ministry of Local Government has planned to give transition funds to these parent districts so that they are able to construct and relocate their offices to where the districts are located. A district headquarter cannot be outside where the district is as it makes services very expensive.  I beg to move.

Ms nabbanja: Thank you, hon. Lillian. Madam Speaker, the first question has been brought today. I request that she registers it with the Clerk to Parliament so that I answer it next week. I have the answer to the last one because that is what I was given from the Clerk’s office.

The Deputy Speaker: I beg your pardon?

Ms nabbanja: I have no answer today to the first question she posed because I am supposed to give adequate explanations and concrete answers. However, I have an answer to the last one.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, when you are reading your questions, read the one which was written and as it is. Do not add anything else. If you want something else to be answered, bring it as a fresh question.

Ms nabbanja: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Lillian. Parliament, on 28 April 2020, approved the creation of 15 cities to be operationalised in a phased manner from 1 July 2020 to 1 July 2023.

All the cities created have two city divisions that are equivalent to municipalities. The first 10 cities commenced operations on 1 July 2020.

Most of the cities were created as a result of elevation of the respective municipalities in the mother districts. Since the municipalities were small in size, this required the expansion of boundaries for the cities, hence calling for annexation of some parishes and sub-counties from the
mother districts. I beg to move.

I can give more information if need be. For example, as per the decentralisation system of Government, Local Government headquarters are meant to be located closer to the people they deliver services to. This will require the district headquarters where cities were created to relocate from the city geographical area after some time. This requires availing start-up funds for the districts to establish headquarters and the Ministry of Local Government is pushing the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for funding.

It also requires the district council to submit a resolution of council to create a town council as per the law for where the district headquarters will be established. The Ministry of Local Government is still waiting for the council resolutions to that regard.

All this will require some time and the Ministry of Local Government has guided that the districts be given some time to relocate.

I would like to talk about sharing of assets. The Ministry of Local Government has also guided on a case-by-case basis regarding the sharing of assets and liabilities formerly owned by the old district.

On human resources, the districts were guided to first identify the human resource they intend to retain and pass on the remaining staff to the cities, that will hence be assigned duties by the city management the moment Cabinet approves the human resource structures of the cities.

The mother districts’ wage provisions have not changed because their structure remains the same. The city human resource structures are pending Cabinet approval for recruitment to start. The cities have a wage provision only awaiting recruitment.

The Ministry of Local Government continues to give guidance from time to time in line with Section 95 of the Local Governments Act, Cap. 243 to cater for the transitional period of the cities and the mother districts. I beg to move.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you. Kindly ask the Minister of Local Government to continuously follow up that matter as it is a very serious issue. 

5.10
Ms Jesca ababiku (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question is about delay to compensate verified victims of the atrocities committed by the Lord’s Resistance Army in Madi sub-region. 

The specific questions are:
“
    i) Why is Madi sub-region not compensated?
    ii) When is Madi sub-region going to benefit from this compensation programme?
    iii) Which districts have so far been compensated as a result of the loss caused by the Lord’s Resistance Army and what was their package?
    iv) When is the Prime Minister visiting Adjumani District to interact with these victims?”

That was the component of the first question. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, the second question was about irrigation. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I am inquiring why the Government has not taken on implementation of the promise to get water from River Nile to support water-stressed areas in terms of production activities. We are also asking whether there is a strategic plan in place. Thank you, Madam Speaker and Prime Minister. 

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, allow me to thank hon. Jesca Ababiku, an old friend. The Government is in the process of verifying livestock compensation claims for areas of Acholi, Lango and Teso subregions, including Karamoja, West Nile, Sebei, Bukedi and Busoga subregions that were affected by insurgency, that is by the Lord’s Resistance Army, disarmament specifically in Karamoja, and cattle rustling. 

The compensation exercise is currently being concluded in Acholi, Lango and Teso subregions. The output is expected in three months. 

The lists of claimants and beneficiaries for Acholi, Lango and Teso subregions are already on display at every subcounty and district headquarters. The exercise was only affected by the ongoing lockdown but it shall resume immediately the lockdown is lifted. 

West Nile region, for example Madi subregion, which comprises of Adjumani, Moyo and Obongi districts, is covered by the livestock verification exercise. Colleagues, I would like you to note that the livestock verification exercise focused on Adjumani District - described as West Nile, East of the Nile - because it was directly affected by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) activities. This implies that the LRA activities which resulted into the loss of livestock were based on the eastern side of the River Nile - Adjumani District. 

Colleagues, the inter-ministerial committee led by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs in January 2020 displayed the list of claimants for six months. I believe hon. Ababiku is aware of the beneficiaries in Adjumani District at subcounty and district level whose claims had been presented in the High Court of Arua in Civil Suit No. 23 of 2017: Hon. Piro Santos vs. the Attorney-General. The case was concluded by hon. Justice Oyuko Anthony who ordered verification to determine genuine livestock claimants. 

The Government already has a programme for verification of the livestock claimants in Adjumani District, which shall be implemented by the inter-ministerial committee on livestock compensation within this financial year. 

The Government has also already provided the funding to complete the exercise for all subregions within this financial year. The Government shall make payments to each affected area after the conclusion of the verification exercise in that area with payments commencing this financial year. 

Previously, funds had been released for claimants and beneficiaries in Acholi and Lango subregions through their respective lawyers and associations. However, based on fraud and mismanagement of the funds by the lawyers and the associations, both Parliament and Cabinet resolved that the payments shall be effected directly to the claimants and beneficiaries. I think using the recent cash releases on mobile money. 

The inter-ministerial livestock verification committee led by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is working with district leaders and district structures in implementing and concluding the exercise within this financial year 2021/2022. 

Hon. Jesca Ababiku wanted to know whether I will go to Adjumani. You are aware, as an old friend, that I was in Adjumani on 8 March 2017 when I was your guest of honour. At that time, I was still a Commissioner of Parliament. As a Prime Minister, I promise that I will still go to Adjumani and other parts of the country to monitor Government projects, but this must be after the lockdown is lifted. 

Colleagues, the other question of water –(Interruption) 

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, this is very important. I would like to seek clarification from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. The issues of compensation of war victims in northern Uganda, including West Nile, are very serious matters. 

I remember that this was raised by hon. Reagan Okumu in the Ninth Parliament and the same issue was raised, again, by hon. Lyandro Komakech. 

I would like to get clarification from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. She has said that the process of verification of the war victims is still going on. For how long will this continue going on? It is coming to 10 years and the war victims have not been compensated in Acholi, West Nile, Lango, Teso but every time, the Government says the process is going on. Let the Rt Hon. Prime Minister give us the timeframe so that we take the report to our people in northern Uganda. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe for information purposes, I happened to serve on the Committee on Presidential Affairs where that matter was handled and that money was budgeted for. The money for compensation is available. The only thing that the Prime Minister needs to push for is faster verification. This is because the original list that was there was a fake list. 

Prime Minister, follow up on a faster verification process for all the regions - Teso, West Nile and the rest. 

MS NABBANJA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. 

MR OMARA: Madam Speaker, the issue of cattle compensation had taken too long and in every electoral cycle, this matter comes up and promises are made. The people of northern Uganda have waited for the last 15 years after the war ended. Therefore, can we take this matter seriously? If money is available, let people get compensated? I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The money for compensation is under the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, my time is almost elapsing, so, I am not taking any more points of information. My 45 minutes are almost elapsing. Can you allow me to present, Madam Speaker? I beg you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you summarise that? We have known where the money for compensation is. We have also made an order that you should make sure that the process moves faster; and the other thing is go and visit those victims.

MS NABBANJA: Okay, let me go to the last question asked by hon. Jessica Ababiku. Over the years, Government has put emphasis on creating a policy framework to guide water for production services. The Water for Production Policy came into force in 2018. 

I would like to say that Government is in advanced stages of developing the irrigation master plan, which will be ready by the end of this year. The master plan will guide investments, appropriate systems and technologies and sources of water for various parts of the country including Adjumani District.

However, permit me to say that some work has been done in that place and many parts of the country, which includes the repair of irrigation schemes, the construction of new schemes and piloting different irrigation systems and technologies. 

Specifically in Adjumani, Government has done Ogoro Irrigation Scheme in Alinyaki Subcounty. Farmers were already harvesting crops especially tomatoes before floods affected them. Now repairs on the scheme are ongoing. This financial year, a valley tank for watering animals, will be constructed at Mada in Dzoiti sub-county. 

Government has also secured funding - a loan from UK Export Finance, for another irrigation scheme in Adjumani. However, the leadership in Adjumani has not yet agreed on the site. 

I encourage hon. Ababiku, who raised this question and the matter on the Floor of Parliament, to help in generating consensus on the site for the work to commence. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next person.

MS ABABIKU: Madam Speaker, allow me raise a supplementary question for clarity. Thank you, Madam Speaker and Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my senior sister. I would like to thank Government for all the actions taken and for your quick responses.

Madam Speaker, I request that the Prime Minister clarifies on the components of this compensation because in your physical absence in our districts, we represent Government and people have higher expectations. Can we get to know whether the compensation is only going to be limited to livestock? I ask this because people lost other property and some lost lives. This will enable us to communicate that as per now, Government is for example, only limiting itself to this.

Secondly, it is not true that we have disagreements. I was in touch with the LC V Chairperson of Adjuman this morning together with the District Chief Administrative Officer and I can attest that we do not have any disagreements. I request that I get to your Office to be informed of other things. Otherwise, as per now, the district is ready for any project. 

On the Ogoro Irrigation Scheme, we request that the Government intervenes to provide access roads. One of the challenges affecting that irrigation scheme, apart from the recent floods, is lack of access roads and that begins from Alinyaki Health Centre III to Ogoro and to Pamajwa. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want that answered. Honourable Attorney-General, there are decided cases related to compensation. Can you tell us how court ruled on a matter of compensation for example, in one of the cases in Northern Uganda, Teso and that would set a precedent? Can we have a legal opinion?

5.26
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to appreciate the Prime Minister’s effort in laying the information bare to everyone.

One, the issue of compensation went to court in the early 2000, the first case being around early 2004. When Government realised the magnitude and the problem at hand, the President asked that we settle those matters through negotiations and see how best we can provide compensation to the people who were affected instead of merely going with a few that went to court.

In some cases, there were people who went to court but the Government understanding and obligation was to cater for everyone who was affected and we are strictly dealing with livestock.

I remember early last year, there was a supplementary that was brought to the Floor of this Parliament; it was of Shs 30 billion. Unfortunately, it did not pass because one of the arguments was that the verification exercise had not been completed.

This verification exercise has been ongoing for some time but at some point, the legal officer who was heading this exercise in the Ministry of Justice, Mr Oluka, unfortunately died. So, we constituted a fresh team to go on the ground and rely on the information he had gathered to gather more.

As we speak, the Ministry of Justice and the Attorney-General’s Chambers are working with the district leaders in Lango, Teso and Acholi; we have got offices at those districts. We are gathering funds to send our officers to the districts and we have sent out lists of people we consider to be verified. Those lists have been pinned at each and every sub-county in the districts of Teso, Lango and Acholi. It is West Nile, Karamoja, Bukedi and parts of Busoga that we have only recently brought on board and the verification is yet to take off.

In the three sub regions, the verification is ongoing. It is not yet complete but it is on-going. As we speak, we have a list of close to 100,000 people. We are yet to determine whether to start paying those or/and whether to first conclude the verification fully. 

We are preparing a Cabinet Paper. You know that during the campaigns, the President agreed to raise this money from Shs 30 to Shs 50 billion per sub region. So, we are preparing a Cabinet Paper and in this very financial year, the Ministry of Finance has budgeted for Shs 50 billion for that compensation exercise.

I wish to confirm what the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has informed you and to confirm further that the exercise - one, there is goodwill from Government. Two, the exercise is ongoing and it will be concluded as and when the money is available. However, for this financial year, we have Shs 50 billion that we intend to use to compensate some of these people. Thank you very much.

5.30
MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. It pains me so much - I escaped narrowly during the Kony insurgency. Greater Arua did not lose a single animal. We met Kony several times while traveling in buses, lorries and we lost goods. I think the interest of our country should really go to human beings other than animal compensation.

The families of these victims - those who perished and those who are crippled - are suffering. The suffering is untold. I kindly beg the Prime Minister to change her direction. Taking this long without touching on West Nile tells me that it seems West Nile has been forgotten. I beg for West Nile to be on board. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For your information, it is not West Nile alone which has not been compensated. The compensation is for eastern, northern Uganda and West Nile. Therefore, saying that West Nile is forgotten is being mean.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am very surprised that the minister, who has been following up the issue of cattle compensation very well, is today speaking in tongues. 

Parliament passed Shs 30 billion in a supplementary and it was not suspended. Actually, the minister strongly lobbied Parliament to allow the money to be passed and he promised that some action would be taken. I was happy to hear that some administrative setup had been done in the three sub-regions of Teso, Lango and Acholi. However, it is important that we capture this information. 

During the campaigns, the President passed through Teso, Lango and Acholi and he made public statements, which our voters heard very clearly. He said that on top of the Shs 10 billion, which was already passed in a supplementary, Shs 50 billion would be added – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Olanya, you are disorganising the House. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, it is not Shs 50 billion for this year’s budget; it is Shs 150 billion - Shs 50 billion for Teso, Shs 50 billion for Lango and Shs 50 billion for Acholi. Therefore, the records should be captured correctly. As per the President’s statement during the campaigns, it is Shs 150 billion. Let us have it very loud and clear. I thank you.

5.34
MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a supplementary question in regard to war compensation. 

In 1986, the war in Luweero ended and the National Resistance Army (NRA), then, came into power. We have been demanding for compensation as the people of the greater Luweero region and I have never heard any commitment from this Government to compensate the people of Luweero.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nabukenya, Luweero is a special case. Bring it as a question on its own for the next House sitting.

MS NABUKENYA: Most obliged.

5.35
MR WILLIAM CHEMONGES (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I get surprised when I hear Government talking about compensation, which is yet to take place, without mentioning Sebei region.   

Sebei region, which comprises Kapchorwa, Kween and Bukwo, is the only region that suffered serious cattle rustling. If you go to Sebei, we lost very many people, cows and many people are orphans. During campaigns, the President told us that we were part of the people to be compensated. However, when I hear, even from the Attorney-General, that Sebei region is not listed anywhere - Can I get an answer in relation to Sebei? I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Prime Minister, I want you to capture the issue of Sebei. Sebei is not on the war victims’ claim but on cattle rustlers. Therefore, we need a response on that in the next sitting.

5.37
MS SYLVIA AWAS (NRM, Woman Representative, Nabilatuk): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am very surprised to hear from the honourable minister that verification is still ongoing on the issue of compensation for the animals. 

For the case of Karamoja, verification was done last financial year. To date, I do not know whether we are still on verification or we are talking about compensation for the animals that were lost during the time when the army decided to keep the animals under their custody and the Karimojong lost very many animals. I am very surprised as to why the minister is still saying, “We are on verification”. When will the verification end?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Attorney-General, we need clear information on compensation – (Mr Kafuuzi rose_) - I am still giving instructions, which may benefit you. You need to come to this House and present a report on how much each area is supposed to get, how far you have gone with the verification and when you expect to start paying the people.

Hon. Apea, if it is still on compensation, I have already given the orders on it. Let us wait and get feedback from the Attorney-General’s chambers.

5.39
MR NELSON OKELLO (UPC, Maruzi North County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity again. The issue I would like to raise concerns Rwekunye-Apac-Lira-Puranga Road, totalling to about 191 kilometres. 

This road has been in a sorrow state for over 30 years. In 2020, His Excellency the President commissioned this road to be upgraded from gravel to bituminous standard road. Work commenced, but slowly. As I talk, work is not moving on and the contractor is demobilising equipment and shifting it to an unknown destination. Madam Speaker, very soon, the community will protest. 

I perused through the budget for the Financial Year 2021/2022 and this road is not mentioned anywhere. Why is it that this road, which is traversing the six districts of Kiryandongo, Apac, Kwania, Kole, Lira and Pader, is missing yet even roads which are under design have been included among the 26 national roads under construction, totalling to about 1,746 kilometres -(Interruption)

MR OMARA: Madam Speaker, Lango subregion has the worst roads in Uganda. Last year, the Committee on Equal Opportunities provided data showing that we only have 12 per cent of tarmac roads in Uganda. Most of our towns and cities are connected by murram roads.

Recently, the Government cut –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Excuse me, honourable member; hon. Nelson Okello has not finished his question. 

MR OMARA: I am providing additional information to what the honourable member is talking about.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under rule 41(3), a question must be written and read as it is to the Prime Minister.

MR OMARA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

MR NELSON OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My second question is that should we conclude that this road is not among the –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was the second question also in writing?

MR NELSON OKELLO: Yes, it is in writing, on the same road. We want to know whether this road is not among the Government priorities for funding. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, the Rwekunye-Apac-Lira-Puranga Road, measuring 191 kilometres, is one of the national roads selected for upgrading by the Government of Uganda, as part of the Third National Development Plan (NDPIII). 

The road is part of the national road network which is managed and maintained by the Ministry of Works and Transport, through the Uganda National Roods Authority (UNRA). The upgrading of the road is expected to improve access to Apac District and provide an alternative route connecting Kampala to Lira City and the Northern Region at large. 

Madam Speaker, the upgrading of Rwekunye-Apac-Lira-Puranga Road (191km) is funded by Government of Uganda, in collaboration with the Islamic Development Bank. The upgrading of the road will be implemented in two phases.

    i) Lot 1: Rwekunye-Apac (90.9km);
    ii) Lot 2: Apac-Lira-Puranga (100.1km).

Honourable members, the contract for upgrading of Lot 1: Rwekunye-Apac (90.1 km) commenced on 7 December 2020 and is expected to be completed by 6 December 2023. 

The contract for Lot 2: Apac-Lira-Puranga (100.1 km) commenced on 14 December 2020 and is expected to be completed by 13 December 2023.

Madam Speaker, one of the issues raised in the communication from hon. Nelson Okello was that the contractor has demobilised key equipment from the site and the progress of works is very slow.

Honourable members, the two contractors for both lots are mobilised on site and are undertaking preliminary works. None of the contractors have demobilised key equipment from site and both the contractors are on track to complete the upgrading works within the planned time. However, because of the Covid-19 pandemic which has affected everything in the country, it continues to affect the contractor’s activities.

Another issue raised was that the Rwenkunye-Apac-Lira-Puranga Road (191km) is not included in the budget for Financial Year 2021/2022 and is not among Government of Uganda priorities for funding.

Honourable members, the funding for the upgrading the Rwenkunye-Apac-Lira-Puranga Road was secured for the entire stretch of the project. The project is a priority – (Applause) - for Government of Uganda; as you know the NRM Government. It is included as Project number 1402 in the budget for Financial Year 2021/2022. I commend the NRM Government for this.

Madam Speaker, I would like to assure you and all the honourable members of this Parliament:

    i. That the Rwenkunye-Apac-Lira-Puranga Road (191km) is part of the Government priorities and is included in the NDP111;

    ii. That the funding for the upgrading of this strategic project were secured from our development partners at the Islamic Development Bank and funds have been allowed for in the budget for the Financial Year 2021/2022; and

    iii. The upgrading works are ongoing and Ministry of Works and Transport, through Uganda National Roods Authority will ensure that the contractors remain mobilised on site and fulfil all their contractual obligations.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, Government is committed to contributing to the national transformation, as set out in the NDP111. The Rwenkunye-Apac-Lira-Puranga Road, which is 191 kilometres, is one of the projects identified in the NDP111 and Government is committed to ensuring that the road is completed as scheduled. 

Thank you very much. (Applause)

THRE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Prime Minister. Hon. Acen Dorcas from Alebtong?

5.48
MS DORCAS ACEN (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister - it is a brief one - you are aware that the Sustainable Development Goals are a call to action to promote prosperity, while protecting our mother earth and also looking at the current climate change and environmental protection challenges such as drought and also floods which we are currently grappling with. 

We know that this has resulted into looming famine in most parts of the country, including Lango Sub-Region and Alebtong District where I come from. We want to understand the policy strategies that the Government has put in place to cushion the economy and also build economic growth and development, while addressing these needs we are currently struggling with as Ugandans, instead of just waiting and putting off the fire. We know that we need to be prepared in advance. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Dorcas Acen. Prime Minister?

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, thank you, hon. Dorcas Acen.

Honourable colleagues, environmental degradation and climate change are indeed a major threat in Uganda’s sustainable development, the Government of Uganda is committed to mitigating the effects and challenges of these threats.

To start with, Uganda has a climate change policy, developed in 2015, that is intended to guide all climate change activities and interventions towards a resilient and low carbon development path.

There also exist a National Environment Act, enacted in 2019 and early this year, Parliament passed the Climate Change Bill, which is awaiting approval by His Excellency the President. This provides for development of climate change action plans and structures, up to lower local governments, including Alebtong District. 

The Government has also developed a green growth development strategy and implementation roadmap for the period 2018-2030. This includes the priorities in each sector, targets and timelines. The current National Development Plan III provides a host of strategies and interventions to be implemented in the year 2025.

Following the identification of environment among the three accelerators for SDGs, in addition to governance and industrialisation, the entire NDP III, Programme 9, has been designed to focus on natural resources, environment, climate change, land and water management. This provides key interventions and resources for cushioning the economy and ensuring resilient growth and development. 

It is also important to note that it is now a requirement for all Government agencies, including ministries and local governments, to mainstream environmental and climate change in their plans and budgets. This, then, implies that a district like Alebtong must have its plan and related budgets capture key environmental and climate change concerns and have them addressed. Responsible agencies are working on a mechanism to track and ensure that compliance to this requirement for mainstreaming is adhered to. 

I thank you and Members for submitting their questions in time. Giving answers when a question is submitted in time is the right way to go. Secondly, I want to implore colleagues that my office is open to you. Whenever you feel that you need to ask anything, I am in the office. Sometimes, I have lunch in the parliamentary restaurant. That is really a friendly manner. We can chat within Parliament or you can come to my office. My office is open to everybody. Other than waiting for the Prime Minister’s Time to ask questions, sometimes we can get these answers before we even come to the Floor of Parliament. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for fulfilling your duty under the Rules of Procedure. Members, next time, bring the questions early enough for us to give the Prime Minister time to prepare the answers. 

5.54
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I thank you for the endeavour you have made to make responses to the questions that were raised. 

However, according to the Rules of Procedure, you are supposed to provide written responses copied to the relevant Member. You should not load it over to the Clerk because you have very many officers who hold briefs for you. Let there be a mechanism that gives these responses in advance so that when a Member comes to the House, he or she does not have to raise a supplementary question.

A question like the one raised by hon. Kawalya is merely a backlash that has been triggered by the utterances of His Excellency the President, condemning and demonising the mailo land tenure system, which is resident in this particular sub-region that has the Kingdom of Buganda. You are likely to get an avalanche of such questions.

The Member was not accorded justice because he raised the question of the 9,000 miles, the 15,000 miles about the forest, and the accumulated arrears which have never been paid. You took us all through the provisions of the Institution of Traditional or Cultural Leaders Act. Those sections do not infringe on any rights, including the land tenure system. However, those utterances – This is just an Act that is operationalising Article 246 of the Constitution; it is very innocent. 

The other question by hon. Lillian Paparu is valid. We actually know of a fund in the local government called a start-up fund. That fund is meant for local government headquarters, whether it is district or subcounty or town council. That fund is provided by the ministry to commence construction, relocation and eventual settlement into the new headquarters. So, it is not about waiting for the district council to sit and make a council resolution before such a fund can be dispatched to the account of the respective local government.

Hon. Ababiku raised a question, which to my dismay, has taken donkey years to conclude. Compensation, including restocking in the regions that have been mentioned, is taking rather too long. By the way, it is generating even more questions because Luweero now has looming questions for next week. So, when will the Government do a service to her own pledges that are made and never honoured at all? 

In fact, on the restocking issue, if you bring in Sebei or even Bugisu – I am wondering why Bugisu is missing in action on this. If it is about challenges that we grapple with of cattle rustling, or the atrocities committed by the LRA, they had a spill over into Bugisu, Teso, Sebei, Bukedi and Busoga subregions -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Summarise your response. 

MR NAMBESHE: I am about to conclude, Madam Speaker. This is something I must say is an omission on the part of the Prime Minister – leaving out Bugisu and Sebei amongst the beneficiaries of the restocking programme. It has already been pledged by His Excellency the President. We only await implementation of the same. 

Lastly, the question on climate change and environmental degradation by hon. Dorcas Acen is very important. This is a global challenge. As a country, we must be seen to walk the talk. The Prime Minister has stated in her response, which I salute, that they are going to ensure that ministries, departments and agencies (MDAs) and even local governments mainstream the cross-cutting issues of climate change and environment in their work plans and budgets. This, however, is not the first time such directives are made and never implemented at all. We have seen cancellation of land titles in wetlands, a ban on polythene papers and all these are responsible for global warming and of course it starts from home here but all these are not implemented. It is preaching water but drinking wine on part of the office of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and so to speak, the NRM Government. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Chief Opposition Whip. When you talk about these things of climate change, most of them are degradation. You find everybody cutting trees, including in your village. As you have said, let us walk the talk. If I could ask, of the members of Parliament here, how many trees have you planted in your area? Let us walk the talk. Therefore, as we go out there, we should walk the talk. It is not about the government because the NRM will not come and plant trees in your village.

There was a request during the last sitting from hon. Abed Bwanika representing Kimanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City on disbursement that has been made to Masaka District. That document was supposed to be laid on the Table. Honourable minister of local Government, can you lay it on the Table?

6.02
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On Thursday, 22 July 2021, in response to the question as you have pointed out by hon. Abed Bwanika Member of Parliament Kimanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City; you directed the Government to lay on Table the approved Budget for the local governments, including Masaka City and the details of the first quarter budget release to the local Government of the Financial Year 2021/2022.

Madam Speaker, I have the submission dated 27 July 2021, approved budgets and first quarter expenditure limits to local Governments for Financial Year 2021/2022 signed by hon. Matia Kasaija, Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development. Accordingly, I beg to lay on Table the approved budget and first expenditure limits to local Government for Financial Year 2021/2022. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. Can we go to the second last item?

STATEMENT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS OF THE SUCCEEDING WEEK

6.05
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure requires the Leader of Government Business to make a statement in the House regarding the Government Business of the succeeding week.

I am, therefore, submitting the following business for the succeeding week from 2-5 August 2021:

    1. The motion from a resolution of Parliament to thank His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the State of the Nation Address to Parliament of the Republic of Uganda on Friday 4 June 2021. 

    2. I will also lay on Table the legislative programme for the Financial Year 2021/2022.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Honourable members, the Prime Minister has given us a notice of the Business that the Government intends to introduce next week. Please read the State of Nation Address so we can be able to have a meaningful debate. I will allocate time for debate after consultation with the whips. Consultations with the whips is meant to do one thing; to allow everybody to talk.

You find that when you are here, you cannot see the people who are behind there. Therefore, I request the whips that you take note of that; get the members. If members are behind there, you should be able to give me the names for Members to express their positions on the State of Nation Address. I will get the names from the whips and everybody is to speak. We will give it an entire week. 

6.07
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for stating the business of the coming week. However, the practice has always been, especially if we are to deliberate on the State of Nation Address by His Excellency the President, that copies of the same ought to be circulated to Members through their pigeonholes. Up to now, we have not seen any copies.

6.08
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, the President made the speech to the Parliament of Uganda and a copy was given to the Clerk to Parliament of Uganda. Therefore, I hope that the Clerk will share the copies with Members. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, if the document has not been received by the Members, can we have the Members receive it before the end of tomorrow so that they use the weekend to read the document.

RESPONSES BY MINISTERS TO URGENT QUESTIONS

RESPONSE ON THE LOOMING DROUGHT IN LANGO SUB REGION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, can we push that to next week? I suggest that we push it to next week because most of the Members have sent their apologies. They are in the field. We said that we want an action oriented minister.

ADJOURNMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to appreciate your resilience and patience for being in the House amidst this rain. I know it is cold but I want to thank you so much and I wish you a blessed evening. The session has been adjourned.

(The House rose at 6.10 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 3 August 2021.)






