Thursday, 11 July 2013

Parliament met at 2.12 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, welcome to this sitting. I would like to congratulate you again on what we were able to do yesterday with the Anti-Money Laundering Bill. I thank you very much for the extra time you put in to let this Bill come through.

Today is World Population Day and we have in this House the National Population Council Bill. What an honour that would be if we could also pass this Bill today to commemorate the day. (Laughter) It would be great that we pass the National Population Council Bill on the World Population Day. That would be something great. I am looking forward to your cooperation on this subject so that we recognise this day by also passing this particular law. Thank you very much.

2.15
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a procedural matter without necessarily delving into a lot of detail. This House was petitioned in relation to Kampala issues, which we all know and I do not want to go into details. You chaired the session and instructed the formation of a select committee of this House to investigate those matters. We are aware of what happened to the previous issues. I do not want to go there.

Just about three or four hours ago-do not be surprised if you do not see over 150 colleagues in this House because as I speak, they are wining and dining away at Hotel Africana, courtesy of KCCA. And aware of the issues obtaining in KCCA and how they relate to the job of this House. I seek for your guidance aware that the honourable Speaker ruled that it is improper for Members of Parliament to wine and dine with an entity under scrutiny by Parliament and without either the tacit or official permission of the Speaker - if anything, the House appropriates funds; should Members seek to do any job in relation to interacting with entities we investigate?
Aware of all the issues surrounding KCCA, we have just received their ministerial policy statement amidst controversy that the political arm was not involved in its formulation; and also aware that the Minister for Kampala, whom I shadow, just about last week, tabled in this House statutory instruments relating to the KCCA Land Board as well as an instrument to attempt to put in place to elect councillors representing professional bodies. So, here we are, Mr Speaker.

The guidance I am seeking is whether Parliament can be petitioned in vain because I understand this issue has been in the House for almost more than six months; and before we even resolve the controversy surrounding this entity, Members selected variously- I do not know the basis, maybe the Speaker will guide the House- are busy dining and wining. My Chairman of the Committee on Presidential Affairs, hon. Peter Ogwang, had asked me to go to join them and I told him I do not find it proper. 

First, we are the committee that is charged with providing oversight over this entity. But secondly, I am also aware, because he told me that one of the innocent undertakings this afternoon is to actually go and participate in a ceremony to open up particular roads in Kampala. And I told him as far as I was concerned, the law provides for a person who presides over ceremonial functions in the Authority and he is not involved. 

So, Mr Speaker, I request for your procedural guidance, as to whether as Members of Parliament, we are proceeding properly and we are not setting a very terrible and dangerous precedence on how we operate. I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is coming to me for the first time. I did not know about this. It is true we have matters touching on the operations and management of KCCA before this House that are not yet concluded. It is information that is coming now; we will have to handle it administratively once we get the full information. We will certainly issue a notice to that effect to try and deal with this kind of situation.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what I have said?

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, when we had a Business Committee meeting last week, the Opposition side was represented by the Leader of the Opposition and the Opposition Whip. This issue of the committee to look into the matters of KCCA was on the agenda and the names were read from both sides of the House and Independents. But among the names that had been brought by the Opposition Whip, there were complaints about some individuals, stating that during the debate, they had already pronounced themselves and shown which side they were on. 

So, they could not qualify to be members of the select committee. We concluded that the Opposition Whip should bring forward names of people who did not participate in the debate that day. And we are waiting for the list from the Opposition Whip, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that was not the main focus of the concern. The main focus of the concern was that a huge number of Members of Parliament are somewhere at some activity, which is not known to the Office of the Speaker. That was the issue. I have received communication on that issue to that effect and I am sure it will be handled properly. All that we are interested in is to do things properly and protect the image of this House. 

2.23
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Mpuuga for raising this issue. I am wondering - I am a member of this House, how was the invitation extended and whether what he is saying has got some meaning - because the House is empty.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I have just said that I need to crosscheck with the details and I will handle that matter administratively.

2.23
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker.I rise to raise a matter of national importance. Our country is governed by the Constitution of the republic and inter alia, it provides for the appointment of the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) and the Chief Justice.

I have addressed my mind to Article 120 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which provides for the DPP and it does not provide for Deputy DPP and it confers certain functions on the DPP to be exercised by him or her without actually giving an opportunity to another person to exercise such powers. But as we speak, a lot of time has passed, even the law society has complained about the vacuum in the office of the DPP and as I speak now, the office is not in position to operate normally as it ought to have been operating.

Article 133 is to the effect that in the absence of the Chief Justice, the Deputy Chief Justice shall be acting. It does not provide for the Acting Deputy Chief to be acting. The two situations as they appear tend to undermine the judicial process in this country and the fight against corruption is more or less hampered by the absence of the DPP.

I seek the indulgence of this House, Mr Speaker and the relevant minister. I thought he would be around to provide the response but I seek your indulgence for the relevant minister.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. I thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter is not only touching on the judges and the justices but also the input from the DPP is lacking. Its implications are not only in court but also in cells of Police and other detention centres, meaning that once you do not have the DPP, it compounds the problem to the extent that the administration of justice in the country and the constitutional order is at stake.

The information I am giving you, hon. Mwiru, is that the problem is much bigger and it is even threatening to bring up a constitutional deadlock. Cases cannot be heard, criminals are having a heyday, and suspects are languishing in jail. It is a matter that needs to be addressed as an emergency.

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude by seeking your indulgence, that you implore the relevant minister to update the House and the country on what is taking place. Has rule of law been abandoned?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not see the Attorney-General, the Deputy Attorney-General, I do not also see the Minister of Justice. I am not also sure whether the shadow Minister of Justice can appoint the DPP. Please, I think these matters are clear. Let us hear from the Leader of Government business.

2.27
THE SEDOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER ANDMINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Mr Speaker, what has been stated is very much appreciated but selecting persons to fill these very important posts takes some time and needs careful consideration – (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I am the shadow Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs. I agree with the Deputy Prime Minister that the selection process is very important to the country and of course that is the reason that it must be given the attention and brains that it deserves.

Every single judge that is appointed, including other public officials like the DPP have got their CVs, which are submitted before they are even appointed, their retirement age is known to Government. Unlike politicians who have no retirement age, public officials including judges have a retirement age, which is fixed and non-adjustable.

In the case of the Chief Justice of Uganda, he has three months on contract to conclude the pending matters. Government, therefore, has adequate advance notice of the retirement date of each of the individuals we are talking about.

I want to remind you that this is the third arm of Government without which Government is not constituted in accordance with our Constitution.

Is the Rt hon. Deputy Prime Minister, therefore, in order to insinuate on the Floor of this House and mislead us that because of the importance of the selection process, it is acceptable for a single person to have an integral arm of Government not constituted. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I heard the Leader of Government Business saying these are important offices and the process of selecting them needs careful thoughts. That is where he had stopped. I had not heard the additional statements he had made before the order came. So, I was hoping that he was going to conclude with all those issues you are raising. If there were gaps, then I would be able to rule on the subject.

But I think you also agreed with him and make him to be in order.

MR KAJURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Indeed, the previous speaker emphasised the importance of careful selection of the people to fill these posts. Hurried appointments will lead to more difficulties in the future and would not be right for this House and for this country.

So, I would ask that Government be given a little more time. It would be difficult to be specific but a little more time –(Interjections)– to accomplish this task.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR KAJURA: What confusion? Let us be consistent and take one point at a time.

MS NAMBOOZE: Order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: proceed. Please wind up. (Laughter)

MR KAJURA: Therefore, Government begs for a little more time to accomplish this matter. I think I conclude there. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think we all know that those matters are important and they are urgent and the earlier they are handled, the better for the country and the judicial process of this country so that everything is running properly. 

So, we urge you, the Leader of Government Business in the House to expedite this process and brief the House on Tuesday about what has happened and what we need to do –(Interjections) - well, he is now at the head, so, please, brief us on Tuesday next week on how far the process has gone so that our Parliament knows what is going on. Thank you.

I will alter the order paper to allow presentation of a petition immediately after the ministerial statement from the hon. Member for Luwero District, hon. Nabukenya. She has a petition that has been properly done. That is after the statement from the ministers. (Mr Ssekikubo rose_) Hon. Member, I thought we had sorted your matters yesterday.

MR SSEKIKUBO: No, Mr Speaker. I am much obliged but this is a matter of national importance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. You did not consult with me on this hon. Ssekikubo, please. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, if you – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, no. I will not. Rules are rules. Please.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, we talked about the visit of the US President and you really -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And it is an urgent matter?

MR SSEKIKUBO: It is of great national importance, Mr Speaker.(Laughter) Just last week, we saw the conclusion of President Barack Obama’s visit to Africa and he started in Senegal to South Africa and then Tanzania. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, you realise that the previous two presidents of the US had made it a point to always be anchored and hosted by Uganda in Kampala and most importantly, it would have been more important this time at this point in time because we are solely spearheading the AMISOM in Somalia, we have great effort in the Central African Republic, we are stabilising Southern Sudan, the DR Congo amongst other places. 

So, it would have been proper for this country to host the President of the United States and to benefit from the Energy Fund of the $70 billion to light 20 million African homes. But on all those, we missed out. 

Why the matter is important is how have we fallen off that privileged position that Uganda used to enjoy? How come that even when our President attempts to meet him in Tanzania, he is not allowed audience? Have we fallen off so badly at a time when we hope we are making steadfast effort to stabilise Africa?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please, resume your seat. This House is not part of the US Congress. This House is not part of the Department of State of United States of America. This House is not part of the White House staff of President Obama. We cannot dictate where he goes, what he says and what he does with the American money. (Applause)We cannot do that.  

So, please, let us be Parliament of Uganda and let us do things of Uganda. Let us leave the things of the Americans for them to do because it is their country and it is their responsibility. Next item.

MR SSEKIKUBO: But we were once a new breed of Africa – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please.

MR SSEKIKUBO: What happened, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please. The Member for Ajuri?

2.38
MR DENIS HAMSOM OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise under Rule 24, sub-rule (4) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda to raise one procedural point regarding adherence and compliance to the Rules of Procedure of Parliament especially the one regarding Questions for Oral Answer that are submitted to the ministers by the Members of Parliament and these questions require written answers within two weeks. 

Under our Rule 35 (iv) and (v), with your permission, allow me read verbatim. Rule 35 (iv) states, “The response by a Minister to a question asked of him or her shall be sent to the Clerk within five working days and the Clerk shall distribute the response to the Members within five days.” Rule 35 (v) says, “A Minister shall not take more than two weeks to respond to a question from a Member.” 

The Clerk to Parliament is the custodian of all the records of Parliament and I am in possession of a document with the title, “A schedule of Questions for Oral Answer raised during the Ninth Parliament for the period May 2011 to August 2012” and the source is the Office of the Clerk. 

In this document, within that period, May 2011 to August 2012, 48 questions were submitted to the relevant ministers and they all require oral answers. Out of 48, nine questions were answered on the Floor of Parliament, which means even the written answers came from the ministries. Thirty seven questions were not answered and up to now, there is no written response from the ministries where these questions went.  

Mr Speaker, the ministries with the highest number of questions are as per these statistics; Ministry of Agriculture has seven questions not answered, Ministry of Health has four questions not answered, Ministry of Education has four, Ministry of Defence has four and so on and so forth. But you can look at the flow of questions that went to the ministries and that means we highly regard Agriculture, Health and Education, because that is as per the statistics in this document. 

The Members of Parliament who asked many questions as per these statistics are hon. Waira Majegere with seven questions, hon. Otada has six, hon. Obua has five, hon. Alaso has five and then others have four, three and two.

I have not seen the statistics for 2013 in terms of Questions for Oral Answer. And for me, I have a number of them but I have not asked. Why? Because I am getting demotivated as a Member of Parliament having raised five questions and the Rules of Procedure are clear - giving a minister two weeks to respond and they are not responded to - in my honest opinion, this is defiance of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is a procedural point –

MR DENIS OBUA: Mr Speaker, I have just been thinking aloud. Our rules provide for five ministers question time and the Constitution is clear that the Prime Minister is the Leader of Government Business in Parliament and coordinates all sectors in Government. Probably, if ministers cannot respond to our questions, why don’t we now have a coordinating centre probably in the Office of the Prime Minister? But fundamentally and procedurally, is Parliament proceeding in compliance and conformity with the Rules of Procedure that were adopted and passed, regarding Questions for Oral Answer? Are we proceeding in the right direction, Mr Speaker, because you are our custodian in this House? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think I raised this on Tuesday. I raised it as a desperate measure from the Members because we have failed or our colleagues from the Front Bench have failed to respond to this particular procedure, enabling Members to bring agenda for debate in Parliament and because we have failed on that, people have become very creative that even on a matter that is not urgent, we now find ways of making it urgent because that is the only way we can get a response from the ministers. We have really killed this procedure by our conduct. There are questions that date back to 2011, there are questions that date back to last year and I am sure there are questions this year, which have been asked that have not been responded to. 

Leader of Government Business, it is important that we facilitate this particular mechanism of processing parliamentary business so that it is active. I urge the Whips and the Leader of Government Business to coordinate with the ministers. We should not bury this procedure. In other parliaments, actually, it is the most active because a lot of business is transacted in 15 minutes. The question is finished, everything is done and then we move forward but we have killed this procedure by our lack of response to them and even where we are to respond, we respond after two years, which does not really make any sense whether politically or in terms of manners. So, let us see how we can improve on these procedures.

Like I always say, it is not only bad policy, it is even bad manners not to answer questions that you are asked and yet, you are holding the docket of a minister. Please, let us facilitate Parliament so that we do work for this country properly. Those questions should be answered and we should find a time we can set aside for all these questions to be handled. Some of them have expired. We can also see those which have been overtaken by events so that we can scale them down and have them answered.

The Prime Minister’s question time is in the rules. There is a specific time allotted every Wednesday for the Prime Minister to respond to face-to-face questions from the Members, to have a discussion. We have seen it in the House of Commons and it works very well; in 30 minutes, the Prime Minister also answers 30 questions. That is where we should go so that we can process these issues much faster. Maybe, it will be either the Whip or the Leader of Government Business to make some comment on this subject so that we see how we can move forward. Please, this is on the questions. But you see, the subject has already been raised. Let us just find a way of moving forward on this, please. 

2.46
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of Cabinet, I want to say we are sorry because this has been reechoed over three times- –(Interjections) - you may say “Ah” but we are appreciating where we have not performed well and we should have that spirit as leaders. I raised this issue in Cabinet yesterday and the Leader of Government Business, the Prime Minister, gave every minister one week to make sure that all the questions and the answers are with the Clerk. So, I want to pledge before you, Members, that after one week, the answers will be with the Clerk and in case a minister has not responded, the Prime Minister will bring that minister here to respond to the country. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Clarification, Mr Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member for Rubaga, that is not good procedure to always access the microphone before I have allowed you to speak. Hon. Members, this, I have said many times and we now have a clear undertaking and we have been informed that even the Cabinet discussed this matter. Can we now wait on the Government Chief Whip to come back to us after a week with all these answers to the questions submitted and then we see how to proceed from there? (Members rose_)This should not be a matter that we should debate. Please. 

MR DENIS OBUA: Mr Speaker, I made a quotation and reference to a document. I think it would be procedurally right for me to lay it on Table such that I am not accused of quoting figures and statistics that do not exist. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it from the Clerk’s office?

MR DENIS OBUA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then it is already the property of Parliament. You do not have to lay it - (Members rose_)– if it is still on the questions for oral answer, then no. Unless it is something not related to this. Then it cannot come because you did not come to my office. Next item, please. 

2.48
MS ANGELINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Along with lack of diligence in answering questions from Members of Parliament, there is also another problem that we face with ministers. When we invite them to committees, sometimes we have to invite them more than three times. On one occasion, we have had to write summons to a minister. I would like, through your chair, Mr Speaker, to emphasise it as well and remind the ministers that we are working for the good of this country and we are here to complement one another. If a committee invites you and you think of going on the defensive, then you are cheating this country. Please, we need your cooperation to be able to do our work as committees of Parliament. I thank you. 

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, this is the first time that I am hearing that ministers are not keen to attend committees when they are invited because as ministers, we always look forward to the opportunity to appear before committees –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the Government side has a leader. Of course, today, it has kept changing between the Chief Whip and the Deputy Prime Minister. The minister responsible for lands has now usurped the power of the responsible and designated officer who is supposed to speak for Government and is telling this Parliament that Parliament has never brought it to his attention the fact that ministers are not attending committees yet, as far as I know, this is not a land matter but a matter of ministers not attending committees. 

Is the Minister of Lands in order to insinuate that when ministers are not attending committees, a matter must be brought to his attention? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we all recall that hon. David Migereko was Government Chief Whip at one point. He might be speaking from his recollection –(Laughter)– but he might now need to have his records updated because he has not been there for a while. These things might have developed long after he left that office. So, he should take the information in good faith and let us just see how we can improve on our working relationship because it is the ministers to help the committees and the committees to help the ministers so that we can have a convergence when we come to the House and we push the business of the country forward. I think that should be the spirit. 

So, now you have known that there are some ministers who do not want to attend committees. You may want to take that up.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I suggest that the chairpersons and the Office of the Clerk at least inform me so that I follow up with the ministers because since I became Chief Whip, no Chairperson or Clerk or any member in the Clerk’s office has informed the Chief Whip when inviting a minister or a ministry official. I think we should streamline the system. Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is not a requirement that you do but she is just saying that if the notice came to her, she would be able to take remedial measures to deal with these problems. Please, let us now go to the order paper. 

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence. In light of the debate on the Floor, the procedural guidance I am seeking from you concerns Thursday. Traditionally, Thursday was supposed to be a preserve for Members to express themselves; to raise issues from their constituencies. The media has been embarrassing Members here for keeping mute. But my defence is partly that perhaps for congestion in this House, Members lack the requisite space for expression. I am looking at, for example, the order paper of Thursday and you can hardly find space for Members to speak; it is laden with government business. And we are now getting confessions that the government is unable to transact business – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, can I respond to that?

MR MPUUGA: Yes, I am seeking guidance whether – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have got you; can I now respond so that we save time?

MR MPUUGA: Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you see, that is why I want to move forward. The whole of item 3 – (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) – these are a response to matters raised here by private Members. They are not like voluntary statements that have come from ministers. Part (a) came as a result of the Opposition Chief Whip’s concern on what happened in Kasese. And then it should have been responded to but it was not. Part (b) on Karamoja is the same and (c) on the tourism sector was raised by hon. Baliddawa. Part (d) was also raised by the Opposition Chief Whip while (e) was raised by hon. Ssekikubo. And (f) was raised by this House on those three accounting officers. 

That is why I want us to move because this is private Members’ business and that is why we are handling them today. We are totally awake to the Rules of Procedure. (Applause) So, please, let us go to the statements and then we move forward. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of procedure. First, I would like to find out whether we have a government in this country. Yesterday, with humility, I stood here and reminded you about your previous ruling pursuant to the brutality of the Police, which has made it difficult for MPs in Kampala to address their constituents. This is a serious matter with reference to the Constitution, especially Article 79(1) and (2) where, as Members of Parliament, we have a duty to fulfil in consulting our constituents. 

The procedural point I would like to raise is: In the circumstances, where Government openly diverts us and neglects its duty, which is supposed to be its cardinal responsibility, is it procedurally right for us to proceed with deliberations when Government has demonstrated reluctance and inability to perform? Why don’t they leave power so that we take over? (Laughter) This is a clear demonstration that they are totally incapable of performing. Otherwise, why don’t we end the sitting here until they have responded?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I have six responses from the government on issues raised on the Floor. When the matter of the statement required from the internal affairs minister was raised, I was informed that it is now standard practice of the Cabinet to go through a statement coming to the House for prior harmonisation. So, I am sure that this statement will come next week. We shall demand for it next week so that this matter is addressed. The issue was raised and it was reinstated yesterday. 

So, please, let us have this matter come up at the earliest convenient date. (Members rose_) Can we deal with these ones that have already come, please?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON SUPERVISION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMPANIES

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr George William Nyombi Thembo): Mr Speaker, I stand here to humbly apologise that our statement is not ready. The issue that was brought up was a specific matter; we have a regulator who handles these matters. There are new issues that came up in the course of investigations, which we thought should be compiled and brought in a comprehensive report. Mr Speaker, we shall be ready on Tuesday. I apologise and to inform the House – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the cameras cannot record.

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: I stand here to apologise and to inform the House that next Tuesday, we will be ready. Thank you.

	MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON KARAMOJA AFFAIRS 

2.59
THE MINISTER OF KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Ms Janet Kataha Museveni): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to inform this House and all Ugandans on the current situation of hunger and food security in Karamoja. I know that many people of goodwill may be genuinely concerned about what has been reported in the media in the recent past. The overall food security situation in Karamoja in the last two months is poor but not extreme. The situation is more severe in three of the seven districts in the sub-region, namely Kaabong, Moroto and Napak districts. 

The sub-region experienced a prolonged dry spell from the month of May to June this year, when families had done their best to cultivate and plant food crops for this season. This dry spell is not only experienced in Karamoja but also, in varying degrees of severity, in other parts of the country and the East African region as a whole. The consequence of this is that some families in Karamoja have experienced stress in terms of available food for their households, leading to a spell of hunger.

We are all aware of the fragile nature of the environment and climate of Karamoja sub-region, that is now aggravated by the negative effects of global warming and climate change. The context of this hunger situation this year should be seen under the backdrop of improving trends of general food security in the region since 2009. Only four years ago, over 75 percent of the households in Karamoja were dependent on food aid for survival and were not producing anything at all. Now, only 10 percent are categorised as highly vulnerable households and receive food aid; the rest are producing their own food. 

The rates of global acute malnutrition (GAM) dropped from 15.8 in 2010 to 13.3 in 2011 and now to 12.8 in 2013. When we look at a few districts, we see consistent reduction in the household severe food insecurity. In Moroto District, it has dropped from 55 percent in 2008 to 25 percent. In Kotido, it has dropped from 45 percent to 20 percent and in Nakapiripirit from 23 percent to nine percent. These figures show that while we are experiencing intermittent hunger due to a dry spell, the situation could have been even worse if our efforts in Karamoja were not bearing fruit.

Mr Speaker, what is our response to the current situation? The Office of the Prime Minister conducted a rapid assessment of the situation in the entire country including the district of Karamoja in May 2013 and a further detailed assessment was done in Kaabong District from 13th -17th May. This assessment was done by the government in collaboration with other development partners and humanitarian agencies.

The findings indicated the stress levels of food security in all the districts in Karamoja and highlighted the severity in the districts of Kaabong, Moroto, Napak and Kotido. Immediate response was then effected by my office in collaboration with the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. The Minister of State for Karamoja, hon. Barbara Nekesa Oundo, also conducted a review of the situation in all the districts and took time to interact with the leaders and ordinary people to understand the gravity of the challenge, assess the response so far and agree on the way forward. 

The following actions were taken:
    1. Dispatch of 400 bags of maize flour and 150 bags of beans to Kaabong District.
    2. 300 bags of maize flour and 100 bags of beans to Moroto District.
    3. A further 300 bags of maize flour and 100 bags of beans were dispatched to Kotido District.
    4. 300 bags of maize and 100 bags of beans to Abim District in May and June.

Only two days ago, on 9th July 2013, we dispatched another 300 bags of maize flour and 100 bags of beans to Kaabong District. In addition to this, Government has sent 240 bags of fortified food and 40 cartons of vegetable oil for therapeutic feeding to the districts of Napak, Moroto, Kotido and Kaabong.

Mr Speaker, my ministry mobilised additional response from development partners especially from World Food Programme, which has traditionally supported the region of Karamoja in times of emergency. We know that to-date, World Food Programme has distributed 3,575 metric tonnes worth of food items to the region through the on-going programmes of school feeding and community based supplementary feeding and food aid for extremely vulnerable populations in the months of May and June.

They also plan to distribute another 6,000 metric tonnes worth of food in the months of July and August. We continue to monitor the situation in the districts to refocus our response accordingly.

I strongly believe that after security, food production in Karamoja remains the topmost priority for Government. Opening more land for production, diversifying on food crops and better livestock farming, harvesting water for production and elimination of dependency on food aid is the solution for our people in Karamoja. In this regard, I wish to clarify our plans to sustain our response to this particular situation but also consolidate our intervention on food production in the region as follows:
    1. Further distribution of food to the affected areas by Government and other partners for the next two months till this year’s harvest.
    2. Close monitoring and analysis.
    3. Sustain our efforts on food production by families and households based on the Food Security and Action Plan for Karamoja in the context of the Karamoja Integrated Development Plan.
    4. To enhance support to school feeding in order not to experience school drop outs and also attract more children to school.
    5. Assess the impact of the erratic rains this year on the harvest to prepare for the lean period of February and March 2014.
    6. Roll out the implementation of food security programmes such as Second Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF2) and Karamoja Livelihood Program (KALIP), community empowerment interventions and re-directing all NGOs and development partners’ support to better production systems at household level.

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, I would like to state that this year, the people of Karamoja have experienced the challenge of hunger in some parts of the region. The government, in collaboration with development partners, has risen to this challenge. It is the responsibility of all well-meaning citizens, and especially leaders at all levels to remain focused, sober and deliberate in the choice of our response. We must remain objective and determined in the face of any challenge. With concerted, coordinated and consistent effort we shall get over this emergency.

In the same vein, our efforts to increase food production at household levels must be strengthened because no government will allow its people to be permanently fed through relief and food aid. The people of Karamoja have already shown resilience. They are hardworking and committed to change the production system for the better. These efforts have already borne fruit, which is why the situation remains under control. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Member for Ruhaama and Minister in charge of Karamoja. We will have some limited debate because of the number of statements we have to discuss. We will limit it to the next 15 minutes, is that okay? We can have quick responses. How long will each take? Two minutes? Okay, two minutes.

3.11
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to extend my appreciation to the hon. Minister for Karamoja for presenting this statement, whose issues affect the entire country. 

The issue of food security is affecting the whole country. I have seen in the minister’s statement where she has indicated that they have been providing food to the region of Karamoja but I know that the entire country, especially Bunyoro, experienced heavy rains. At the end of the heavy rains, we experienced drought and the food is drying up. The country needs to plan what is going to follow next.

I would like to find out from the Executive - other countries within the region have plans of putting in place silos for food storage especially when they get bumper harvests. In the last financial year, we had a programme of construction of regional silos.

And two, Mr Speaker, the honourable minister has talked about harvesting rain water. I want to emphasise the fact that we need plans for harvesting rain waters in place throughout the country. For example, Bunyoro is usually hard hit by droughts. We need a major plan for harvesting rain water. What does the Minister of Agriculture say about harvesting rain water?

Lastly, Karamoja region is part of the cattle corridor just like Masindi and Hoima. I recall in the last financial year, Government had a plan to construct dams and Kimengo Sub-County was one of those sub-counties –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. I respect the commissioner. Madam Speaker, we know that the country has a big problem –(Interjections)– no, I apologise, Mr Speaker. Okay, I was saying that I know that the whole country has a problem, but the situation in Karamoja is so bad.

In the circumstances, is it procedurally right for the colleague holding the Floor to divert us into caucusing on another region yet this report is specific to Karamoja?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please, conclude so that we can move on.

MS BINTU: Mr Speaker, as we talk about Karamoja, there is need for us to plan for the entire country. Karamoja does not live in isolation; it is within Uganda. I would like to propose that we create a structure on how to help these cattle corridor areas especially in terms of tapping rain water. Masindi is now hard hit with animals dying. We need assistance from Government. Thank you.

3.15
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to express my appreciation to the Minister for Karamoja Affairs, for giving the correct version of what really takes place there. We are very grateful.

About a week ago, I was in Karamoja and I can report that the situation is really deplorable. I would like to say that instead of us all the time having to talk about the chronic poverty and hunger in Karamoja, which is intermittent - we need to find a more lasting solution to the Karamoja affairs. Part of that solution would be to get better irrigation systems for the people there. If other regions of that nature throughout the world are sustained through irrigation, why not Karamoja? We have some water bodies, which we should be able to utilise, if we really mean it. That way, the situation will be addressed more sustainably.

I also would like to propose that in the near future, we need to hold a conference to discuss these matters more specifically for us to find better modalities for the irrigation to be put up in Karamoja - (Interruption)

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank my colleague for giving way. The information I want to give is that in 2008, Government committed itself to providing food to all school going children in Karamoja and the Acholi sub-regions. I was surprised when the responsible minister said that they are just in the process of enhancing support to the school children to keep them in schools, yet, that commitment was made in 2008. What happened to that commitment?

MR TERENCE ACHIA: As I conclude, it is my appeal that instead of us lamenting about this strategy of ensuring Karamoja gets sustainable food, we should have this kind of plan.

3.18
MR LOLEM MICAH AKASILE (NRM, UPE County, Amudat): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for presenting that precise information about Karamoja. If you compare the Karamoja of 2001 to that of today, you will find a difference. Through her hard work, as Minister of State for Karamoja – and I want to put this on record – compared to other ministers who have been appointed to that post, including the sons and daughters of Karamoja, she is the best.(Applause)

Mr Speaker, on improving food production in Karamoja, I want to say that all we need are the irrigation systems. Water harvesting is the solution. As you may be aware, Karamoja feeds Kenya with a lot of water through River Kanyari.

We also supply water to the Teso sub-region. That is why I say this would be the best alternative to solve the water problems of Karamoja. We have a lot of water flowing to west and east of Karamoja.

Kenya has got a dam –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you for giving way. I would like to inform the House that the Committee of Government Assurance had the opportunity to visit Karamoja sub-region. During that visit, we visited four massive dams that had been constructed in that area. If I may recall, one of them is called Arachek Valley Dam. This means that there is already enough water in Karamoja. So, what are you talking about? (Laughter)

MR LOLEM: Thank you very much. You know, Mr Speaker, my brother comes from a place near South Sudan. I suspect he only visited some villages and not the entire Karamoja. For example, how many districts are in Karamoja? How many tribes are in Karamoja? So, when you talk about only four dams, what are you talking about? You might have rotated in some of the areas. We badly need water to serve the people there.

The other issue is about distribution – at the moment, there are four districts as mentioned by the minister, but Mr Speaker, let me ask the First Lady, the responsible minister, it is true you gave us the Tractor Higher Scheme, which is doing so well. However, you realise that there is always no rain in Karamoja. So, what plans do you have now? Does Government have any other plans?

Before I conclude, Mr Speaker, let me say something about the school feeding programme. You know in Karamoja, children go to school because they feed them. Karamoja- (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, your time is up. I will have the Member for Aruu County. 

3.23
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to speak in my capacity as the Chair of the Committee on Government Assurances, just to give some useful information to Parliament. The Committee on Government Assurances toured Karamoja sub-region last year. We were shocked and surprised to find that there were four massive man-made dams, some of which should not even be called dams because one has almost turned into a lake. I am not pre-empting the committee report in any way but I what want to put on record is that unlike formerly where we had no valley dams in Karamoja during the times of Dr Wandira Kazibwe, the Vice President then, this time, the committee was shocked to see massive dams which have been constructed in Karamoja. (Applause) Credit should be given where it is due. 

My only question now to the Minister for Karamoja is whether we can tap water from those dams and start irrigating the surrounding areas –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you hon. Otto for giving way. The information I want to give you is that all the MPs from Karamoja are actually satisfied with the service of the Minister for Karamoja Affairs. And both sides of the House are satisfied. So, the information I want to give you is that it would be important to go to other areas where there are problems-(Laughter)- and condemn people who broadcast pictures of children dying from hunger on television. That is what we need to be doing because the situation is different, things are okay, the MPs are happy- (Interruption)

MR LOLEM: Mr Speaker, I am tempted to say something against my friend because he mentioned something lousily. In some parts of Karamoja, as we speak, children are dying because of hunger. Now, my brother, hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda, is trying to insinuate that the report some of my colleagues gave about the situation in their constituencies was wrong. Even in the report of the minister, she mentioned the districts affected. So, is my brother, hon.Ssemujju, in order to insinuate that the report we gave on the issue of some problems-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is a serious matter and it is time we started treating it seriously. Even from the statement of the minister, it is clear that there is a problem and there have been some problems but that does not take away the fact that some improvements have been happening over time. But this is a specific problem that needs to be handled. That has been stated. So, instead of making a big joke of the whole thing, please let us get serious about this. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, my question to the Minister for Karamoja Affairs is what plans do you have to tap water from those four massive dams for irrigation in the neighbouring areas?

Two, when the committee went there we saw the Karimojong planting sorghum. In their local language, they call sorghum “otukene” which means something which has grown on its own. That is what it means. But for the first time, the Committee on Government Assurances saw the Karimojong planting sorghum courtesy of the programme of-

MR TERRENCE ACHIA: To help my brother, sorghum is not called “Otukene” as you may think. In Karimojong it is called “emomwa” –(Interjections)– it is not as you may think. In the past, the Karimojong thought cassava was growing on its own. Cassava was “elomabon” but not “emomwa”. “Emomwa” is sorghum so you are mistaken.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What does it mean? 

MR TERRENCE ACHIA: “Otukene”?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Whatever you have said. 

MR TERRENCE ACHIA: “Emomwa” is just sorghum. There is no other meaning. So, cassava is a different matter from “Emomwa”.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you for the information- 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I saw the item on Karamoja on the order paper, I remembered that on Tuesday, two of our colleagues addressed a press conference and they stated that 31 people from Karamoja had died of hunger. That Tuesday night, the media was awash with images of people eating leaves and others dying. During the week, one person was caught selling dog meat in Karamoja. 

I expected this House, rather than delving into a ministerial policy statement for Karamoja, which I hope we shall opportunity to debate- today’s item was basically on the critical situation and how to overcome it rather than speaking about the matters or the activities that are well catered for in the policy statement. 

Therefore, are we procedurally right to digress into the policy affairs of the Karamoja Ministry and leave a critical matter of people dying- 31 registered deaths; not mentioning those who are not registered- and the physical images of people climbing trees and falling and eating leaves; and other malnourished people plus those selling the offending meat to our people? Mr Speaker, I thought it would be procedurally right to focus on that matter as the gist of this debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the minister’s statement says the situation in the three districts of Kaabong, Moroto and Napakis severe and there have been some coordinated responses in terms of intervention from the government with support from development partners. That is the substance of this statement for which I had allocated 15 minutes. 

From what we have heard and the interventions from the Members, the statement of the hon. Minister, I think there is some comprehensive response to this situation and we need a clear updating process for the House to know exactly what is happening in Karamoja as of now because of this situation. The rest of the other programmes can be debated, as the Member says, when the policy statements come. 

As of now, hon. Members, the 15 minutes are up but we should have a framework where the minister updates the House either orally or by notices to the House about what is happening and what interventions have been made so that the House is kept abreast of the challenges that you are facing and for any help that you come to seek from the House, I am sure the House will respond appropriately. Next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE PROPOSED NEW TAX ON THE TOURISM SECTOR

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I seek your indulgence. You have moved the House to the next item but I was seeking for your indulgence that the future statement from the minister should have statistics of how many people have died; how many people have received food; how many mothers are in labour but cannot go to hospitals; how many children cannot access classrooms; how many people have received food; what she expects from the donors and then whether this House would move to declare Karamoja a state of a national disaster area so that together with the international community, we mobilise resources for this place. I am seeking for your guidance that is it proper to end this debate like this when bodies are floating in Karamoja.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This debate has been ended by stating that this House needs to be briefed on what is going to be required that requires the action of this House to move forward. That is what I said. So, let us leave it like that and the minister will come back to this House, let us know what is happening, what the gaps are and what this House can do to facilitate the process of the intervention in Karamoja.

Hon. Members, in the Public Gallery, this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers from Kidawalime Preparatory School in Namungoona. They are represented by hon. Moses Kasibante and hon. Nabilah Ssempala. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them.

We also have pupils and teachers from Holy Cross Lake View Secondary School; they are represented by hon. Moses Balyeku and hon. Agnes Nabirye, Jinja Municipality. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them.

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INVESTMENT (Mr Gabriel Ajedra):Mr Speaker, this matter was discussed in Cabinet and it requires a lot of consultations. As you know, that was already included in the budget proposals which are already here in Parliament but we shall give a comprehensive report on Tuesday. This will be on the issue of new taxes in the tourism sector. There was an article in the papers, I gave a copy of that report to the director of economic affairs and asked him to look at that matter again. So we are awaiting the comprehensive report from the technical officers in the ministry. 

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DISABILITY AND THE ELDERLY(Mr Suleiman Madada):Mr Speaker and hon. Members, during the proceedings of Parliament on Tuesday 2nd July 2013, hon. Winifred Kiiza, Woman MP for Kasese District, raised a matter of national importance regarding what transpired in the Rwenzururu Kingdom on 29th June 2013. 

In the subsequent contribution, the MP for Busongora North demanded that the ministry responsible for cultural institutions should explain to Ugandans the cultural rights of the cultural leaders.

In this presentation of cultural rights by cultural leaders, allow me to provide a definition of culture and cultural rights.

The Uganda National Cultural Policy, 2006 defines culture as the sum total of ways in which a society preserves, identifies, organises, sustains and expresses itself. Cultural rights are defined as rights for everyone whether alone or in community to choose and express one’s identity.

Cultural rights are considered as part and parcel of human rights. The cultural rights of these leaders are enshrined in the Constitution of Uganda, Article 37, which states that “Every person has a right as applicable to belong to, enjoy, practice, profess, maintain and promote any culture, cultural institution, language, tradition, creed or religion in a community with others.”

Article 246 of the constitution which is on the institution of traditional and cultural leaders spells out the traditional cultural leaders, what should be their roles, responsibilities as well as their privileges and benefits.

Uganda has 65 indigenous communities as stipulated in Schedule 3 of the Constitution of Uganda. Cultural and traditional leaders are spread all over the country and among these communities, currently Government supports 13 cultural institutions including Acholi, Alur, Buganda, Bunyoro Kitara, Bululi, Busoga, Masaba, Obusingabwa Rwenzururu, bwa KamuswagabwaKooki, Lango, Teso, Chengi Adola and Tooro.

In the recent past, conflicts have arisen from the exercise of cultural rights by cultural leaders which have led to the involvement of Police to keep law and order.

On 29 June 2013, as I mentioned earlier, the Omusinga of Rwenzururu, Charles Wesley Mumbere, was stopped from presiding over a cultural ceremony in Bundibugyo because the Bamba had earlier requested for time to first install their king before they welcome the Omusinga. Therefore, Government had to come in to balance the two arguments and cool the situation explained by my colleague, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, on the Floor of this House.

Such tensions are not unique to Rwenzururu. They exist in other traditional and cultural institutions including Buganda Kingdom among the Baganda, Banyara and Baluli. Among the Atengi-Adola, sometime back, a meeting would not be held in Osukulu Sub-County because it was considered to be within Teso Cultural union despite the fact that it is in Tororo.

Further, the Bamasaba of Bududaare requesting to be recognised as a kingdom of Babukusu which amounts to breaking away from the traditional cultural institution of Inzuya Bamasaba. Similar tensions are brewing among the Bagungu and Banyoro.

I would like to inform this august House that the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda under the national objectives and directive principles of state, cultural objective XXIV stipulates that cultural and customary values which are consistent with the fundamental rights and freedoms, human dignity, democracy and with the constitution might be developed and incorporated in aspects of Ugandan life.

However, Article 43 of the Constitution puts a general limitation on the fundamental and other human rights and freedoms.

It specifically states that in the enjoyment of rights and freedoms prescribed in this chapter, no person shall prejudice the fundamental or other human rights and freedoms of others or public interest.

Article 246(d) of the constitution stipulates that no person shall be compelled to pay allegiance or contribute to the cost of maintaining a traditional or a cultural leader.

Further, Article 246(2) of the Constitution states that in any community where the issue of traditional or cultural leaders has not been resolved, the issue shall be resolved by the community concerned using a method prescribed by Parliament.

The Institution of Traditional Leaders Act, 2011 which the Eighth Parliament enacted in section 16(1) of this Act, guides that any conflict or dispute with the traditional cultural institution or within the community shall be handled by a council of elders or clan leaders or a representative chosen and approved by the community in accordance with the traditions, customs, norms of conflict resolutions pertaining to that community.

Further, in Section 16(2), the Act guides that where the community fails to resolve the conflict or dispute in accordance with sub-section (1), the matter shall be referred to court. The Act in section 16(3) further guides that conflicts or disputes are limited to;

    a) Whether or not a community should have a traditional or cultural leader.
    b) Who should be the traditional or cultural leader of the community or area of Uganda?
    c) Whether or not proper procedure for installation of traditional or cultural leaders has been followed.

Mr Speaker, it is clear that the conflict and disputes of traditional cultural institutions threaten the security of Ugandans and can no longer be ignored as an issue to be dealt with by traditional cultural institutions alone. 

Therefore, I call upon colleagues to educate the communities about the Institution of Traditional and Cultural Leaders Act, 2012 which will help communities to understand the procedures of resolving this conflict.  

I would like to assure this august House that Government shall encourage courts of law to fast track the handling of such cases that have been brought before it. My ministry is in the process of submitting amendments to the law to cover any legal gaps for the smooth operationalisation of Article 246 of the Constitution. I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. We will apply the same time frame and the same limitation to the subject. I will have the hon. Members for Busiro, Busongora North and South, Kasese Municipality and Member for Bungokho. Let us start like that and we see. Two minutes, please.

3.44
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for making an attempt to make a presentation on this important subject.  

This is not the first time we are witnessing a situation of this kind in this country. And the ministry or I can say the Government generally has always surprised me by siding with the wrong doers. I say this because there are rights of both majority and minorities in this country, and these rights are covered within the four corners of Article 246 which the minister has alluded to. No person is forced to pay allegiance but does that stop those who pay allegiance from converging and assembling to exercise a right within this Constitution?

The duty of Government is simply one; to protect those who are exercising rights legitimately. As simple as that. If there is anyone threatening to harm and hurt, that should be your target. Why would you stop me from exercising a right simply because somebody with criminal dispositions has threatened to hurt me? That is number one.

I am also surprised that the minister has amended the schedule to this Constitution rather by infection and I do not want to say “criminally”. The Third Schedule to this Constitution is clear on the composition of the communities that are referred to. 

By decent, I come from Kooki County, a county of Buganda. Some one can say it is Tanzania etcetera but it is in Buganda for the information of those who want to know. 

Mr Speaker, the communities that are allegedly supported by the government in the manner that the minister puts it, can only be those ones listed in the schedule. The Bakooki who are only a county in Buganda are not mentioned. Where does the Government get the money –(Member timed out_)

HON. MEMBERS: More time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, we agreed. Member for Busongora?

3.47
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we were raising this matter, we had serious issues that we wanted the minister to explain and you can see from even the document that the minister presented, it is a mere gamble. 

When you compare what hon. Janet Kataha has presented, the author is clearly named: “Statement by Hon. Janet K. Museveni, Minister for Karamoja Affairs, to the Parliament of Uganda” and she is giving the status of food security in Karamoja. This is a legitimate statement which a minister should really present and can be defended. But when you look at the document which the Minister for Gender has presented, it is very illegitimate because it has no author and so it means that even whatever is presented here is null and void and cannot be supported by him or Government because it is not owned by anybody. 

So, Mr Speaker, when we presented our views to Parliament that there is a problem in the Rwenzururu Kingdom, there is a problem in the Rwenzori area, we were very clear. First, I demanded that the Minister for Gender explains to Parliament and the entire country including the Rwenzururu Kingdom what the two statements that have been propelled by Government mean in the discussions, which Government has had between the Rwenzururu Kingdom and Government. One, the Government was talking about cultural space but when I scanned through this document, I have not seen his explanation of what Government purported to be cultural space.

Two, Government was propelling the issue of centre of gravity. I have gone through this document I do not see the explanation of Government propelled centre of gravity. 

So, I am at cross roads because the minister is not answering what we asked him to do. Secondly, when you look at his second page –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, we agreed on two minutes. There are other Members going to speak on the same subject. Please, we have agreed on two minutes. The member for Kasese Municipality?

3.50
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to appreciate what the Minister for Gender has put to us and this came from a Member of Parliament from Kasese seeking an explanation as to why the King of the Bakonjo at several occasions has wanted to visit his subjects and is always blocked.

Mr Speaker, this is not the first time it happened on the 29th. The month before, it had also happened - that the king on invitation by his own subjects in Kasenyi, wanted to go there and he was blocked.

I am a leader in Kasese District and my colleagues are also leaders. We have always been caught unaware by instruments of the defence and security which I recall under Gen. Kayihura. He comes to Kasese with his forces and he asks us to put our heads into this issue. I want to appreciate that we are so many tribes in Kasese and the Rwenzori region but as hon. Sseggona put it, every person and also the minister has put it clearly here, that you should not infringe on the other person’s rights. 

I have a question to the minister. When the minister put it that he had seen animosity almost happening in Bundibugyo, but there are subjects of this king in Bundibugyo and then Police went ahead and stopped this. Didn’t the Police infringe –[Mr Sseggona: “Information.”]– I will take it. (Laugher)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you my colleague for giving way. I just want to give you this information that this Government is responsible for the creation of these pseudo kingdoms. In Buganda, they created a group called Bunyala kingdom. They created another one called Baluli kingdom. They are creating more and just prepare yourself –(Interjections) - in Buganda, I heard another one called the Bamoli purportedly belonging to the Ngabi clan. The government is responsible and is actually fermenting rebellion in these kingdoms in order to weaken them and rule us as a divided community. That is the information you need to take.

MR MBAHIMBA: Mr Speaker, I want you to understand the issue of Kasese District – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we spent the little time that we have on those matters. Please, let us deal with this.

3.52
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for this statement but this statement was all about the government and the Rwenzururu Kingdom on the exercise of a cultural right. Article 37 of the Constitution is very clear about the cultural rights and similar rights. Article 246 of the Constitution is also very clear on the institution of traditional and cultural leaders and the biggest problem surrounding all these cultural institutions’ conflicts are the political leaders. The political leaders have gone ahead to intervene or engage themselves in the cultural affairs and this has created a very big problem and the politicians are using it as a campaign tool to get a political platform.

The ministry should accept this defeat that they really have failed to organize the cultural institutions – (Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the issues of kingdoms especially in our region – the Rwenzori - are very complicated and complex in nature that even mere debate here in the House cannot find a solution –(Interjections)– I am saying debate in the House on this matter cannot conclude and find a solution unless Government is prepared first of all to stop the influx of emergence of new kingdoms because this is what is causing the problems. Every society that feels marginalized feels entitled to create a kingdom and this creation of kingdoms, for instance, the Bamba and the Babwisi in Bundibugyo want to have their own kingdom but also amongst the Bamba and the Babwisi, the Babwisi also feel marginalized. So, we really would like Government to tell us how far these kingdoms are going to be, like districts – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you debating or giving information?

MR RUHUNDA: I am giving information because the districts have been too many and unsustainable and we are now talking of kingdoms, and yet we are talking about an ideological disorientation –(Interjection)- So, this is the problem. The problem is Government. (Laughter)

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The existence of cultural institutions arises out of the traditions and cultures of given people and so does the role of setting up and recognising the existence of those institutions, clearly to put it as such. Is it in order for the hon. Member from Fort Portal to castigate Government and actually warn it against creation of these institutions when actually these creations are as a result of the traditions and cultures of people who so demand to be recognised as such? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the restoration of cultural institutions was brought by this Government. It was put in the Constitution and the Constitution did not list any cultural institutions nor did it put the schedule that these are the recognised cultural institutions. It is an expression of desires of those people as they so please. There is no limitation in the Constitution unless we are going to put a limitation in the Constitution that it is only the following that will be recognised. Is there a schedule of cultural institutions in the Constitution? [Hon. Members: “Yes”]No, I am talking about cultural institutions and not tribes – for example, the Kingdom of Buganda and whether there is schedule for them. There is none in the Constitution. 

In the reading of the Constitution, I have not found where they have said that these are the recognised cultural institutions. So, please, let us keep within the ambit of the Constitution. Honourable member, please wind up; there are Members who need to contribute. Please, can we just debate this matter? 

MR KAFUDA: In fact, the guidance I can give to the honourable minister about these cultural conflicts is that first of all, there were some cultural institutions, which were formed without boundaries like the Rwenzururu Kingdom. It has got no boundaries –(Interruption) 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, it is very painful when hon. Kafuda from Busongora South actually alludes and insinuates wrongly that the Kingdom of the Rwenzururu has no boundaries and yet, we have one of the senior government officials by the names Rt Hon. Kajura who led the commission that actually went to Kasese and Bundibugyo to the effect that the results and findings of that commission concluded and recommended to this Parliament that the kingdom has boundaries. Is the hon. Member, therefore, in order to confuse Parliament and the entire country that the Businga Bwa Rwenzururu has no boundaries?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I draw some wisdom from one Acholi cultural leader who said kings do not preside over land, they preside over people. So, wherever the people are, the king is. It is not geographical. You cannot say the territory of the Kabaka of Buganda ends here because he has Baganda in London and Baganda everywhere. So, wherever they are, the King of Buganda presides over them. (Applause) Is that not true? Okay, I was simply drawing my knowledge from my cultural leader.

4.03
THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF GENERAL DUTIES/OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Mr Speaker, I had hesitated to make a point on this issue but I think with your contribution, I feel there ought to be a comment on this. Geography and social boundaries can be conterminous or separate; you can have a culture which cuts across, particularly when you focus on language. For example, the Bantu-speaking group is big and has hardly any boundary. But when you talk of a kingdom, you are talking of loyalty. The people who are loyal to a king can be defined in given territories. Now when they are out of that territory, they are visitors elsewhere. But the king of Buganda, for example, cannot go to America and claim to be a king there just because Baganda live there. (Interjections) Whether there is “order” or no “order”, if you want to know you can know but if you want order, you can have it and continue with your ignorance. (Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I have always respected Prof. Kabwegyere but this afternoon, he has disappointed me. Mr Speaker, you have properly guided this House that a king does exist wherever he has people who are loyal to him. And by Prof. Kabwegyere’s contribution, it appears that he is overruling the Speaker of this House. Is Prof. Kabwegyere, who represents no constituency in this House – (Laughter) - and therefore, not speaking for and on behalf of anyone outside this Parliament, in order to hijack the powers vested on your honourable Chair and overrule you?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: “Attempts to overrule” because he cannot. What I am saying is that, this discussion should be harmonious because if you have Baganda in London, certainly their loyalty is not to Queen Elizabeth. (Applause) That is just common-sense; their loyalty will still be towards the King of Buganda. At least, that is what my cultural leader said in the long past – the Acholi leader – that you do not preside over land; you preside over people.

4.07
MR YAHAYA GUDOI (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to react to the minister’s paragraph on page 3. The minister has admitted that there are conflicts and disrespect among our cultural leaders, and you have also requested us to educate our voters. My question is: Are you going to provide us with facilitation so that we move around educating them? (Laughter)

Secondly, on the last page, you have stated that you are bringing up amendments to back up the legal framework. Do you think in those amendments, you are bringing up a law that will allow a district like Mbale or Kasese to have more than one cultural leader? Why am I saying this? Normally, Government hurries to recognise these cultural leaders. It would have been prudent that before Government recognises a cultural leader, let it do its best to ensure that the cultural leader is accepted by all the people within the district. Now, when you go to some of the districts which I am not going to mention, you will find a cultural leader who is supported by few people while the majority do not. And in so making, you will find that the cultural leader does not enjoy the freedom of movement – [Mr Mbahimba: “Information”] - Yes, I will take it.

MR MBAHIMBA: Mr Speaker, the information I am giving is stemming from what the Member has just presented about conflicts that exist and how we can control them. The conflicts have existed, as Members have alluded, because of politics and other personal interests. For the case, Mr Speaker, you are aware, it is a strategic place with minerals and water; it is a gateway to the West and some individuals from politically far off areas have vested interests in that area. They have gone ahead to get small tribes that exist in Kasese and persuaded them to come up with a different identity and yet we always lived in harmony from time immemorial. The information I want to pass on is that, politically and strategically, the conflicts in these kingdoms arise from individual and political interests plus the fact that they are in strategic areas. Therefore, Government needs to be very conscious of such individuals.

MR GUDOI: In conclusion –(Interjection)– I have no time, I would have –(Member timed out_) (Laughter)

4.12
MR MARTIN BAHINDUKA (NRM, Ntoroko County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. I happen to be between Bundibugyo and Kasese districts. Therefore, I represent the Bakonjo, the Batooro and Bakiga. For example, in Ntoroko where I have the Bakonjo, the Omusinga will come and greet them and go without any problem. The Toro King will equally come and visit his people and go without any problem. What is the problem in Bundibugyo? Why is the conflict there? 

I am aware that the Omusinga was going to visit a county dominated by the Bakonjo – that is Bugemera County – not where the Bamba are. So, I find it confusing. Why would he be stopped from going and meeting the Bakonjo when he is not going to interfere with the Bamba?

As leaders, it is upon us to educate others about the Constitution and the rights of these cultural leaders but we have to take a stand also. What do I tell my people? I have to tell them what the Constitution says, which is that everyone has a right to their cultural affiliations, movement and all that.

So, I think it is most important that we stand with what the Constitution stipulates instead of letting people hit themselves and cause more confusion. In Ntoroko, we have no problem whatsoever with all these kingdoms coming so what is the problem in Bundibugyo? I think that is what we should look at. I think it is politics and a few other issues. Thank you.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have had more than 30 minutes on this subject. We had said 15 minutes but for clarity’s sake, my ruling was to the effect that based on my experience from my cultural leader, a king does not preside over land but over people. So wherever the people are, that is his area of operation. However, if there are Baganda in London, it does not give the King of Buganda the territory of London as Buganda Kingdom. It is only the subjects that he is concerned with. That should be clear. That is what I was saying. 

4.15
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You posed a question as to whether some kingdoms were listed in the Constitution and others were not but the Constitution properly guides us on this matter. Article 246(5) of the Constitution provides that those cultural institutions, which were in existence before the coming into force of this Constitution would be recognised. Article 246(2) of the Constitution provides a channel through which those who would wish to secede to create new kingdoms or to resolve cultural matters would go through in order to separate from others and that would be by the guidance of an Act of Parliament.

Indeed, as the Minister for People with Disabilities has this afternoon indicated, Section 16(6) of the Traditional Leaders Act provided meaning that is, a council of elders sitting and resolving the matter. It is nowhere on record that a council of elders has ever sat in Rwenzururu or in Buganda for that matter to create another kingdom. I wonder how the Government of Uganda goes ahead to recognise and even pay people, most of them –(Interruption)

MR MADADA: I would first of all like to quote the law that provides for the institution of cultural leaders. Under the Institution of Traditional and Cultural Leaders Act, 2011, Section 4(1) states: “A traditional or cultural leader may be instituted in the following ways: (a) In accordance with the culture, customs and traditions of the people to whom it applies. Or (b) in accordance with the wishes and aspirations of the people to whom it applies through a resolution of not less than two-thirds of members of the district local councils and sub county local government councils respectively in that area.”

The hon. Member was saying, is there anywhere that elders have sat in Kasese or elsewhere for the government to put in place a leader? In this law, it is not provided for that the leaders are supposed to sit. It is the local government council. Therefore, is she in order to mislead this House by misquoting the law that properly provides for how to institute a leader by saying that it is by a council of elders, which is not correct in the law? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member said that elders did not sit. From the law, you are now saying that the people who should have sat should have been the council. The question is, did they sit? If they sat then her point would not arise. If they did not sit then even if she was mistaken and called them “elders” when they were actually supposed to be “councillors” the point would still be well played.

MR MADADA: Mr Speaker, in terms of Rwenzururu and Bamba, the institution of Bamba has not been officially recognised. What is happening is, at that time there were arguments that the Bamba were in the process of forming an institution of their own and this conflict resulted into tension, which tension - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I was about to rule but I needed the minister to explain before I did. Hon. Minister -

MR MADADA: No, they have not sat and that is the reason –(Interjections)– Excuse me, I am explaining.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, if they have not sat, then the point being raised by the honourable member that there was no sitting of such people to take such decisions was actually factual. So, she is not out of order.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling and for the information from Members. I would like to add that on page 3 of the statement, which has been brought to this House by honourable minister, Madada, he said in paragraph 2, “The Institution of Traditional and Cultural Leaders Act, 2011, which the Eighth Parliament enacted guides in Section 16(1) of the Act that any conflict or dispute within the traditional or cultural institution or within the community shall be handled by a council of elders or clan leaders or a representative body chosen and approved by the community in accordance with the traditions, customs and norms of the dispute or conflict resolution pertaining to that community.”

I feel so sad that a minister is now raising a point of order against something he has brought to this Parliament and for that reason, I want to propose that this statement, which is tainted with a number of unconstitutional assertions should be thrown out by this Parliament and also expunged from our Hansard; and that Parliament requests the substantive minister to bring a proper statement. 

Mr Speaker, in September 2009, we had riots in the city resulting from situation like those in Kasese –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have already made a proposal. Let me try to guide before we take a decision on it. If you are making a request that the senior minister should come and speak on the same subject but at the same time expunge that record, what will you rely on to debate what the senior minister will have presented? Are you saying all we have done will not be part of that?

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, a matter of national importance was raised in this House by the Woman MP for Kasese. That matter was properly captured on the Hansard. I want to say that I am making this proposal based on that background. Let the full cabinet minister who is more knowledgeable about this matter and in any case who is not an interested party –(Mr Madada rose_) –  I have information that hon. Suleiman Madada is an interested party –(Interruption)

MR MADADA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member is alleging that I have a certain interest in this matter. Is she in order to make such an allegation without substantiating it? Two, she is talking about ministers, but there is no single day that a Government will run without a minister. When I am here I represent the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. And I took the same oath like that taken by a senior cabinet minister. So, is this member in order, if she is knowledgeable on the functioning of Government, to make such an assertion?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a minister of the government is a minister of Government and this Parliament has no choice as to who should address this House on behalf of the ministry. We don’t have that mandate. 

On the second leg about your personal interest in this subject matter upon which you requested for substantiation, I will not be able to rule unless the Member can substantiate the ground upon which she raised it.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, the minister has just denied part of the statement presented to us by raising a point of order –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the issue is –

MS NAMBOOZE: That is where I am going, Mr Speaker. I live in Mukono and I know that hon. Suleiman Madada was formerly a councillor. He got in touch with the late Mpagi, the father to Capt. Kimeze. Hon. Madada – and I can repeat this even outside this Parliament – is one of the people who are spearheading the separation of the Banyara community from Buganda. He has been at the centre of that conflict. If you conducted a public hearing on this matter, Mr Speaker, people will come with all the evidence you need to pin hon. Madada for cultivating conflicts in Buganda –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the point of order was about whether the hon. Betty Nambooze had substantive reasons about hon. Minister Suleiman Madada having personal interests in the subject matter. 

But the minister objected saying that in the absence of any substantiation, hon. Betty Nambooze should be ruled out of order. I have asked hon. Betty Nambooze to substantiate the grounds for her assertions and she has made statements that I am not able to verify, as Speaker, in terms of their factuality. So, I am unable to rule on that point of order. Please summarise.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I therefore humbly propose that Parliament –

MR TODWONG: Procedure, Mr Speaker. I know the subject of culture and religion, and to some people political parties, are very dear to their hearts. When you read the Third Schedule of the Constitution that I see our colleagues on the other side reading, you realise that it indicates the recognised indigenous communities in Uganda as from 1 February 1926. I have just seen the Bamba as the third on the list. That means by 1926, for those who studied a little history and know a bit of archaeological evidence, would have knowledge that by that time, the Bamba had a well-organised political, social and economic establishment –(Interjections)– I am going to raise my procedural point.

Mr Speaker, if we cared to know, the whole of Africa has basically big races. Just to review the Great Lakes Region, we have the Bantu and the Nilotics; and that some of us could be products of intermarriages and migrations, if you studied history well. We also know that the strong cultural establishment got into place because of wars of conquest and intimidation of the small communities.

Mr Speaker, as the world looks at globalization, in Africa we are still talking about village units and tribes. As leaders, I know it is painful to a few of us, at our level, but is it procedurally right to keep derailing the National Assembly to start to discuss tribal tensions in ethnic groups yet we should be looking at Uganda as a republic? I seek to know whether it is procedurally right for us to keep dwelling on issues of ethnic nature that keep diving our people. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Nwoya County, you certainly raised a very important point. But the matter we are discussing is premised on the Constitution about the expression of rights by a certain category of people recognised by the Constitution. Now that this matter has been brought here, it is within the mandate of this House to debate it or not after all this very House already passed an Act to regulate that sector. So, there is no procedural irregularity in this debate.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, in view of the fact that ministerial statements are supposed to clear some matters; and in view of the fact that this particular ministerial statement has instead caused more reasons for us to seek clarification; considering the central role played by cultural institutions in this country; and the very fact that their existence is as a result of constitutional provisions; fully aware that so many Ugandans do love and cherish their culture and therefore their cultural institutions, I beg to move that Parliament rejects and therefore expunges this statement from our Hansard; and request the government to come up with a statement which will clear all issues so that, Mr Speaker, we do not run into the security problems which were alluded to in this statement. I beg to move, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With due respect to the proposal made by hon. Nambooze, some of us do not have kings and kingdoms - (Interjections) - in our constituencies but we feel what has been submitted by different Members emanating from this report has some substance for reference. I would think it would maybe be declared inadequate but expunging it from the Hansard is very dangerous because wise submissions have been made. I am therefore seeking your guidance whether, for example, we should not require the minister to make another statement but retain this one on the Hansard. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a motion which has been seconded by the Member for Busiro, the Member for Busongora North, the Member for Rubaga South and the Member for Kasese Municipality. Let us see if we can reconcile and come to one issue only because there are two aspects of this motion. The first one is that another statement should be brought to this House on this subject. The other one is that this be expunged. Amendment?

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I pray that the mover of the motion accepts that instead of throwing out the report we refer it to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. Considering that indeed it has been extremely overwhelming - massive brutality, deployment, torture, cruel treatment on both the leaders of cultural institutions and also other leaders as we have seen in recent times; all largely orchestrated by the Police. I would pray that this matter is moved to a committee. Even the Minister for Justice, hon. Otafiire, has been concerned and has raised it on a radio programme on CBS. He was later interviewed and he confirmed the same statements. 

Mr Speaker, this matter is not just a matter of necessarily Kasese or Rwenzururu it also has wider implications especially concerning treatment and trampling on people’s rights, both cultural leaders and political leaders. I would pray that we handle this matter in a committee and get a substantive report before this House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, is it proper that we refer this subject to the committee?

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am going to state the hard facts which are going to help us. I am a Member of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and we are already handling this issue. We sat yesterday for the first time and made the plan for the committee to handle issues. On our timetable, this is issue No.2: “The ethnic conflict in the Rwenzori Region” and in particular this one. We have received a petition and we have talked to a number of people from there and if you bring this issue to us we shall handle it.

Number two, we must not bury our heads in the sand. There will be conflicts relating to traditional institutions. The existing ones before the birth of the Republic of Uganda had conflicts. The ones that came into place and continued when Uganda was in existence and the ones which will be born today and tomorrow will have conflicts. So we must put in place a formula for handling - (Interruption)    

MS BAKO: Thank you very much my brother for giving way. Mr Speaker, in 1993, they reinstated the Buganda Kingdom; that was three years to the 1996 elections. In 1994, Bunyoro Kingdom was reinstated. That was two years to the 1996 elections. In 2009, the Rwenzururu Kingdom came in place. That was exactly two-and-a-half years to the 2011 elections. And when you see the crisis in Busoga Kingdom and you project that to the fact that the Omugabe in western Uganda has been resisted, and he has not been created then you point a finger at one person. Why is there selective creation in some of the regions that formerly had kings? And, therefore, it points at one thing - (Interruption)

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter in the House now is not concerned with Ankole and the Obugabe of Ankole. Is she in order to start talking about the Obugabe?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please conclude.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you for the information. Honourable members, this is our Uganda which we love so dearly. We must put in place a formula to resolve the matter of how new kingdoms can be created. So for me as a Member of Parliament coming from Obongi, much as we do not have kings, we have traditional institutions- we have chiefdoms and there is no such a problem there. But we know that a problem in Kasese is a problem in Uganda and, therefore, it affects people of Obongi. A problem in Buganda is a problem in Uganda and it affects people in Lango. We must not lock out those who are already called Ugandans from resolving issues or making contributions. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the proposal that has come from the committee. Is the Minister for Internal Affairs saying something on this matter? 

4.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I have no problem with this issue being referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. But to bring in the Police, the Police under the Police Act their job is to maintain law and order. The issue at hand is to do with the rights of kings and their political space.

MR SSEMUJU: Mr Speaker, a motion has been moved that this matter be referred to the committee for further investigation for Parliament to come to an amicable solution. The minister responsible for Police is jumping the gun actually to begin determining what should happen in the committee, who should be invited and pleading that we should not invite the Police. Is he in order, therefore, to stop Parliament from pronouncing itself on a matter of national importance and for him to jump the gun and begin determining who should appear before the committee?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, my recollection of what the minister has said is that he supports this matter being referred to the committee. That is what I recollect, so it is up to the committee to choose who it will listen to and who it will not listen to. It was not up to us to determine from here who they should invite. 

I suppose now that the original motion has been withdrawn so now the motion is that whatever we are discussing should be referred to the committee so that they can process, have consultations with the ministries, then they can come and advise Parliament on how to harmonise this issue of cultural leaders.

4.45
GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Mr Speaker, this issue is already before the committee as the Members informed us, but I want to differ from what hon. Karuhanga has moved. His proposal is bringing together the issues of culture and politics. I want to differ from that, we should only refer to the committee the issue of cultural matters. If we are to refer to the issue of politics that should also be a different motion not this motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the debate we are conducting is on the ministerial statement of the Minister of Gender on the exercise of cultural rights by cultural leaders. It is the committee to look at whatever is necessary to resolve this particular issue. The committee is already handling similar matters but they say they can also handle this alongside the other one.

But if we are to refer, this would be the matter to be referred because this is the matter we are debating on now. Can I put the question that this matter be referred to the committee?

(Question put and agreed to.)

On the consensus of the House, I now refer this matter on the exercise of cultural rights by cultural leaders to the committee responsible for this matter so that they can handle expeditiously, consult with the necessary sectors and come back to the House on this particular matter. Is it the committee on gender? It should be a joint committee: that of Gender and that of Internal Affairs so that they can resolve this matter properly and come back to the House on this. It is so ordered.

4.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY (Mr Peter Lokeris): Mr Speaker, yesterday, I was requested by Parliament to make a statement on destruction and the looting of Government properties in Entebbe. I wish, therefore, to make the following statement. 

I was informed that on Sunday, the 7 July 2013, a group of casual labourers who were alleged to be working at Imperial Golf View Hotel located along Lugard avenue, Entebbe trespassed and vandalised the building of the Auditor-General and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. They also attempted to break into the fence of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, Earthquake Monitoring Institution located at Hill Road Plot 1A in Entebbe Municipality.

The extent of destruction at the building belonging to the Auditor-General and Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is reflected in today’s The New Vision page 4, including the removing of iron sheets from roofs, windows and demolition of walls.
In addition, computers and their accessories and cabinets containing various documents were looted. However, there was no serious destruction at the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development save for the gate and the door of a staff uniport. This is because the occupier of the uniport shouted and police came and restrained the looters.

In the wake of destruction, my ministry has informed all relevant stakeholders including the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development who personally visited the site and has since requested the Chairman Uganda Land Commission and the Commissioner Land Registration to urgently investigate the circumstances under which this allocation was made and further take corrective or remedial action. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is on the request of Parliament and I will allow a debate in the spirit of what we did earlier. I will have Member for Lwemiyaga, Jinja Municipality East, Member for Kanungu East and Member for Ntungamo Municipality.

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have a group of women market vendors from St Balikuddembe Market represented in Parliament by hon. Muhammad Nsereko and hon. Nabilah Ssempala. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House but particularly, there is a matter of interest for them and I think they have been coming here for the last three days to see whether that matter could be resolved. That is why I was saying we could go in a speedy way. The matter is on the Order Paper today but at our speed, we may not be able to handle it today because there is a Bill coming and we had said today is Population Day and we might need to recognise that day in a big way.

Also in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a group of elders from Kaliro District represented in Parliament by hon. Flavia Nabugere. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are very welcome.

4.52
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the minister for the two-paged statement but –(Interruption)

MR SSEBAGALA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Having said that we are not going to be in position to handle St Balikuddembe issue and yet these people have been coming here for the last four days, I would advise and request that we should really inform them about the date they are coming back so that they can go back and do other business.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, whatever business is standing on the Order Paper will be adjourned to the next sitting of Parliament.  

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, this was a Government property. We are having Government land and there are Government offices on this structure that was vandalised.

How can casual labourers as they say, from the adjacent Imperial Golf View Hotel come and break into the premises of the Auditor-General’s Office, of the Ministry of Agriculture and of all places in Entebbe, which is one of the most secured places in this country? And it is only when those in the uniport - and really even for that structure, they uprooted the gate of the Ministry of Energy’s structure; they carried away the sign post and they were even moving on that Earth Quake Centre only that Police came in and convinced them to walk away with their loot –(Interjections)– because they brought in lorries, they loaded computers, they loaded filing cabinets and loaded all things that could be loaded and took them away.  

Mr Speaker, this is a Government office. These are Government offices set up as early as 1919 and from today’s papers, the lease for Government expired in May and Government never bothered to renew the lease. After 99 years, they normally expire but within a month, a title has been processed in the name of a developer and without any due process, he has carried out the eviction. Even with Government, we now have the instructions by the President - the President instructed that any eviction to take place must have a certificate and in this matter, what happened? But what is on the ground is that there is insider’s dealing for all these long term leases of 99 years that expire.  

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you honourable colleague for giving way. Actually, the information that I want to give hon. Ssekikubo is that as a legal practitioner I know that you cannot under the law evict Government. That is number one. Number two, nobody can evict another person without an order of court. Yesterday, I did ask this question to the minister, and of course now he is sending us to another ministry, whether there is a court order and his answer was that there is no court order.  

Number three, even with a court order, you cannot carry out an eviction without a sanction by the Police right from police headquarters.  

Finally, I rose up to inform hon. Ssekikubo that the government should be telling us where this property was and how looters would come with a lorry -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I thought you had the information. (Laughter)

MR SSEGGONA: Oh, I thought he needed more. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Medard Sseggona for the information. But the fact is that, it is only the ministers for Minerals and Lands, as I read, who have raised a complaint. The parent ministries: Ministry of Agriculture and the Auditor-General have kept quiet and this is a sign that there is insider dealing in this transaction because how could it have been vandalised and they do not even complain to the Police? It has not only happened in Entebbe but it has happened in Mbarara and Kabale - there is a hunt for all Government property. This Parliament must wake up. I am telling you that they are even closely watching the title for this Parliament –(Laughter)– should it at any point expire, even this Parliament is going. (Laughter)

For this particular one, the title expired in May - one month ago and they had already moved and acquired a title and shameless of all, how do you evict Government? How do you attach Government property? But in this case, they did not even evict but looted and the rest was vandalised. Computers were thrown out and everything of this country was lost. 

Mr Speaker, this Parliament must demand a reversal of this and whoever was involved - the Police Could not only have escorted or helped. They should have arrested. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you so much. Mr Speaker, I have looked through the minister’s statement and hearing what hon. Ssekikubo is saying - which are the same issues he raised yesterday, I was seeking procedural guidance that if this Parliament is to be of help to the Minister for Minerals who also seems to be complaining alongside Ssekikubo, it would be prudent through your guidance whether it should not be the Minister for Lands and the Minister for Internal Affairs to come and present a comprehensive statement to this House because the way I see, honourable minister Peter Lokeris, is also a plaintiff. He is also crying louder than hon. Ssekikubo.

So, we could save our time because this statement does not have substance and with your guidance probably next week, the Minister for Internal Affairs and the Minister for Lands, hon. Migereko, who was very resilient on the issue of ministers not attending Parliament - this would be a very good opportunity – (Interjections) - hon. Nantaba is here and she has been very active on land matters. This would be a very good opportunity for them to come and tell us.

So, Mr Speaker, shouldn’t we throw this issue to the docket of Ministry of Lands and Ministry of Internal Affairs as opposed to Ministry of Energy and Minerals Development so that we save our time and next week we have meaningful discussion?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is a proposal because the subject now is beginning to move away from who was occupying the premises and about leases that have elapsed, and subsequent transfer of the properties to other persons other than the holding ministries and departments. Would it not be proper that the Minister for Lands should brief us on this subject properly, and then we will see if we will need any further inquiry into this subject? 

Hon. Minister for Lands, you might need to advise us properly on this subject. 

MR SSEGGONA: As the minister comes in, Mr Speaker, in the mean time –

MR MIGEREKO: But I am already here.

MR SSEGGONA: The Speaker allowed me. I was allowed to seek this guidance. 

MR MIGEREKO: I did not know that he knows the Minister for Lands.

MR SSEGGONA: The hon. Migereko I have known for the last 20 years would definitely give way and I thank him. Mr Speaker, as the minister comes in to brief us, is it not proper in order to save the remaining property of Government, to request the Minister of State for Lands, hon. Erios Nantaba, to reinstate Government in the building in the meantime? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, the Minister for Lands. (Laughter) Guidance? (Laughter) Order, members!

MR MULIMBA: Mr Speaker, before you move in the direction proposed by hon. Odonga Otto –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members! 

MR MULIMBA: Mr Speaker, before you move in the direction as proposed by hon. Odonga Otto, there is a lot of substance in this document as raised by hon. Lokeris, although it cannot really help us deal with the matter at hand; so, I want to be guided. 

One, it is alleged here that a group of casual labourers vandalized and took off with property of Government. This is not a mere statement; it presupposes two things. It presupposes that there is laxity in the security in this country, particularly in the Police –(Interjections)– Yes, very strongly. I know the Police have always been on high alert in all cases; how come in this particular matter, a group of casual labourers walked into a place and vandalised property. I watched this footage on television and it was something systematic. I really do not want to believe that it was a group of disorganised – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, let us be orderly. If you heard the statement of the minister, he said the Ministry of Energy was saved because the occupier of a uniport shouted and the Police came and restrained the looters. That is what happened. I think it is not that the Police did not intervene but it is the Police who stopped the further looting of the property. That is what it is. I just want to give this information. 

MR MULIMBA: I appreciate, Mr Speaker, but all of us watched television yesterday. I watched this footage as well. It was nothing to do with restraining, because what I saw was that somewhere – (Interruption) 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, a while ago, hon. Odonga Otto –(Interjection)– I am in better position to pronounce that name, better than you who comes far away from the centre.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you talking about the Speaker? 

MR WADRI: No, no –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am talking in regard to the people who will read the Hansard.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, a while ago, the honourable Member for Aruu County had sort of brought us closer to the end of this debate. He had proposed that the Minister for Internal Affairs and the Minister for Lands show interest and take up this matter. The honourable Minister for Lands had even moved closer to the microphone for us to hear his side of the story as to how they will handle this matter. Is it procedurally right for us to continue debating when we had actually already narrowed down the area on which we want to reach consensus? I seek your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have the Floor.

5.06
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a very unfortunate development because Government land is being grabbed by certain individuals. 

This matter was brought to my attention on Tuesday. I was at our land office in Entebbe and I immediately moved to the Geological Survey and Mines Centre and moved to the site with the commissioner. I saw the destruction and the vandalism which had taken place on the property. I immediately got back to my office and directed that we establish how this land was allocated to individuals because it is supposed to be Government land housing Government offices. It is therefore irregular for this land to have been allocated to any individual groups. 

I have directed that investigations take place. I have directed that the title be immediately recalled, and there is a letter from the Registrar of Titles here –(Applause)– recalling this title with notice for cancellation.

I have also found out that quite a number of properties in this area have been wrongly allocated by the Wakiso District Land Board. I will be meeting, most likely tomorrow, the Wakiso District Land Board together with the registrars and I should be in a position to furnish this House with a comprehensive report on this matter on Tuesday. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us have this matter debated properly when the minister comes on Tuesday. He has issued out those instructions. The property has been destroyed so the issue of possession does not arise. Please, let us deal with the next item.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON APPOINTMENT OF ACCOUNTING OFFICERS ARISING FROM THE COMPLAINT BY PARLIAMENT

5.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Dr Gabriel Ajedra): Mr Speaker and colleagues, as you are very much aware, this particular issue has a number of stakeholders which include the Ministry of Public Service, the Ministry of Finance and we are also trying to get a legal opinion from the Solicitor-General. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I wish to report that I will be able to give a statement on Tuesday. I have directed the technical team from the ministry as well as from the Ministry of Public Service and from the Solicitor-General to sit down so that we can bring a comprehensive statement to this House. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is about the three accounting officers and a schedule which should accompany some documents. Why should we come back to this matter as Parliament time in, time out? Three accounting officers! 

They gave you the example of how the former Clerk, Mr Tandekwire, who was the accounting officer of this Parliament, being the Clerk to Parliament when the financial year closed and it was towards his retirement, declined to be appointed accounting officer and yet he remained the Permanent Secretary of this institution. The deputy became the accounting officer. What is so legal about this that requires the Solicitor-General? You are making this thing complicated for nothing.

DR AJEDRA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury appoints accounting officers, he has to consult with the Ministry of Public Service first to look for individuals who are competent and worthy to be appointed as accounting officers. That is the reason why we have to consult with the Ministry of Public Service to give us recommendations of individuals whom we can consider for appointment. Therefore, Mr Speaker, it is the Ministry of Public Service –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank hon. Ajedra for accepting to give clarification to this House on the matter that I am going to raise. 

Yesterday, I received a copy of a letter signed by Dr Kagoda, the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Internal Affairs. In this letter, he went ahead and appointed two undersecretaries - one as the accounting officer of the Police and the other is the accounting officer for the Prisons Services. The clarification I want to find out from you is whether since that day when Parliament moved that the three named Permanent Secretaries - that is, Mr Pius Bigirimana in the gender ministry; Dr Kagoda in the internal affairs ministry and Dr Asuman Lukwago in the health ministry – cease to exercise their duties as accounting officers –(Interjection)– No, they can continue as PSs but without exercising the duties of accounting officers. 

In this particular letter that I have referred to – if given time, I can even go to my office and bring it here and lay it on the Table – he has done so in his capacity as the accounting officer. Under the law, he has the right and powers to designate other accounting officers as has been the tradition in those two sectors of the Police and the Prisons. The question, therefore, that I am asking you is: As we talk now, who are the people responsible for those three votes? Who can I, as chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee, now summon to come and explain matters of financial impropriety? 

MR AJEDRA: Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Wadri for the information and clarification. As I earlier said, the appointment of substantive accounting officers in various ministries is based on the Ministry of Public Service recommendations. As a ministry, we have to consult the Ministry of Public Service to see who is suitable for appointment as a substantive accounting officer. 

We know that the permanent secretaries are, in terms of the Constitution, the accounting officers and they have that prerogative to delegate individuals who are going to be accounting officers in their respective ministries, agencies and departments. That is the reason why I said that we are consulting with the Ministry of Public Service to come up with individuals who we think can be appointed as accounting officers in those three ministries.

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINSTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof Tarsis Kabwegyere): Mr Speaker, we talk of rights, we talk of fairness and of justice, more so when we are in this House. Yes, a point was raised in this House questioning the integrity of these three senior civil servants. I believe, and I think would want to move the House to believe, that it cannot just be a simple affair that can be accomplished within two or three days or one week, particularly when the judicial officers like the Attorney-General - we have not seen him here - and others who give concrete advice on these matters have not been around with us because of other duties.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable  minister, let us help each other here. Article 164 (1) of the Constitution says: “The Permanent Secretary or the accounting officer in charge of a Ministry or department shall be accountable to Parliament for the funds in that Ministry or department.”

This provision recognises a Permanent Secretary, as well as an accounting officer other than the Permanent Secretary, existing in a ministry. So, this issue of the Attorney-General, how does it arise? Who is the current accounting officer in the Ministry of Energy? What about in the Ministry of Finance? Please, help the House.

MR AJEDRA: Mr Speaker, in the Ministry of Finance we have Betty as the accounting officer while Mr Muhakanizi is the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury. We are not saying that we cannot have other individuals as accounting officers in those three ministries. What we are saying is that we are having consultations with the Ministry of Public Service for individuals who we believe are of high moral character so that the same Parliament does not come back and say, “You appointed the wrong individuals.” 

Mr Speaker, as indicated before, on Tuesday we will be able to give the names of the individuals who are going to serve as accounting officers.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister has alluded to the fact that they are taking their time to avoid getting wrong people to be accounting officers. He seems to allude to the fact that Government is full of bad people who are in charge of the taxpayers’ money. Is he in order to proceed as though the taxpayers’ money is not at risk with those wrong officers in Government and yet the Parliament’s intention is to facilitate Government’s operations? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this was an undertaking from the Ministry of Finance to this House to come back and clarify on these issues. This is like the third time you are coming back to clarify that you have not yet clarified. (Laughter) It is not helping us. 

Is the Minister in charge of the Ministry of Public Service making a statement on this matter? The Minister said that they are consulting with the Minister of Public Service; that is why I was asking the Minister of Public Service to respond.

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Speaker, we are aware that this House follows the Commonwealth practice and members of the Cabinet sit on the front bench. Is it in order for the Deputy Leader of Government Business to flee from the front bench and even get a chair to sit behind you? Is he in order to do that when this bench is empty?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am unable to see the person mentioned or where he is seated. I am not able to see. (Laughter) If the member wants to be seen, he had better come where the Speaker can see. (Laughter)

5.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Sezi Mbaguta): Mr Speaker, we shall provide the names of accounting officers for the three ministries next Tuesday. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Ministry of Public Service now promises to bring the names by next Tuesday. The Accountant-General does not come to Parliament, so now you have made the undertaking.

MRS SEZI MBAGUTA: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I do not know whether it is a tactic, but the Minister who made the undertaking last time is not in the House. Now we have another Minister making an undertaking. I am wondering whether next time we will not have another minister coming to make the same undertaking. The issue of procedure I am raising is whether we will not be procedurally right to assign the Leader of Government Business to be the one to report because ministers keep on changing; one makes an undertaking and then hides and then another one appears to make an undertaking.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is a directive from the Speaker that on Tuesday we should have these names, whether dropping from the ceiling or wherever, but we should have them. (Laughter) If we do not have these names then you will see the other side of the Speaker. (Applause)

Honourable members, I had allowed the Member for Luweero to present a petition. Let me just recognise that in the public gallery we have pupils and teachers of Visionary Junior Primary School, Kabwohe, Sheema represented by hon. Elioda Tumwesigye and hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. They are behind there. Please proceed.

5.24
MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (DP, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. This petition is brought under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The humble petitioners are members of the Nubian Advocacy Group comprising of parents, relatives and friends. It is presented on their behalf by me, the Member of Parliament for Luweero District.

The petitioners showeth and state that in the years 1979 and 1984, the Central Bank did order the freezing of all bank accounts held by members of the Nubian Community in Uganda in various banks. A copy of this order is hereby attached. 

Your petitioners’ monies were then invested in Bank of Uganda Treasury Bills and subsequently held in custody in Tropical Bank of Africa. A copy of the correspondence between the Governor Bank of Uganda and the General Manager Tropical Bank is hereby also attached.

The petitioners, however, have faced a number of challenges in attempts to recover their entitlement, which include:

a) 	The President’s directive to pay the outstanding monies, which arose out of the meeting held on 4 October 2005, has since been ignored. A copy of the correspondence is hereby attached.

b) 	The Bank of Uganda has since not heeded to the Constitutional Court ruling delivered on 27 September 2007 decreeing that the petitioners’ money be reimbursed. A copy of the ruling is hereby attached.

c) 	The community, which comprises of over 1400 families, has continued to suffer. Many of the members have since died due to inadequate healthcare and the youth have been unable to access quality education as a result of not receiving their earned monies.

Rt Hon. Speaker, the humble petitioners pray that:
1. 	The Parliament resolves that Government unfreezes all the frozen accounts and the petitioners’ money be released.

2. 	Government values the petitioners’ monies at the going exchange rate of 1979 and pays accordingly.

3. 	Government pays the interest on the said monies from 1979 to date and payment be made in full. Your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

Your humble petitioners have appended their signatures. I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the petition and all the attached documents in the petition.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling. The Clerk will sort out which committee will be appropriate. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

5.27
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Paul Mwiru): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the National Agriculture Advisory Services (NAADS) Programme financial statements for the year ended 30June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Paul Mwiru): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the conservation of Biodiversity in the Albertine Rift Valley Forests of Uganda – UNDP funded project, No. 00043885-UGA07200PIMS 449 BD - full report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Paul Mwiru): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Makerere University report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Paul Mwiru): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives’ report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Paul Mwiru): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry Second Trade Capacity Enhancement Project (RACE II) financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTYSPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Paul Mwiru): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table Gulu University report and the opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Paul Mwiru): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTYSPEAKER: Let the records capture that. All the seven papers laid on the Table stand committed to the appropriate Committee on Public Accounts for expeditious handling to feed into the processes and inform this House. Thank you very much.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL POPULATION COUNCIL BILL, 2011

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Can somebody move the motion for second reading for this Bill?

5.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Population Council Bill, 2011” be read the second time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Minister of General Duties, Office of the Prime Minister, and by the Member for Ibanda North. Yes, would you like to speak to the motion?

MR AJEDRA: Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to move that the whole House dissolves itself into a Committee of-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, proceed with justification of your Bill.

MR AJEDRA: Rt Hon. Speaker, the National Population Council Bill, 2011 has the following objectives: to establish the National Population Council as a corporate body; to continue to exercise the Population Secretariat as the secretariat for the Council; and to provide for the council’s composition, functions and administration.

The Bill consists of two parts. Part one contains the preliminary items and part two of the Bill deals with the establishment of the National Population Council, which provides for the composition of the functions and administration of the council.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the first three objectives actually justify your Bill. The rest, concerning the structure of the Bill, will be handled by the committee.

MR AJEDRA: Thank you. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The National Population Council Bill” be read the second time. 

That means that the motion is to open up debate on the general principles of this Bill, its propriety and the rest of the issues. When this Bill was read the first time, it was referred to the appropriate committee, the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This is the appropriate time to receive the report from the relevant committee, after which we will determine whether there is need to first debate the principle or we just go to the text of the Bill.

5.34
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Mr Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the National Population Council Bill, 2011.

Introduction

The National Population Council Bill, 2011 was read for the first time on 7 February 2012 and referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for scrutiny. The committee has, in accordance with rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, scrutinized the Bill and wishes to present its findings to the House.

Methodology

The committee discussed with, and received memoranda from, the Ministry of Finance and the Population Secretariat. The committee undertook a benchmarking trip to Ghana and its findings have provided useful information for the consideration of the Bill.

The Object of the Bill

The Object of the Bill is to establish a national population council, a body corporate that will in turn set up the Population Secretariat as a secretariat of the council, and to provide for the council’s composition, functions and administration.

The Effect of the Bill

The effect of the Bill is to create strong and effective oversight mechanisms as a population council whose main function will be to formulate policies that give strategic direction on the implementation of the objectives of the National Population Policy and further institutionalise the Population Secretariat.

Mr Speaker, with your permission, I beg to skip the salient features of the Bill since they are well articulated in the Bill itself.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairman of the committee, do you have any recommendations on this Bill? Should we pass it or not?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move to the recommendations and observations under item No. 6.

The first observation is about the need to have strong and effective oversight over population issues in this country. The committee was informed that one of the main challenges facing the Population Secretariat is the lack of direct oversight. The minister responsible is also in charge of several other agencies and departments, so he does not devote the much needed attention to population issues.

The committee notes that population is a key element in our planning function, especially in terms of the welfare of our people. So there is need for a strong body to plan and strategize, to ensure there is improvement in the quality of life and standard of living for the population in Uganda.

The committee further notes that effective implementation of the population policy requires high level oversight, guidance and advice.

Delinking the Planning Sector from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
The committee observes that planning is an important tool to economic development of any country. The committee, therefore, recommends that given the importance of planning, there should be a separate ministry in charge of planning for the country. 

The committee further observes that this common practice in most countries, for example Kenya where a full ministry has been created to regulate policies on national population and planning. That ministry is further subdivided into several directorates, each with a mandate to enhance proper service delivery, with one particularly dedicated to national planning.

Composition of the proposed National Population Council

The committee notes that the entire membership is composed of permanent secretaries of the ministries of health, gender, education and sports, local government, a representative of the National Planning Authority and a representative from the Non-Government Organisations (NGOs). The committee observes that the proposed composition of the council as provided for under clause 4 of the Bill is ill-conceived for it is a designated one. The permanent secretaries are very busy persons, who by law are part of several governing bodies of several agencies in the country. 

While the committee appreciates the need for representation from the various ministries, we recommend that since population is a major aspect of our development, there is need for experts in the council to provide expert direction to population issues in the country.

The committee also noted that the functions of the council provided for under clause 5 are not exhaustive to encompass the envisaged mandate of the council. The committee, therefore, recommends the insertion of additional functions in clause 5.

The committee also observed that the Bill as it stands does not provide for remuneration and tenure of the council members. The committee observes that it is a key aspect of good governance to make a provision for tenure of the council and remuneration of council members. The committee recommends that the tenure of office and remuneration be expressly provided for in the law.

Relationship with other Public Agencies

The committee observes that clause 5 (2) of the Bill provides that the council shall, to the greatest extent possible, co-operate with Government, line ministries, local government institutions and civil society organisations in carrying out its functions. The committee observes that there is need to institutionalize council’s relationship with other institutions. To this end, the committee recommends that the minister, under clause 24, should issue guidelines institutionalising the broad roles of each of the government institutions and civil society organisations in the implementation of the National Population Policy.

Appointment of the Director-General

The Bill, in clause 11, provides that there shall be a director-general appointed by the President on the advice of the Minister. The committee observes that the Director-General should ideally be under the authority and direction of the council. However, his or her appointment by the highest office in the country makes it functionally impractical for such a person to submit to authority.

The committee recommends that given its earlier recommendation on the composition of the council, (who shall be appointed a minister) the Director-General should be appointed by the minister on the recommendation of the council. This arrangement ensures that the reporting mechanism is clear and streamlined.

Annual Reports to Parliament

The committee notes that there is no provision for annual reports either to the minister or to Parliament. The committee observes that the effective implementation of the population policy largely depends on the monitoring and evaluation mechanisms instituted within the law.

The committee recommends that it is important that the council prepares periodic reports on its activities, operations and implementation of the policy. The committee further proposes that the responsible minister be mandated by law to table the reports before Parliament.

Uniform Corporate Governance Structures

The committee observes that there are several agencies under the supervision of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development with different and varying governance structures. The committee notes that there is need for uniformity and adoption of universal corporate governance structures for its agency. Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairman of the committee. Honourable members, this is a clear report. The motion is that the Bill entitled “The National Population Council Bill, 2011” be read for the second time. That is the question I now propose for debate, which is based on the principles of the Bill and not the actual provisions; we will be dealing with those comprehensively at committee stage. 

Is the House agreeable that we carry out debate on the principles of the Bill to determine whether it is a justifiable Bill or not? The House can now debate this motion in the next 20 minutes because we have to close at 6.00 p.m. 

5.43
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chair of the committee and the Minister for the Bill and the report. This Bill is about providing for a national population council or a board as the committee is recommending. 

Right now, population issues in the country are co-ordinated by the Population Secretariat, which is an institution managed by civil servants and yet population issues are extremely important. The challenge now is that the body that co-ordinates lacks the clout that is required to give the importance to these issues. So, the main reason why this Bill comes in, in my understanding, is to create a body that has that necessary clout so that population issues can be given the highest profile possible in this country. In that regard, I do support the motion and also the report of the committee. 

Today is World Population Day. It would be very important if this Parliament can pass this Bill on World Population Day as a gift that we can give to the population community in this country.

Allow me, Mr Speaker, to make just a few comments in respect to the issue of population as I contribute to this motion. One of the biggest challenges we are facing today in Uganda is the issue of unsustainable population growth. There are three actors, which determine the change in population size. One is fertility, people producing children; the second is migration, moving in and out of the community or country; and the third is mortality or death, if people die. 

Uganda has one of the highest annual population growth rates, estimated at around 3.3 or 3.4 per cent per annum. The import of this is that the population in Uganda doubles every 20 years, and when you look at the projections which have been done, we are going to be in trouble if we do not address this challenge of population. 

What is driving this population growth is the high fertility, which is measured by the number of children women produce in their reproductive lifetime, not the men but the women. Uganda is second to Niger in the world in terms of having highly fertile women. Ugandan women produce averagely seven children in their lifetime. That is the average. In places like Kanungu, our average is around nine children. So, it is a very important area which Parliament must interest itself in. We must support Government to put in place measures, including policies and legislation but also interventions, to address this challenge of population growth. 

I have heard debate on economic transformation. Mr Speaker, usually experts say that for an economy to grow and for you to have sustainable growth, economic growth must be at least three times the annual population growth. When you look at our figures in Uganda, our population growth is estimated at 3.4 per cent per annum while our economic growth is at around 5.1 per cent. That means you cannot easily attain economic transformation at these rates. Actually, the –(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Dr Baryomunsi, for giving way. You said the population growth of Uganda is 3.3 per cent per annum. The information I want to give you is that that is not true. These are statistics that are generated from I do not know where. 

First of all, there is no way Ugandans can be 34 million people as of now. Scientifically, there is no way Ugandans can be 34 million. At most, we can be 26 million. The information I am giving you is that during the Obote II Government, when the Prof. Kamunutus were close in Government, that is when adulteration of Uganda’s census started because then money was spent according to population in a particular area. Up to today, we have not got the exact number of Ugandans because we are using the same principle in the Constitution to send money to the local governments. That is the information I wanted to give you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, hon. Otto. The first census in Uganda was carried out in 1911, the second one was 1929, then 1939, 1948, 1959, 1969 then 1980 - the results for 1980 are not yet released – then 1991/1992, and then 2002. So, there has been a systematic process over time. Usually, you use the last results of a census to project for the future using demographic techniques. So, it is not true that we cannot accurately project and estimate the population. You can either project or you use intercensal estimates. I appreciate your information but I am fairly knowledgeable in matters of demography, so it is wrong information.

Lastly, there has been this point that has been raised by this House, that is the issue of the census, which ties in with what hon. Otto is raising. Usually, censuses are carried out every 10 years and the last census was carried out in 2002. Ideally, last year we should have had a national population and housing census for us to get the most accurate data and information to base our planning on. We are now basing on projections, like hon. Otto is raising, but the fairer way would be to do an actual census and establish the actual population. 

Government keeps changing goal posts and you keep postponing the census. I am told now you are looking at August next calendar year. What is the problem? Why can’t money be found to carry out this census? The preliminary activities for carrying out the census had already been funded - cartographic work, the surveys and trainings. A lot of money has already been spent to prepare for a census. So, further postponement of this exercise makes us –(Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, hon. Baryomunsi, for giving way. When you talk about preparations that were made for the national population census last year, we even have evidence of calendars produced by Uganda Bureau of Statistics where the Minister of State for Finance, hon. Jachan Omach,  together with the Prime Minister and Vice-President are launching the national population census at Hotel Africana. This calendar is circulating all over the country and yet as we talk, nothing has so far been effected. That is the information I wanted to give you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, that is the question we are asking. What is the problem? Is Government scared of carrying out a census or Government does not consider the census a priority in this country? Our view is that money should be found to have a census done so that we can do proper planning for the population in this country. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. There is information from the Leader of Government Business.

THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I just want to inform the House and the people who are not aware that there will be a census next year. That is the information. If you have other information, you can lay it on the Table.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Rt Hon. Speaker, while I appreciate the information from the Prime Minister, our concern is that we run financial years, July to June.  What Government was saying last time was that the census would be done in this preceding financial year, but it was not done. Now they are saying it will be done in August, which will be a different financial year, and no provision has been made in the current budget. It will come to July and then you say “no, the financial year has just begun, we must push it ahead.” 

A commitment should be made to provide the resources in the current budget. Even if the exercise shall be in August in another financial year, money should be found in this current budget. I think that is the concern that we have. So, can you assure us that the money is in the current budget because most of the activities will be undertaken in this current financial year, if we are to carry out a census.

GEN. ALI: Mr Speaker, I want to assure the House that there will be a census.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, what will be there?

GEN. ALI: A census, Sir. There is not going to be war. I do not think we are going to fight or the country is going to break into pieces if there is no census. We have to be careful not to exaggerate things. The money will be there and if it is not there, it is not there. 

1.56
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee for bringing to us this good report. Let me hope that by us sitting here, debating and passing this Bill it will take us to a level where we can have our population census. It should not just remain here, us debating and shelving it somewhere. 

Why do I say this, Mr Speaker? The issue of population is very important and I wonder how our country or Government can go on to plan to deliver services minus this very important tool. I am talking from a gender perspective and as a woman who is responsible for providing food on the table. As a woman, before you begin cooking, you must know the number of people who are in your household, the people who are living under your roof. That is when you can plan and know the amount of what you are supposed to provide as food on the table. Now we have a dilemma here of not knowing the number of people that we have in our country. Sometimes I think that maybe that is why the services are not reaching some of our people. I see surpluses and sometimes inadequate service provision because we assume; we are not sure about the number of people that we have in this country.

Last year, we were in Namibia and when we were asked about the size of our population. One member said 35 million, another member said 34 million and another member said 30 million. Just now, hon. Odonga Otto was talking about 26 million.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. There is a likely to be a population explosion if we do not plan well, so this Bill is timely. 

The information I want to give is that it is on record that Uganda’s women are among the most fertile women in the world. Now that Government has made paraffin more expensive, it is going to be worse because people are going to be having supper early enough before probably 6 O’clock and then go to bed. There is an indication that the only recreational activity after supper –(Laughter)– will result into more children and hence the population is going to grow even bigger.

MS OTENGO: Rt Hon. Speaker, the honourable MP for Oyam has raised very important information and we should not leave it unhandled. The member said that when they went to Namibia, they had different information or data. It makes me ask a question: how prepared are we when we get out of this country? I believe that we go with technical staff, and I do not know whether that is the only team which went outside the country and made wrong representations.

The case raised by hon. Santa Alum is not a small case. Every time we have huge groups leaving this country from this Parliament going to represent us, how sure are we that we are rightfully represented?

MS ALUM: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. If I were to ask you to tell us a figure for the population, you would come up with a different figure altogether. If I ask the honourable Minister in charge of Northern Uganda, she will come up with another different figure.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I have a procedural problem; first, my colleague, the Minister for Northern Uganda, said that when we travel we should have data. Is it not procedurally right that the Prime Minister gives us the right figures of our population such that when we leave here, we know the figures?

GEN. (RTD) ALI: Mr Speaker, first of all, the revelation from our Member of Parliament for Oyam has scared us to extent that it has become clear that all our Members of Parliament who go out do not even agree among themselves. Even if you do not know, why don’t you agree before? You are now showing how ignorant you are about your own country because three from the same country are giving different information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Even if the Member for Oyam has not done anything else, she has been able to scare a General. (Laughter) Proceed with your point of order.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The point, which I raised, was that when we went to Namibia, those people were very exact and clear. They gave us the exact number of the people who live in their country and then –(Interjection)- Let me finish raising the point of order and then later, you will give me the information. When we went back to our hotel rooms, we were discussing this very important subject amongst ourselves – the Ugandans who went there. We asked ourselves what the exact figure was, if you do not live in a guess world because we have never done this census in the last how many years. So, this was an informal discussion we had as Members of Parliament who were coming from Uganda. 

Now, is it in order for the Rt. Hon. Deputy Prime Minister to begin saying that members who go out do not have a specific number when the country has stayed for more than 10 years without doing this census? Is he in order to say that Members of Parliament are ignorant? Where else can we get the data from minus guessing if not from Government?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the information that the Member from Oyam initially brought was that when they were asked to present figures, they all presented different figures and that, the General said, is scary. That showed, just like the member for Aleptong also confirmed, that it is scary if we can go and do not even have a figure that we can agree on. That is the point they are making. That it is a scary situation, that nobody knows. As to what causes it is not in debate now. As to what causes this disparity is the subject of this debate. So, I think the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister is just scared but he has not violated any order.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we have eight ministers; can each of them get up and tell us the exact –(Laughter) 

MR TODWONG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Just a while ago, hon. Odonga Otto told us that during the UPC time, population was used to distribute resources.

Two, our friend, the Woman MP for Oyam, who is also UPC, confirmed that she is really not part of those who are aware of the population statistics of Uganda.  I just want to quote from the latest archive of Government that as of 2011, our population estimate was 34.51 million people – (Interjections)– You can go online; I am sure you are Members of Parliament who can research and get this. Mr Speaker, is it, therefore, in order for the Leader of the Opposition to stand on the Floor of Parliament and insinuate that ministers are not aware of the population figure of the Republic of Uganda that they dearly serve?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the situation being presented is a factual situation. For the population of Uganda, as we speak now, you say what is right for the circumstance.  There is nobody who can tell you an exact figure. You go to the internet, you will find different figures. So, there is no source that we can now say, “this is the figure”. That is now the debate, honourable members, that this confusion can only be resolved through a census because people have different figures in their heads.

However, for the honourable Leader of the Opposition to start carrying out his own census in the House on the ministers, I think that was not proper. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for that. Is the minister in order to be on the phone when we are talking? 

Mr Speaker, you can see the type of ministers we have. We are complaining of census because of one reason. I am sure that – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, on what point have you risen? There is a member holding the Floor.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You have ruled against me but I thank you very much for the wise ruling. 

We are complaining about census because as we sit now, in our villages mothers are producing children and there is no record of this. Everybody knows about this and we are all complaining about it. Surely, Mr Speaker, these ministers should not hide under the grass that they know the right figures yet they do not know. It is because you want to – You do not know.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Member for Oyam, please close.

MS ALUM: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I know that what we have in this country are estimates, and that cannot be the exact figure that everybody can walk out and say this is the total number of people that we have.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you for giving way. Mr Speaker, in this Parliament when the Vice-President was the Speaker, I moved that using the budget estimates, the unconditional and conditional grants sent to the districts. In the Constitution, there is a formula which shows how money should be divided to the districts. The Speaker then put up a select committee of Parliament to find out, and the information I was giving you is that the biggest ethnic group or the fastest growing then were the Iteso. However, the money which the Central Government was sending to Teso was less than the money which was going to western Uganda. All these are indicators that the population figures have been adulterated for purposes of taking money to specific areas. 

There is no way you can become a middle class person, like in many areas of western Uganda, and produce 11 or 12 children like in our areas in the villages. So, the information I want to give you is that a committee of Parliament failed to produce a report - 

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Rt Hon. Speaker, hon. Odonga Otto has been making sweeping statements and he continues to make sweeping statements without substantiating. He says that at some point, the fastest growing ethnic group was the Iteso and he did not substantiate. Where has he got this? Even if it was, they may not have necessarily caught up with those who are in the west. All those are sweeping statements.

Is it procedurally right for hon. Odonga Otto to continue making sweeping statements without substantiating those statements and without telling us the source of the alleged figures he is giving? Is it procedurally correct?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is like a birth pang. What this debate is saying is that this Bill as a facilitator of the process of reconciliation of these numbers is very important. Isn’t that what this Bill is saying? Is there anybody who wants to speak against the principals of this Bill?  

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if we agree that this motion should be passed, can we then go and do that surgery at that level where we are going to make changes to cater for those details that have got to be contained there? Is that okay? Can I then put the question?  

6.12
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Whereas it is true that nobody would wish, according to what has been demonstrated in the House, to speak against the principles of the Bill, the report raises issues which would require either the chairperson or the minister to clarify if we are going to come up with a proper law. 

The Bill recommends the separation of the ministries of planning and finance, for example. We shall need to know: do we defer the passing until this recommendation is implemented or at what level do we consider a recommendation?

Secondly, the report talks of harmonizing the governance structures of the agencies. So, do we wait to pass the Bill and see the harmonization of the governance structures of the agencies under the Ministry of Finance, or at what level do we consider the Bill or the recommendations because these are issues which have been raised in this report. 

Finally, also from what has been observed here, I have noted one thing; while in Namibia members talked about the different figures of our population, there is no country in the world that at any one particular time can tell the exact number of its people. Mr Speaker, I want to tell you that even as they count and name, there is a woman giving birth and we can only probably say, “in addition to those who have been born” but –(Interjection)– Mr Speaker, hon. Chris Baryomunsi is an expert in demography issues, I will take his information.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable member. I just want to give information in support of what you have said. There are two methods which are used in a census. There is the de facto method of enumeration and the de jure method. In the de facto method, you count the people who slept in the house but by the time you count, there are people on buses travelling who will miss the counting. In the de jure method, you go to a community and ask how many people usually reside around that place but you will miss plotting for a place like Kampala where people float around. So, it is true that even when you carry out a census, you cannot get an accurate to-the-dot result in terms of the population size. 

Mr Speaker, the additional information I want to give is that after a census, usually you get the total estimates. In 2002, the population of Uganda was estimated at around 24 million Ugandans. Like I said earlier, it is fertility which drives the population. When you control immigration and the deaths, averagely we add about 1.2 million Ugandans every year. When you add that figure to 24 million, the population now is around 35 million Ugandans. This is as a result of tested demographic models, which are scientifically robust. So, I just want to assure the population that you can estimate with reasonable accuracy how far we are in terms of population size.

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I want to give information, which differs from what hon. Chris Baryomunsi has given the member. 

I want to tell you that there are countries which are aware and have got accurate data through technology. One of these tested countries is Malaysia. They use technology, they register births and deaths and they issue national IDs for their citizens. So, even when a citizen leaves their country for another country, they are aware and they will be able to tell that this person has left our country and is in a certain country A. Such countries have data centres or databanks where they track information on individuals. They use postal codes, which is one way of locating an individual even at a point of residence, so that they can know this individual exists. 

The problem in Uganda is that we cannot have accurate data because we do not have such technology. We have implemented the national ID project but it has collapsed. We have implemented the postal code system and it is almost failing. Once we have that technology which can work in any country, in any part of the world – Actually, those were my recommendations, that with the establishment of this population council, such facilities and such systems must be built to capacity to support this council. Otherwise, we will still lament and estimate that the population is this. 

Do we know who a Ugandan is here? Do we know that we are counting 25 million Ugandans yet we count Indians and Japanese as Ugandans too? What is the quality of our population? What is the credibility of that population? We can determine such things and we can know the size of our population if we implement such programmes that are enabled by technology, by systems that cannot be corrupted. Thank you. 

MR DOMBO: Finally, Mr Speaker, whereas I want to agree with both people who have contributed, I want this House to know that technology is posted by individuals. When you go to the internet now, you will know that every second, there are people being born but the technology upgrade is not done every second. Uganda can achieve and strive to be there.

The other thing I want the committee to clarify is that recently, when India did its eighth population census, it was a very comprehensive census. They counted not only the population but they looked at a number of issues so that by the time they came up with a conclusion, they were able to look at their employment and unemployment rates. They were able to look at the number of animals that they had so that they knew whether they were producing or they needed to produce more animals. They looked at the carrying capacity of their land. It was a comprehensive exercise. 

This secretariat that we intend to set up is a population secretariat for human beings but when we reach the time of the census, they incorporate the other issues that are key elements in the planning process. Mr Speaker, those are the issues we want concluded before we finally go to committee stage to consider the merits of the Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had agreed that we would be rising at 6.00 O’clock to enable our colleagues of the Islamic faith be with their families to break the fast. Can we resume tomorrow at 10.00 O’clock because from Tuesday, the key item on the agenda will be debate on the State of the Nation Address by the President and that will take most of that week. So, can we meet tomorrow at 10 O’clock in the morning? If that is okay, I will then use my prerogative to allow the Chief Whip lay a ministerial statement on the Table. 

6.22
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I want to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Education and Sports for the financial year 2013/2014. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that, and it should also be recognised that that is way beyond the timeframe we had agreed. This statement should have come on the 30th of last month; today is 11th. The shadow ministers are supposed to have looked at these things and presented theirs by 15th June. I do not know what the Shadow Minister of Education will do, but those are the challenges that we need to improve on so that we can do better work in the future. Hon. Members – 

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, tomorrow is a very hard day for many of us –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not need to talk about tomorrow; this House is going to be adjourned to Tuesday at 2 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 6.23 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 16 July 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
