Tuesday, 2 July 2013 

Parliament met at 2.33 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Good afternoon honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you are aware, last Saturday, a tragic accident occurred on the Northern bypass where a fuel tanker was hit by a car sparking off fire that engulfed the whole area. It is reported that so far 36 lives have been lost and many others involved in this accident are nursing serious burns and wounds in hospitals.

On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, I wish to extend our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved families and wish a quick recovery to all those persons hospitalised due to this accident.

Let me register my appreciation to the Uganda Police especially for responding quickly to avert a looming catastrophe that would have caused even more death if it had not been nipped in the bud. Similarly, gratitude is extended to all the medical personnel who provided and continue to provide care and medical support to the accident victims.

In a special way, other challenges notwithstanding, I would like to commend the work of Mulago casualty and burns unit for the work they have done.

I wish also to take this opportunity to thank His Excellency, the President, for his quick and immediate visit to the scene of the accident to offer comfort to the people affected and his condolences to the families that are bereaved. He also made pledges on how he is going to handle the loss that has occurred to these families. I thank the President for that!

Honourable members, I urge you to use your constituency visits wherever you do this to sensitise the population of the dangers of rushing to these scenes of accidents, especially where fuel tanks and tankers are involved and the issue of collecting fuel from the road side. The dangers are known so we should make it known to our people that it is not good business to try and do it this way because it causes death.

I wish to further call on the NGOs concerned with road safety to step up their mobilisation and sensitise the public, among others, on the cause of the carnage on our roads arising from traffic accidents. It is very sad and indeed unforgivable that in this modern age many lives can be lost in just a few minutes yet this could have been avoided.

On yet another sad note, I would like to inform you, honourable members, of the death of Mrs Remmy Wamala which occurred at International Hospital Kampala (IHK) on Thursday, 28th June this year. She was buried on Sunday. Mrs Wamala was the Coordinator of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children. I was informed that she was a devoted, honest, diligent, cheerful and respectful officer. Her passion and devotion to children’s causes were deep and really unmistakable.

I am further informed that she was at the forefront of the struggle against maternal mortality, but she ended up passing on from postpartum complications arising from similar situations she has been struggling to improve upon.

She leaves a widower and four young children, the youngest is still hospitalised because it was the one that was being born. Mrs Wamala did a commendable job and it is for this reason that I call on the executive members of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children and all well-wishers out of their love and dedication for Mrs Wamala to provide solace and comfort to the deceased’s family.

Honourable members, at this time, I request you to rise with me to observe a moment of silence in respect of the fallen Ugandans.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, on a positive note, I wish to commend the business community especially the traders in Kampala for heeding the call made by the government to halt a strike on complaints in regard to pre-import verification of conformity to the standards.

In a similar vein, I wish to thank the government team lead by the Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business who was supported by the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for concluding successful negotiations. The leadership of the Private Sector Foundation is also commended for the mediatory role they played in negotiations.

I am informed that a period of a month was given for the negotiations to be concluded. I call on all the stakeholders to be sincere and open to each other during the negotiations. They should not relax because time is not on their side and not our side, and they should ensure that this matter is resolved once and for all.

The financial hemorrhage arising from this strike caused enormous losses to the traders and the entire nation and should not be repeated. I call on the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to continually brief the sectoral Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industries on the progress of the negotiations and when necessary this brief should be given to Parliament here so that together this matter can be solved for good of all of us. 

I wish to congratulate the Parliamentary Catholic Chaplaincy and the Catholic Church in Uganda for making just last year 100 years of Ugandan priesthood. I wish to congratulate the church for the various functions held in country of ordaining of priests, deacons and installation of some seminarians into various ministries.

I wish to give notice to the Members of the Business Committee that the meeting of the Business Committee is scheduled for Thursday, 4 July 2013 at 9.30 a.m. in the South Committee Room Second Floor, South Wing of the Parliamentary Building. Please, keep time.
The agenda of the meeting is to chart out a programme of business for the First Meeting of the Third Session of Parliament. All Members of this committee are invited to come and please come early.

Honourable Members, thank you for listening to me, I wish you a fruitful week as we build and continue to build Uganda. 

2.41
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to very sincerely thank you for a very important statement you have just made -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just give me a moment, sorry. You know, most of this period as a country we have been in prayer for the condition of President Nelson Mandela. We continue to pray that his condition improves so that he continues to shine to show the world what forgiveness is, and what leadership can do to people held back by troubles.

So today, we are very appropriately accompanied in this sitting in the gallery by the Parliamentary Committee on Appropriation and the Department of Performance Monitoring and Eventuation in the Presidency from the Republic of South Africa. They are here to observe our proceedings. You are very welcome! (Applause) I will get the names and introduce them to you appropriately.

I am informed that one of the members is on a wheel chair and in accordance with our Rules of Procedure, to facilitate her participation with the rest of her team, we will allow her to access the Speaker’s door and draw the bar to allow the stranger to be able to be in the House.

All the honourable members sitting from behind the bar are requested to come to the House before they are moved to the strangers’- Please allow the honourable member in. (Applause). She is a member of the Parliamentary Committee on Appropriations. They have come to visit our Parliament and see how we do business and compare with how they do business, and we see how we both can improve on how we do our general business for the people we represent.  So you are very welcome again. (Applause) I thank you. Yes, honourable minister.

DR RUGUNDA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

I just want to thank you very much for making an important statement following the tragedy that befell the country when we lost so many lives in the inferno on the Northern Bypass. As you already know, this took place on Saturday the 29th at around 9.00 p.m. and all in all 53 people were affected in terms of getting injuries and dying. Of the 53, 28 died more or less on the spot and their bodies were brought to Mulago mortuary and 24 were admitted and the last body was collected from around the swamp and brought by the Police yesterday to Mulago mortuary.  

Mr Speaker, with your permission, I will be making a substantive statement on the matter tomorrow. But suffice to say that as soon as this tragedy befell the country, the Police assisted by the wanainchi or the people in the area were able to retrieve the bodies and also rescue those that were alive and take them to Mulago Hospital. The death mainly came through burns and also inhalation of smoke that was coming from the burning objects. 

The staff at Mulago Hospital, Mr Speaker, as you have rightly said, did exemplary work amidst the challenges they are facing. They have been able to resuscitate and help many of the victims to at least make some progress. Unfortunately, because of the severe burns which were very extensive in many cases, we have continued to lose people at the hospital. 

So far of all those that were admitted alive at Mulago Hospital with injuries, nine have died and the doctors continue to work day and night with the nurses to save the lives of those that are still struggling on and surviving. There has been extensive medical support from neighbouring institutions and especially the supplies from the National Medical Stores and the staff at Mulago Hospital have, therefore, not been wanting in terms of supplies. 

His Excellency, the President, yesterday came to Mulago and called on the patients and their relatives. He consoled those who had lost their dear ones and was able to mobilise mabugo for those that had lost their dear ones and also made some money available for those who were nursing their sick dear ones so that they can, at least, get benefit of that support.

His Excellency, the President, also took the opportunity to advise people of Uganda to avoid rushing into accident spots for negative reasons. Some of the people who actually lost their lives went there and were busy trying to take fuel from the area and the fire therefore found them already soaked with the fuel that they were trying to get and that made it easy for the victims to lose their lives. 

So, Mr Speaker, my main point today is to support the statement you have made.  Number two, to inform this august House of this tragedy. Number three, to inform colleagues that Government both from the level of the President and also from the leadership and staff of Mulago Hospital are doing everything possible to support the lives of those who sustained injuries but are still being nursed. 

I want to take this opportunity to also salute the wanainchi of Uganda because many have supported the efforts either in terms of rescue of those who have survived or in terms of even being able go and give decent management of even those who have lost their lives. So the cooperation of the people, the cooperation of the Police and the dedication and commitment of the health workers is greatly appreciated! (Applause) 

Let me also take this opportunity to salute the leadership of the Opposition - because I was informed by Mulago Hospital that the leadership of the Opposition had been to Mulago to console those who have lost their dear ones, and also to express solidarity with those that are nursing their dear ones and have made some donation of bed sheets. This solidarity at this hour of need is very welcome. (Applause) This is the time when the country must be together and united to confront this common problem.

The last point I want to make, Mr Speaker, is that this is not the last accident we are having in the country. We should do everything possible Government, the Opposition and general public to avoid situations that precipitate accidents. We should go to accident spots in order to save lives instead of trying to take advantage of those who may be victims of the accidents, and that Government will do all that is possible; the Police will do all that is possible; health workers will do all that is possible to support those that are in need after accidents. 

And as you rightly said, may the Almighty God rest those who have rested in eternal peace. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you. Honourable members, the minister has said he is going to bring a comprehensive statement tomorrow. Can we reserve our comments and listen in tomorrow and have enough time to discuss this matter? I am just proposing that it might be good so that we have a comprehensive matter on the subject. This is just as a matter of importance. Okay, the Shadow Minister.

2.52
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Dr Lulume Bayigga): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the new Minister for Health for making the statement about what happened. 

Indeed, we have also visited Mulago Hospital and we have also expressed solidarity as the report has been given by the Minister for Health. We have also had some interaction with the leadership of the hospital and we shall also have a statement to make and we duly await what the minister will have to say tomorrow. 

Otherwise, I thank you for the opportunity to make this comment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you. The Member for Kasese District.

2.53
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I stand here on a matter of national importance. This morning the people of Kasese woke up to alarming messages that were sent to their phones saying that the water system in Kasese had been poisoned and, therefore, the people should not consume the water.

The leadership of Kasese District together with the leadership of National Water and Sewerage Corporation took up the matter very fast, tests were carried out and it was found to be a hoax. It was a rumour. 

I therefore stand here to put the minds of the people of the Kasese community to rest and to let them continue consuming the water. As for now, there is no problem with the water. All I know is that we got a problem during the floods. The water system broke down and we lamented - they called it a lamentation. Our people went for dirty water and I know, like I have said before, we may witness diseases that may emanate from the consumption of this dirty water. But for the morning message, the population can be calm.

The second issue regards what happened in Kasese District on the 29th of this month- (Mr Odonga-Otto rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What was that? You are negotiating - (Laughter) 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thought it would be prudent for the Minister in charge of ICT to get up and explain to the House, the circumstances under which SMS companies can get involved in such grievous activities like the one hon. Winifred Kiiza has just raised. Because for the people of a whole district to wake up and get SMSs sent by a media company -  the Minister in charge of ICT should come and explain, and probably give a formal statement to Parliament that relates to these serious issues. That is the little bit I wanted to add because it may again happen tomorrow in Pader or Kampala and alarm the public. It is a very sensitive issue, which we should not take lightly. Actually it is close to an act of terrorism.  

So, the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of ICT may find it prudent to give a formal statement to this House on the Kasese incident. 

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you my brother for that kind of clarification. And now that our telephones are registered, it can prove to us that the system will work to save Ugandans.

Mr Speaker, the other issue which is a matter of national importance is what transpired in the Rwenzururu Kingdom on 29th June. In 2009, the Government of Uganda recognised the Rwenzururu Cultural Institution as one of the cultural institutions in this country. And this was through a process where studies were carried out. One of those studies was carried out by one of the Deputy Prime Ministers of this country now, Mzee Henry Kajura, who is with us here. The study resulted into the recognition of the cultural institution. The study indicated that the people of Kasese and Bundibugyo request Government to recognise the cultural institution. 

It is upon that background, Mr Speaker, that His Excellency, the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, recognised and went to Kasese to officially officiate at this function. After the recognition, the institution has continuously carried out the activities of the cultural institution, one of which is the celebration of the institution’s birthday. This is always done on 30th June every year. So, 30th June of this year, was yet another day when the cultural institution was supposed to celebrate her 51st birthday. 

On 29th June, when the cultural leader was supposed to travel to Bundibugyo, the people of Kasese woke up to a nasty situation where the kingdom was put under house arrest - I will call it that because the whole palace was surrounded by police officers who blocked the king from leaving the palace and denied his subjects access to the palace. I think the subjects thought that the palace had been attacked and they wanted to find out what was happening there. 

To our surprise, the subjects of His Majesty Omusinga Charles Wesley Mumbere were welcomed by teargas and some live bullets. It was something that alarmed the people of Rwenzori, the Banyarwenzururu and the king himself who is culturally and traditionally respected by the people.

Mr Speaker, we saw the Police Commander in the names of Grace Turyagumanawe beating up his other officers, slapping them and rolling them on the ground- (Interjections) - whether you would want to call it “disciplining them” it would have been called an unprofessional way of disciplining officers in broad day light. What kind of signals do you send to the public outside there - promoting violence by the police! We are aware that the Police are mandated to keep law and order but in a situation where it is now the Police that are promoting disorder in society, violating fundamental human rights of individuals and the rights of a king, lowering his dignity - 

Mr Speaker, the people of Kasese have asked me - and those of Bundibugyo because they were ready to host their King. Preparations had been made but unfortunately on the day before -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: The day before, the people were surprised: the venue was cordoned off, the king was not allowed to go, people were teargased, people were beaten and then we began asking was this kingdom really recognised by Government? We started looking at other incidents that have happened in other kingdoms: in Buganda, in Busoga, in Bunyoro now and elsewhere. I hear last month the Papa Emorimor was also                              denied to go and attend a memorial service in his own kingdom. The Omusinga last month was denied to visit parts of his area in Kasese District - (Interjection) - I can take the information brother. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is a -

MR KIWANDA: Thank you very much, hon. Kiiza for giving way. Mr Speaker, today we might be hearing this from Kasese but the other day it was in Buganda where the king of Buganda was stopped from going to see his people in Bugerere County and Nakasongola. The people whom the king wanted to visit were anxiously waiting for him and all of a sudden Government came here and told the people that the people of Kayunga and Nakasongola were not interested in the king. Up to today, the people of these areas are agitating to see their king. 

The statement that was given by the Government was lacking. If there is good will for our cultural institutions, the government should defend them. It should not be the same Government that reinstated the kingdoms of this country that denies them their rights. 

We love our king and we love our country. You know what happened here, Mr Speaker, when the king was stopped from visiting Kayunga. As the people of Buganda, this is still fresh in our minds and we are reminding Government that our king should be left to visit his subjects in his kingdom. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, the Opposition Chief Whip. I want to thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a matter of constitutional nature and a violation of the Constitution. I would have expected the Minister of Internal Affairs to have sought your permission to make a statement, and I would have expected, in the minister’s statement, the suspension of the officer who violated the Constitution. Now that the Minister of Internal Affairs has not acted as required, don’t you think it is prudent that this Parliament immediately demands the resignation of the IGP? (Laughter)   

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank my colleague for that information. This being a matter of national importance, it cuts across all the kingdoms of this country. We hear the King of Ankole, Prince Barigye, is also being whipped here and there - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please.  

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: But what was alarming in the situation of the Rwenzururu king and what was alarming in the situation of Prince Barigye -(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI:  Mr Speaker, can you protect me from - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, the hon. Member holding the Floor, the Woman Representative for Kasese, whom I respect a lot, brought up a very important issue which concerns everybody. The issue was only concerning Kasese and she stood up to give her account of what transpired in Kasese. 

I was in the western region, particularly in Fort Portal- I had gone to Semliki. I know what is going on there. That is none of my concern. The Minister of Internal Affairs will address that. 

But having brought the matter of Kasese here, is the Woman Representative of Kasese in order to transgress and draw in the issues of Ankole? Is it in order, when we the people of Ankole, who are affected by the kingdom and who want or who do not want the kingdom, are here and we can talk for ourselves? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member who raised the matter is actually also the Chief Whip of the Opposition and she speaks for the country as well. (Applause) Honourable member, please.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. In fact, when I swore in as Member of Parliament, I pledged to work for the country. I, therefore, as a Member of Parliament speak on behalf of my other colleagues- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now commenting on my ruling? (Laughter)

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. What was heart-breaking in the issue of His Majesty, King Charles Wesley Mumbere, is that the area where he wanted to go and have this celebration is the area where he was born, where his ancestral home is and where the first flag of the Rwenzururu Kingdom was hoisted. So, it is a monumental ground for us as the Banyarwenzururu. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, hon. Kiiza, my Chief Whip for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving us this opportunity to speak about Kasese and the Rwenzururu Kingdom. The information that I want to give is that in Uganda, we have so many tribes and there are some tribes in Uganda, when you ask them where they came from they will never tell you where they came from. But also there are those tribes who are very clear; when you ask them where they came from they will tell you where they came from. Now, Mr Speaker-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I do not think that there is anybody in this Parliament who does not know where he or she comes from because even if it happens in Uganda then we call it disorientation in place and time. That is a pathological problem. Is the honourable member of Parliament from Busongora in order to insinuate that we have some people who are disoriented in space in that they do not know where they came from? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When an honourable member speaks, he speaks from a point of information. I suppose to the best of the information that the hon. Member from Busongora has, that is, the knowledge he has about himself and his tribe; they may not know where they came from. (Laughter) So it may not apply to you. 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, there are two aspects which I wanted to highlight regarding the -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is an urgent matter. On 29th June there was an issue in Kasese. The king was stopped from going somewhere. There was teargas. That is the issue. Can we ask the minister to comment on this issue so that instead of widening it- the rule says I use 15 minutes. We are now – Please, you have one minute. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is the argument of cultural space and the centre of gravity which have been highlighted in this matter, which are not explained in the –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you say “centre of gravity”?

MR NZOGHU: Yes.  (Laughter) The arguments that are being fronted are that there is the element of cultural space, and there is the element of centre of gravity within the cultural institutions that we have in Uganda that are not even constitutional. And I want to ask through you, Mr Speaker, that it would be prudent for the minister responsible for cultural institutions to explain to Ugandans what it means to have a cultural space or centre of gravity in the matters of cultural institutions. 

I am saying this because, as far as I know, the Obusinga Bwarwenzururu – their boundaries are well known to Government that they actually stretch up to Bundibugyo. The population of Bundibugyo, which is the Bakonjo, constitutes 45 percent. The rest of the tribes together constitute the other 55 percent. This implies that the Bakonjo are actually the majority in Bundibugyo District, Mr Speaker. So, whoever says the Bakonjo are a minority in Bundibugyo is just fronting a misplaced statement.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I can summarily say that possibly the Minister of Internal Affairs informs the country and the Banyarwenzururu at large, what could have caused the attack on the kingdom and the teargasing of the Banyarwenzururu in Kasese.

Two, to explain to this country why Police Commissioner, Grace Turyagumanawe, has been an issue in causing disorder in this country. Mr Speaker, this House will recall that –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please respect the time.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Woman Member of Parliament for Kasese who is also the Opposition Chief Whip, for delivering that statement.

On the issues she has raised, I would like to say that it is true Government received a delegation about the celebrations on 30th June to take place in Bundibugyo. But it is also true that Government received another delegation from the Bundibugyo people who said, “Please, postpone these celebrations until we are ready.”

It was at this point that Government decided to invite both these two parties – the representatives of the king of the Bakonjo and those from the Bamba. Indeed, His Majesty sent a powerful team as well as the team that came from the Bamba. And thank God, hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, who was asked by the President to mediate between the two groups is here; he can give more light later. Actually, there were a number of negotiations – hon. Rugunda is here and he can confirm this – between the two groups about how to proceed with these celebrations.

The last meeting that I also happened to have attended was held on 12th June and I can tell you that the positions were entirely irreconcilable. Hon. Rugunda in his wisdom, asked the two parties to go and further consult with their various groups including His Majesty and see if they could agree in the remaining two weeks.

The main point of contention was whether the celebrations of 30th June would take place before the coronation of the king of the Bamba. The Bamba were requesting to be allowed to first install their king for him to welcome His Majesty. But His Majesty said, “No, I had already made my arrangements to come-” (Interruptions)

MR SEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, we are talking about constitutional rights and freedom of Ugandans, including cultural leaders, to move freely within the country. In Buganda, we have had the Bagisu do their Embalu without seeking permission from the King of Buganda because they don’t have to.  So, is the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, in order to suggest that some cultural leaders, or for that matter, other Ugandans must seek permission and that the President must task hon. Rugunda to mediate between them, before they can enjoy their constitutional right of freedom of movement within their country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Human rights are human rights and institutional rights are institutional rights. Both categories of rights are guaranteed by the Constitution of Uganda.

When I used to teach Human Rights, there was a story we always told about the person who had just come from a seminar on Human Rights, but started to walk while swinging his hands freely. However, in the process of doing that he knocked another person’s nose. That person said, “You have hit me.” But the person from the seminar said, “I am enjoying my freedom of movement.” Little did this person know that while he enjoyed his rights, there was need for him to know that that freedom had to end where the other person’s nose started.

Human rights are supposed to be enjoyed in consonance with respect for other people’s rights. That is the only qualification, which the Constitution also talks about. But I think the point that the minister was making here is that, there were two representative groups in regard to the visit of the King of the Rwenzururu to his birth place but also visiting another part of his area. But there were also representatives from the other side that said that they would not be able to receive him until they were ready and that the basis of their being ready was this and that. 

Because of those contestations, there was need for Government to intervene. That is what I heard the minister say. He talked about the need to harmonize issues for the celebrations to go on schedule. I do not see any violation of any order in this situation.

MR BABA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling –(Interruption)

MS OSEGE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker and the honourable minister for giving way. I just want to seek some clarification, much as the Speaker has given guidance. I don’t understand how teargas and harassment of the king and his subjects came in a way of harmonizing this situation. This was way out of hand. It could not be covered in the name of harmonizing the situation, hon. Minister. I don’t think these people were that violent. So, may I seek a clarification as to why it necessitated teargasing and beating up these people and cordon their places?

MR BABA: Mr Speaker, when therefore, Government failed to mediate, intelligence made its assessment and issued a statement that Government made on Saturday, 26 June 2013, urging the Rwenzururu King to postpone the celebrations. We thought that guidance would be followed.

When they insisted on matching to Bundibugyo, this led to some fracas in which some reckless policemen started shooting before being given order. No police officer is supposed to shoot before an order is given. The police is a command-and-order institution. Those who started shooting before an order was given –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, sometimes I feel amused. Since Saturday, we have not witnessed a situation in Kasese where the purported reckless police officer who shot the bullets was reprimanded. Now, is the minister in order to simply give baseless statements considering the fact that the police officer who shot the bullets is still a free man?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have not been to Kasese and I do not know what is happening in Kasese except what I am hearing from the two of you. So, I cannot rule on an order based on those factual matters that are not within my knowledge. 

MR BABA: So, the commander who happened to have been Grace Turyagumanawe was trying to stop this reckless shooting. And if he acted beyond his powers that is for the police authority to deal with –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, the minister has said that the assistant IGP, Grace Turyagumanawe, was trying to stop the shooting and according to me, he means that Grace is a highly trained police officer. But it was Assistant IGP, Gr Grace Turyagumanawe, who shot dead one boy called Olanya in Amuru District during an operation. So, if at all Turyagumanawe is a highly trained police officer who is also disciplined, why did he do that? And is the honourable minister in order to mislead the House that Turyagumanawe is a highly trained police officer yet most of the atrocities in Uganda where there is chaos and wrangles, they send Turyagumanawe Grace to kill people, to shot people – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Kilak, you have said that deputy inspector general of police shot a one Olanya in Amuru. Is that a statement of fact? Did he shoot him? Please come back to the record because that is a serious statement you are making. 

MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, in military, if you are a commander, you take the responsibility of all the atrocities done. Therefore, when Grace Turyagumanawe was commanding in Amuru District, they shot dead one person and as I talk now, five people are still missing. We need him to produce them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, then the correct statement would be that a person was shot under his command; not that he shot. A distinction has got to be made otherwise you bring in other issues which might not be necessary in this matter. 

MR BABA: So, Mr Speaker, Grace Turyagumanawe was stopping these people from shooting in the air. But the important thing here is that we were trying to avoid a situation of going into chaos. We wanted to make sure that His Majesty is not hurt or even killed by stopping people from matching to Bundibugyo. 

Honourable members, this country must be ruled by the rule of law; the police must maintain law and order. That is what they were doing and that is what they are mandated to do. So the stopping of His Majesty from going was purely a precautionary measure to avoid violence, death and harming of people. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Minister. I will be making some orders on way forward on some of these issues once we finish with this matter. 

3.38
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. And before I proceed, I would like to thank you very much for informing the House about the death of Mrs Remmy Wamala. 

The late Remmy Wamala drove herself on Thursday, 27th May to International Hospital, Kampala for a check-up. While she was there, she started feeling labour pains. So she was admitted. She was there over night and she was able to progress up to four centimetres by the following morning of Friday. 

Then the labour pains disappeared. While in the labour ward, the health worker on duty induced her to regain her labour pain. In the process, Remmy Wamala fainted and went into comma before the baby could come out. The good thing I was around. The mother came out of the labour ward crying, “My daughter is dead”; and the baby was still in the womb. 

Now, the question is, how did that baby come out of the womb if she had fainted and she was in comma? Secondly, International Hospital is a hospital that is highly reputed in this country. Everybody wants to go there because there is care. But what happened? Why did Remmy Wamala die? Is it because of negligence? Is it because there was no blood? 

When she fainted, they rushed her to the theatre and started calling upon people: “Come and save a life”. People rushed in, but whoever went in, their blood could not match with Remmy’s because she was B+. They kept asking for blood. The husband rushed to Nakasero while a friend of her husband rushed to Bukoto; another person rushed to Cardic Hospital and they all came back with blood. But they were told it was cold blood which could not be used; they wanted warm blood. 

So they kept on announcing until some other people went and got the warm blood. But we do not know what happened in the theatre; she never came back alive. 

I am worried; confused and concerned to see that in such a hospital, Remmy Wamala becomes one of the 16 women who die every day while giving birth! People were commenting that they wished she had gone to Mulago. In Mulago, there are doctors full time – (Interjections) – there are doctors on internship; there are those who are not specialists and the specialists. But here it seems Remmy Wamala was left in the hands of a midwife and if any doctor was there, then it was a junior doctor. We really need answers because we have been getting answers from the government hospitals but we also need answers from such a private hospital.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, hon. Mutyabule, for yielding the Floor. International Hospital Kampala has become a death trap. It is a name now. I want to find out from the Minister of Health what monitoring mechanism is in place to monitor the private hospitals that we have in this country.

By the time we were burying Remmy Wamala, we were told even the post-mortem report was not yet out because of the negligence that was exhibited that day. They refused to release this report because of Shs 570,000 that was being demanded from the family members.

What is happening within these hospitals? Have we decided to relinquish our powers as Government? This is not a simple matter; the minister should explain and account to Ugandans how they are monitoring these hospitals.

MS MUTYABULE: Remmy Wamala died at a very young age, just 35 years and she has now left four children, the eldest child is in P.3 and this baby is also in intensive care in the same hospital and he is on oxygen. Even when we wanted to get the body out on Saturday, they retained it saying they were going to do post-mortem.

They had said that they had done an operation in the theatre, hadn’t they really found out what killed her? The following day they were asking for Shs 580,000 before we could take the body. Were we paying for death? We wanted our person alive.

I am requesting for leave under Rule 48(a) to prepare a motion because Remmy Wamala’s death calls for a lot of Government intervention.

MR KATOTO: The information that I want to give is that, in the same hospital, Remmy’s elder sister was operated while she was giving birth and cotton was left in her womb. When they realised, they took her back to remove the cotton.

MS MUTYABULE: So, Mr Speaker, I would like to request that you give me leave as I said under Rule 48(a) to prepare a motion because Remmy Wamala’s death calls for a lot of answers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not a motion; she has given a notice of her intention to bring a motion. I think we grant her the leave to prepare and come with this motion once it is ready and we schedule it on the Order Paper so that we can have a comprehensive debate on the subject unless the hon. minister of health has something to say on this before we can move forward.

Honourable members, why don’t you give the honourable member time for a motion so that we debate properly. I do not have to put a question on this. It is my prerogative to allow her to bring the motion and I have already allowed her to bring this motion. As soon as it is ready, it should be on the Order Paper. If it is ready today, it will be there tomorrow. We will go into better details into some of these things because a lot of the debate we have had here is about Government hospitals and Government health facilities, but now it seems like it is getting out of the Government facilities so we might need to have some guidance on this.

3.39
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am agreeable to the proposal and the position as you have guided but the death of a mother is something very traumatising. I was just wondering whether in the interim we should actually not give outright instruction to the Minister of Health and that of Internal Affairs to try to dig into this situation so that they come to us the day we have this motion with information that is credible. I hear an abandoned mother; I hear something to induce the delivery; I hear blood is flowing out of her nose, all sorts of scary situations and I think that somebody in authority should help us figure out what happened to the late Remmy Wamala. I am even imagining that if somebody was negligent - and I do not want to insinuate so may be some fresh authority should do a proper post-mortem before that body rots away completely because it is so traumatising to think that you can take yourself to a hospital to bring out life and then you pay for it with your own life.

Can Government do us a favour and start an inquiry into the death of this dear lady, so that as we discuss the motion we have the facts. If it turns out to be lack of standards in private hospitals then we know which resolution to adopt. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought we had agreed to come and discuss the motion than to start discussing this matter now. I have already given leave to the Member to bring a motion. I was going to give a further directive that the minister responsible for this sector should come prepared to inform the motion so that the decision and pronouncement we will make as a House will guide on policy issues to deal with the management and supervision in private hospitals. Can we leave to the motion members? it may be better.

3.41
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (CP, Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I raise a matter of public concern, I would like to join you in welcoming the MPs from South Africa where at one time, when I was Vice-President of Global International, my offices were located in Cape Town. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, allow me, pursuant to Rule 39 of our Rules of Procedure to raise a matter of public concern pertaining to what happened to me in Rubaga South, which I occupy as the current Member of Parliament. Under Article 79(2) of the Constitution, it is only Parliament which has powers to make provisions with the force of law through legislation. 

So, in order to play that role, a Member of Parliament must necessarily interact with his or her constituents for consultations purposes. On two consecutive occasions, namely: on 14th June this year and 28th June the same year, even after officially writing to the DPC, RPC Katwe Police Station and even showing courtesy to release the topics I was going to talk about in a public meeting, namely, discussing the budget and discussing problems in KCCA, the police officers gathered in one place where I was going to hold the meeting and - 

MR BAKKA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I know that you have the discretion to allow Members to present their issues, especially issues of national importance, but the practice that we had agreed on was that that was to be done on Thursday and we knew that was the time to bring issues from the constituency or –(Interjections)- I want to seek your guidance, Mr Speaker, whether we are at liberty to come with any matter other than on Thursday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules are fairly clear on this subject. A Member who comes to the Office of the Speaker and discusses with the Speaker and shows that there is an urgent matter that may not wait for a motion or a petition; or any other matter once it is certified by the Speaker to be urgent, the Member can raise it. The rule that relates to private members’ business during the first one hour on Thursday is also there but does not preclude this particular rule.

But Members you will recall that I had made a ruling on this subject. Today I am paying the price for going back on that ruling. I made a ruling that these matters should be raised after we have handled the business that is before the House. But you can see that we have spent two hours on these matters and yet I have an Order Paper that is loaded, and I do not know how far we will be able to move with the business on the Order Paper. I am now going to ask the hon. Member for Rubaga South to raise the matter he is going to raise in two minutes so that I can go to the Order Paper.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: So, Mr Speaker, in light of what I have stated, Police dispersed my rally with the use of teargas and rubber bullets and we were not able to hear from the constituents.

Police have denied me the opportunity to hold rallies in Rubaga South for fear that some MPs whom I had invited as resource persons would cause havoc, which havoc I did not understand. What I am talking about is very important. It seems to me that the Members of Parliament for Rubaga South are in danger. We are in chains and yet we are elected people. Why should we be isolated from the rest of the Members of Parliament countrywide? Apart from Makindye East and Nakawa MPs - these can freely hold meetings –(Laughter)– for the rest of the constituencies Police will always come in. 

So, I would like to pose the following questions:  

One, can the Minister for Internal Affairs tell this House whether there is a state of emergency in Kampala today to warrant a ban on public meetings.

Two, this House would like to know the MPs and politicians who are not allowed to address public meetings in Kampala. We would like to know whether there is a standing embargo stopping anybody from coming to Rubaga South and interacting with my people.

And finally, does Police have powers to choose resource persons for John Ken-Lukyamuzi the man? If I am a wanted man let me be told by Police so that I can be charged by Police - (Interruption)

MR TAYEBWA: Information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information on what? The honourable member suffered in his own rally in Rubaga and you are giving it from Bushenyi Municipality?

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi for giving way. Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I am giving is that the Police, headed by Kaweesi, gave a statement in the media that they shall not allow any meeting in Kampala. That is the information I want to give you. Now, can the minister tell us what authority he is exercising by stopping rallies and meetings in Kampala? Thank you.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much. What I have talked about is very important in regard to the responsibilities and the duties of a reigning Member of Parliament. I, therefore, demand for a comprehensive response to the issues I have raised. I am entitled to talking to the people of Rubaga South at any time. Nobody should bar me from interacting with them. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Member for Rubaga South. This matter has come at a time when the person in charge of Internal Affairs is not in the House. This information should be passed to the hon. Minister so that these matters can be comprehensively - but we will have an opportunity when we are discussing these things to do with fires and things like that. We can have intervention that can capture that area since the minister is not here right now.

Honourable members, I had promised to give you the names of our visitors from South Africa. I have the honourable member leading the delegation, the chair of the committee, hon. Sogoni. Others are:  Hon. Refilwe Mashigo, hon. Member of Parliament; hon. Thandiwe Helena; hon. Narend Singh; hon. Salomon van Dyk. We also have members of staff: Ezekiel Bacon, Ms Zandile Gabhozi, Mr Zamisa Musa. We also have the Deputy Director General Outcomes from the Presidency, Nolwazi Gasa and Dr Ian Goldman. We also have Mr Stanley Ntakumba and Caroline Mangwane. They have all come to observe the proceedings. 

They will be leaving shortly and as I had allowed the hon. Member who is in the wheelchair to access the House through the Speaker’s door, I will now grant the authority that she can be taken out through the same door and please withdraw the bars. Honourable members who are feeling comfortably from that side can resume their seats.

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, also, we have students and teachers of Buziga Hill Primary School –(Applause)– represented by hon. Hussein Kyanjo and hon. Nabilah Naggayi. Please join me in welcoming them. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. You are very welcome! Where are your students? Yes, they are here. You are welcome. Thank you.

Honourable members, you are reminded to empty your pigeon holes to allow easy slotting of policy statements, which we are now receiving from the various ministries. 

Honourable members, arising from the lack of proper response from the government side – I had directed last year that the ministerial policy statement must be laid on the Table so that we know that they are now in the House. I do not know whether the two statements I have so far seen have been laid before the House.

So honourable ministers, each time you have your statements ready, they have to be laid before the House so that we can record the date on which they came and we stop making our committees feel like they are not doing their work, when actually the statements have not reached them.

LAYING OF PAPERS

I) THE POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE OFFICE OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR THE FY 2013/2014

3.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, pursuant to Section 33 of the National Act and Section 6(1) of the Budget Act and Article 163 of the Constitution, I wish to lay on Table the policy statement for the Office of the Auditor-General for the financial year 2013/14. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and it stands committed to the appropriate committee.


II. PROPOSAL TO BORROW SDR 8,000,000 (US$ 12,000,000) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) TO FINANCE THE UGANDA ENERGY FOR RURAL TRANSFORMATION (ERT) APL-PHASE II PROJECT

3.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Floor of Parliament a proposal to borrow SDR 8,000,000, equivalent to $12 million from the International Development Association to finance the Ugandan Energy for Rural Transformation APL-Phase II Project. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture and it stands referred to the Committee on National Economy for the examination and thereafter report to the House.

III. PROPOSAL TO BORROW EURO 15.0 MILLION FROM KFW OF GERMANY (KFW) FOR FINANCING OF THE KAMPALA – ENTEBBE POWER TRANSMISSION LINE PROJECT

3.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, the proposal to borrow Euro 15 million from KFW of Germany for financing the Kampala-Entebbe power transmission line project. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture and it is equally referred to the Committee on National Economy to examine and report to the House for propriety of this request. Thank you.

BILLS

COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING BILL, 2009

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you recall that we had examined this Bill, we stood over some clauses but we had gone up to Clause 40. So we will proceed from there. There were areas on which we were supposed to have some discussions; we will deal with those later. If a matter should arise that they need to report, then we will come back to that. But let us go to the Bill now.

Clause 41

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert SSEBUNYA): Thank you, Mr Chairman. We had head notes on Clause 41 which reads, “Seizure, freezing, forfeiture of assets in relation to money laundering”. We wanted to include the word “tracing”. Then the amendment will read, “Tracing, seizure, freezing and forfeiture of assets of proceeds of crime”. Justification is to include “tracing” to widen the scope of assets from those related only to money laundering to include even those assets resulting from acts of crime. 

Secondly, normally you first trace, identify or search for assets before they are seized. Assets seized should not be limited to only those resulting from money laundering but rather all those resulting from proceeds of crime. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal is to introduce the word “tracing” in this amendment; is there any debate on that? I put the question to that amendment by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is on the amendment of the general title of part V. Can we now go to the clause itself?

Clause 41

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is there any amendment on Clause 41? I put the question that Clause 41 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, this is a topographical correction in subclause (1)(a): “An authorized officer to whom documents are produced under the production order.” Delete the word “to”.

THDE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, take out “to” in sub clause (1)(a) – that is in the opening paragraph of 43(1). Can I put the question to that amendment? I put the question on the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43, as amended, agreed to.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: This authorized officer retaining documents – I want to seek a clarification from the minister; who is this authorising officer you are talking about, and who is to retain the documents? We know they are many – it could be the Police or any other person. But who is this authorised officer who is supposed to retain the documents and where is he supposed to keep them because he can easily tamper with them?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Have you looked at Clause 2, where it is defined?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, I have seen it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So are you dissatisfied with it because -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Well, we have not defined it yet, but I want him to help me so that I can answer that interpretation clause in advance. Otherwise, in this matter this is the way I want to know so that I am able to interpret it under the interpretation clause.

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, “authorized officer” is defined in the interpretation clause and it means the Director-General, Deputy Director-General of the Authority; a prosecutor of the Director of Public Prosecutions or a police officer of the rank of Assistant Inspector of Police or higher. And, Mr Chairman, my understanding is that the interpretation clause will be dealt with at a later stage. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, except that we had made some changes on the Director-General and things like those.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, that is why I was coming  because that means the Executive Director and the Deputy - Does it mean that anybody below the rank of those two who are senior cannot be authorised officers? Here you are saying “anybody of the rank of Assistant Inspector of Police”. That means from the Assistant Inspector of Police up to the IGP. In this case you are saying that the Executive Director or Deputy only; not person at any rank. Are you saying that those are the top most who should be the ones responsible for that?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is there any justification for excluding the other officers in the authority? That is the point being raised. Please consider it and see if it can be incorporated in the definition to widen it to take care of that concern. Can we now go to Clause 43?

I put the question that Clause 43 as amended stands part of the Bill.

Clause 43, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, this is from foreign assistance to seize property. What will be the procedure before you seize property obtained using money from foreign crimes? Because, yes, here, you are going to get a warrant but what about this foreign one, where will you get the orders from?   

MR RUHINDI: I do not know whether I have got the Leader of the Opposition clearly because if I understand him the way I do, this is a foreign state; the crime is committed outside the country. The proceeds of that crime are either to be concealed or utilised in Uganda to commit another crime. And, therefore, the procedure to be applied is substantively the procedure as enumerated in the clauses we have covered. You proceed normally because we are not going to enforce action outside the country but we note that a crime has been committed outside the country, the proceeds are being brought to be concealed here and therefore the process of enforcement is as enumerated above. That is the distinction.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. Attorney-General, I want you to help me understand. Is this where double agreements exist? We could be dealing with a state which we do not understanding. Let me give an example from taxation; where there is a double taxation agreement there is some arrangement whereby when I pay tax in Kenya it is offset in Uganda. In this case, are you going to deal with countries where they are also enforcing the Anti-Money Laundering Act? How? I do not understand it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The reciprocal arrangement?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes the reciprocal arrangement. 

MR LUBOGO:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. When I look at Clause 45, what I understand is that we are legislating for foreign countries- where a matter has been determined in a foreign country- and we are legislating that we enforce a decision made outside the country here in Uganda following our procedures. Is it right that we should legislate for decisions taken outside the boundaries of Uganda? Thank you.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I do not see where the confusion is. This does not apply in the same way you apply reciprocal enforcement of judgements. Reciprocal enforcement of judgements means that a judgement has been delivered in one country - and of course we have got an Act; an enabling legislation to that effect on reciprocal enforcement of judgements. All that this is saying is that, if there is evidence that a crime has been committed in country X and the proceeds of that crime are to be applied here and there is evidence to that effect -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: And there is a request from that state.

MR RUHINDI: No, there might not be a request.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is what it says. 

MR RUHINDI: Yes, this is where there is a specific request but I do not think in all cases there should be a specific request. But this is where there is a specific request. In this case the specific request is for which purpose? To locate or seize property suspected to be tainted property in respect of a crime within its jurisdiction. The provisions of clauses 41 to 44 apply mutatis mutandis. Mutatis mutandis means, “With all necessary changes and modifications,” then you apply clauses 41 to 44 and this is by operation of the law. You need not actually go beyond this. They are telling you that if that request comes, in order to enforce this provision, look at clauses 41 to 44.

MR OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Attorney-General. Mr Chairman, I have been combing through the Bill to see what happens to our money, which is taken out and how we can recover it. Because here we are saying that people who have stolen money and brought it to our country to clean it can take it away - which is okay. How about our money which people steal and take away, where is it taken care of, Attorney-General?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is the rationale we are looking at, reciprocal or not reciprocal. People steal money and take it to Shanghai or South Sudan. Then this one - foreign request- and foreign request has two categories: either the citizens of Uganda committed the crime or their own citizens. So, we want that clarification to come out clearly. One, on request, does it mean if there is no request we should not do it? Two, what happens to us? Even if they are not citizens, somebody comes here, they do some work, rob our money, they are non-citizens and they run away. What do we do? That is where we wanted you to help us.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we have part V of the Bill, on page 72, on international cooperation. There are general provisions and there are specific provisions beginning at 10.3. So, maybe when we get there we shall know when we shall get money when it is our own who will launder it outside the country.  

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, if you look at part V right from “seizure, freezing” and “forfeiture of assets” in relation to money laundering; and looking at production orders, right from sections 41, 42 and 43 - if you read these continuously, I would think the Learned Attorney-General is actually clear because here we are looking at a document suspected to be in your possession or of which you are in control; either it is directly under your possession or you are in control of the document in a way. But now here comes a point where you are required to produce the document in Clause 44.

Now, let us give an example that probably your house was gutted by fire and it is extremely hard for you to produce this document. This clause is seeking to bring forward the possible relief within the understanding of court – it should be granted to a person who otherwise is ordered to produce the document but because of extreme hardship or some condition that is burdensome, the person can’t produce it and so can find a relief under this clause. That is my understanding. So, we would think it is a trait law; it doesn’t bring a lot of complications.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, can we take a decision on this?

MR NANDAL-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the framers of this law knew the reason why they did it. I want to suggest that we tie it on both ends because it is deliberate, if you look at it. First of all, it says that where a “foreign state requests assistance to locate or seizure property” – they are not talking about documents, but property. 

First, this might be a request or not necessarily a request. Two, because it involves crimes in their own crimes, it should tie in even the locals or non-locals who also take our resources out of this country. If you leave it this way – the issues you are talking about at page 72 have not been addressed here. That is the reason we are raising it.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, the definition of property is very broad. In the definition section it reads: “’Property’ means property or assets of every kind, nature and description, whether movable or immovable, tangible or intangible, corporeal or incorporeal including currency, monetary instruments, motor vehicle, ships, aircrafts, boats, works of art, jewelry, precious metals, legal documents or instruments, evidencing title to or interest in such property or assets.” This is very broad.
Two, you see international obligations say, incorporated in the charter or conventions. This is why conventions or charters that we become members or signatory to are ratified here; after ratifying, we domesticate them in our domestic laws. The purpose is for enforcement.

There is no way, here in Uganda we can legislate for the enforcement of our laws outside this territory. If you have international obligations, like in this case - because some of these, as has been indicated, are included in the Convention on Terrorism. But you need to know that we are now domesticating some of these provisions for purposes of enforcement.

Likewise, many other countries that are, for instance, signatory to that convention, have passed similar legislations; maybe the Minister of Finance can give you the list.

So, you can also seek enforcement in the same way these people do when they come here. We can seek enforcement on what happens in their jurisdictions as far as, for instance, terrorism financing is concerned. It cannot be, Mr Chairman, and you know this very well, that we can sit here and pass legislations for the enforcement of our law outside our own territory. That is why Clause 3 is very clear.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to propose an amendment in regard to (a) and (b) and say that where a foreign state, whether or not –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In which clause?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: In Clause 45. I want to first make that in (a) in respect of the foreign state and (b) to take care of Uganda’s interests because we may also want to ask foreign states permission to cease property owned by our nationals or even other people not nationals but may have stolen our resources from here to that other country. That is why I want to propose production orders in relation to foreign crimes.

One should know  whether they have requested or not, so long as we have evidence that there is somebody there who has property that cannot match their earnings - we should be able to give out that information. Two, when it comes to our fellow Ugandans or even non-Ugandans, we should be able to say, “You person you have our money stolen here but being kept in Dubai.” We should do for both.

MR RUHINDI: The Minister of Finance can add on – I hear him citing come other provisions – but I was looking at Clause 4 on prohibition of money laundering from wherever the proceedings of the crime come from, it is prohibited and it is an offence.

Clause 45, talks about where there are a specific request. Clause 4 is very broad. The Minister of Finance may wish to add on.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you cannot take this law to a country like Saudi Arabia and say that under Section 45 (2) of our law, this is what you must do. That is the simple point the Attorney-General is putting across. We cannot legislate like that because there is a framework for enforcement of such laws outside our jurisdiction, but which cannot be captured in this law. For example, even now you can go to court, obtain an order, but later realise that the person you sued does not have any property; he has it somewhere else. You have to seek another order to do such a thing outside the country under another arrangement. You don’t have to go there and say that “Under Section 45 (2) of this law, we are now moving you to do this and that”, no. You have to ask the authority of the court to carry out trans-national instructions the other side. You cannot legislate it for enforcement in that manner. That is what the Attorney-General is saying.

MR KOLE: If I got what the Leader of Opposition was saying correctly, he knows why we were elected as per Article 79 of the Constitution, which says in parts that we are empowered to make laws on any matter for the development and good governance of Uganda. What he is trying to say is that, if we are to protect and also scare away some of the perpetuators of these crimes, we should have some law to base on. We should do it as a preventive measure and not for enforcement purposes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: One of the principles of legislation is that, it is never made in vain. You do not have to waste parliamentary time to pass a law that you cannot enforce. That is acting in vain.

The proposal that the Leader of Opposition is making would look like this, in addition to Clause 45: “Where Uganda requests a foreign country to locate and seize properties suspected to be tainted property in respect of a frame within its jurisdiction”, that is the kind of thing he is talking about. And you cannot do that -  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, let me be clear. First, we may want to seize something. We go to court and get an order. That order becomes the basis on which we go to the other country and say, “This is our order”. But you cannot go there and just say that we want to get this property and go to court in this country. At least we should first take our own court order and see if it can be domesticated. 

Mr Chairman, at an appropriate time, it may become easier when all other countries adopt this Anti-money Laundering law. But for us to make a law, we should be able to go to court and say, “Person X was in this minister and run away with this amount of money, which we believe is in this country.” 

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I said before that we have a chapter for international cooperation. If you can read 105 it reads: “Upon receipt of request from another state for confiscation -” it is more detailed in as far as our jurisdiction is concerned. Other countries, as the Attorney-General has said, have ratified the same laws in their countries. 

So once someone launders money here and takes it in another state, they have laws that help us retrieve the same from those countries. So, we have laws here and they have laws there and they have all ratified. So, I want to tell Members that apart from Uganda, the rest have ratified these recommendations. 

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, additionally, in Clause 103 there is an intended amendment to add that, “The Attorney-General or authorised officer may enter into any agreement with any ministry, department, public authority or body outside Uganda for collection, use or disclosure of information for the purpose of exchange or sharing information outside Uganda or for any purpose under this Act.” That is to allow the Attorney-General or authorised officer to enter into such agreement with people outside. 

Also under Clause 103, there are intention to insert another close which provides that, “The Attorney-General or an authorised officer in Uganda may make a request to a court or other competent authority of another state for legal assistance related to civil, criminal administrative investigation, prosecution proceedings or enforcement of court orders.”  So that will address our chapter on how we as Uganda can request people outside Uganda for legal assistance. 

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, the amendment proposed is on page 30 of the amendments where the committee is proposing to insert a new clause to read, “The Attorney-General -”, as the minister has read. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, in cooperation, that is just a request and for us we think there must be a procedure. Here it says, “Production orders”. We should have our production orders, which we want to enforce in the other country. It is up to the other country to build international cooperation. That is why we want to put orders here, which we should get here. 

Mr Chairman, if we leave it like this, it means we will only be helping foreign states and when our things are taken, we will be the losers. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I want to give you a good example. We are members to the Rome Statute. We domesticated the ICC statute here in 2010 – (Interruption) – that is a different matter altogether. You cannot legislate on enforcement measures for another country. 

If you talk about a production order, the other country may prefer something else. So you cannot sit here and legislate for enforcement of an international charter or convention for another country; you cannot, hon. Leader of the Opposition. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Chairman, in Section 45, we want – if I got the Leader of the Opposition correctly - a provision where we shall move our own country to request assistance from another country to locate or seize property suspected to be tainted in respect of crime. When you read part V critically, it is mainly about us receiving requests and answering, but the equivalent of 45 is not there. 

I would, therefore, propose that we have a section which says, “Where Uganda suspects property to have been gotten from crime to request assistance from another state to locate or seize this property.” I do not think it is a crime to request. If they refuse so be it, but I do not think it would be in vain, Mr Chairman. 

MR EBIL: Mr Chairman, to support her, you could look at (3): “A request for mutual assistance may be refused where -
    a) it was not made by competent authority according to the legislation of the requesting state; or 
    b) if it was not transmitted in the proper manner.” 

I do not know how that can guide us to support – (Interjections) – that is in Clause 103. 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I want to agree with the Attorney-General for one fundamental reason on how laws are made. If we want to involve a foreign country, we have to seek their consent. One of the challenges for implementation of international law is enforcement. 

Mr Chairman, you rightly guided that laws are not made in vain. Why would we try to make such legislations here which are not going to be implemented? On our part, Clause 45 is good enough to show that we are receptive for request but we cannot put in our laws, and making sure that laws are made to bind willing parties; we are making these laws for Uganda but we are also aware – (Interruption)

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: I would like the hon. Member to clarify on an issue where he thinks that we are deliberating in vain and that implementation of such a law may not really take place. I thought that under international law, the countries have a mechanism of collaborating to ensure that certain systems are put right or certain situations are corrected. In such circumstances, why do you think it would be hard to ask for example, Kenya, to seize properties that hon. Wafula has accumulated in Kenya? (Laughter)

I just wanted to use my brother hon. Wafula because I know he is not a thief. I may use someone else and they say possibly, I am saying the Member is a thief.

I thought that if we asked our neighbours across to help us recover our properties that were ill-gotten and someone has tried to clean the money by putting up a structure, we would be in order. I just want my brother to make it clear to me how hard it would be in using international law to recover this money.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: We will ask the lawyers to help us here. We have had countries recover their stolen treasures; Philippines did that, Nigeria has done that, Kenya has done that, Ethiopia did it. Which law did they use to recover stolen monies by their fallen politicians, which had been hidden away in foreign countries? Under what law did they recover that money?

That is what we want you, the Attorney-General, to help us with and hon. Oboth, you are a lawyer. Please, help us so that we can use this law to check money laundering within the country and those who take our money, those politicians and whoever, and go and clean it in another country.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would like to seek a clarification from my brother. In this matter, if you do not put Ugandans here, are you telling us that you are authorising Ugandans to steal from Uganda and go and keep it in other countries? How do we handle it – because those are crimes committed by both Ugandans and non-Ugandans and they are taken to other countries?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, maybe, you could do a formulation. Please, do it so that you can guide the debate because now, we seem to be just guessing what we really mean.

MR OBOTH: If I may respond to clarifications before the Attorney-General does. My fear is that we want clause 45 to do for us everything. Clause 45 can only work together with other clauses here; Clause 4, prohibits money laundering of any form whether here or outside Uganda. International law,in which I may claim some limited knowledge - how is it created? How about part 6, isn’t that creating international law, international cooperation.

What is international law, if it is not all about cooperation between two states or more? Must we legislate here, specifically? I agree with the Leader of the Opposition and others. We are in this state of fear of money being stolen or about to be stolen and be taken to foreign countries but my difficulty is to make the law with such a mind that in the future will not help.I beg to agree with the Attorney-General that, in international law we cannot bind other countries.

As long as you create an obligation on behalf of another country, you are creating international law. I am saying this with all the conviction. As long as you are creating an obligation for another country, you are making an international law.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I would like to inquire from the hon. Obothon whether we have a situation of laundering money in our country. We are making a law allowing requests that are made to us, have there been cases that we are stopping? 

MR OBOTH: I can understand your pain hon. Wafula and probably, we are faced with the reality of making laws. What I am saying is not denying that a request should be made but the reality is we cannot make a provision that empowers to make requests outside. That is what I am saying because by so doing, we can only show in our locality Uganda that we are receptive of other requests to be made here.That if there is any country at international level, they will ask you, what have you done?So, to create obligations for other countries by making our domestic laws here, we shall be taking a walk.

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, colleague. I am worried when you try to scare us from legislating from a point of view, where we have to make requests and yet, we are legislating from a point of view of receiving requests from other countries.The danger is that we are creating room to help others but we are blocking ourselves from an avenue of requesting other countries to cooperate in the same manner we are providing for.

A request can be honoured or turned down, it is better we provide for room for someone to turn down a request than give the money launderer the opportunity to say there is no law. Iwould be very comfortable to hear from the learned Attorney-General what specific clause is there under international law to provide for this.

Then two, if that law is there, then, why are we providing to help other countries without referring to the same law? Can you clarify to me, hon. colleagues, about that?

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, I am afraid that it may take more time than is available for us to go through what exactly I am saying here. Clause 45 as it stands is a benchmark provision for us for international relations and here, in my view, which I am convinced about, that it does not stop us from making similar –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let him just finish the statement.

MR OBOTH: My argument is and was that under this provision, we cannot create obligations on the other countries to accept or not to accept our requests. But we are at liberty because we can say strangers are welcome; we cannot say we should also be welcomed in Dubai. We cannot say that.

MR EKANYA: I thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. Hon. Oboth says he has good knowledge in international law. I also have some knowledge having been a Chairperson of the Local Government Accounts - the Parliamentary Powers and Privileges Article 90 and I do not want to waste time. I want to go to 3 (c) and then (iii) in exercising this – that clause which is stated there, “……the Parliament has power to issue commission or request to examine a witness abroad.” It is already provided for here. So, if you want to go and examine a witness abroad, you need to go with documentary evidence that this witness has a case to answer and what we are just saying domesticating under the Anti-Money Laundering law is that you go there, go with clean authentic documents so that the judicial system and the Police can help you, to avoid wasting peoples’ time. Otherwise, that is why, for example, some of us have a clean bill of health from Interpol when you need certain business so that when you go abroad, there is this clean bill of health. Most of these countries require that you are clean from your home country first. And that is what we are saying, Mr Chairperson. I thank you.

MR KAKOOZA: I beg for your guidance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, conclude and then I have the member for Kabula.

MR OBOTH: You cited a constitutional provision and I will cite the same constitutional provision about the functions of Parliament in Article 79, which was read here before – that is clause (ii). I want to only add that you will have to make laws that help provisions having the force of law in Uganda.

About the witnesses, something is being done here, Mr Chairman. We should not confuse the two. The example I gave is that you can make a law in your home country, whether to receive like this Parliament accepts strangers and can also decide not to. But we cannot say that other Parliaments in South Africa should do the same thing as our Chairman did here as the Speaker. So, that would be creating an obligation for that country from here and international law is not made like that. This knowledge I am speaking about is beyond being in the Committee on Local Government Accounts. (Laughter)

MS NAMBOOZE: I thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to thank my colleague for giving way, although reluctantly. The constitutional Article that the honourable colleague is citing provides that Parliament shall have powers to make laws on matters for peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda. It does not say that “in Uganda.” So, these are issues of good governance “of Uganda” and not “in Uganda”. That is the information I wanted to give him.

MR OBOTH: The hon. Member for Mukono who is my area Member of Parliament, I referred to Article 79 (ii) on force of law in Uganda. You know Uganda is mentioned in this Constitution many times –(Interjections)– if you come privately, I will tell you - because the Constitution is of Uganda. But I have put my case and I understand the pain of the Leader of the Opposition and I agree with you –(Interjections)– I agree with you but I think that we cannot make the law that will never be enforced.

MR KAKOOZA: I thank you. I think there is a point when you look at part six, which legislates for international cooperation, when you look at “Request for confiscation of property” – “Upon receipt of a request from another state for confiscation of property derived from money laundering and other crimes…” - I thought that we could put that point because when the situation of money laundering is not particularly in Uganda and other states can request us, we can also do the same. But the arrangement - I thought that we would put it under part six, where there is that arrangement where other states can request us and we can also request them because it is not one way traffic. Otherwise, if I take money from here –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to thank hon. Kakooza for giving way. You have seen that section 45 is saying “foreign friends”. Now the moment somebody has committed a crime here, he has gone to a foreign country, we should tie it in the same area. The foreigners can ask us and we should also be able to ask them and we can only go there like hon. Ekanya said, with an order and say, “Yes, we have got this court order, X,Y; we suspect he has these properties here or these accounts and we want them.” 

Anybody objecting to this must either be planning to aid the criminals who have taken money because we have a lot of things out there, which we need to follow up and we have a lot of evidence. The moment we make this law, we shall show you where they are.

MR KAKOOZA: I am not trying to oppose your position but the arrangement where to put it because if there is a request for confiscation and there is a state, which you are allowing to come into your country, then your point could be put there that as much as these people or other states are requesting us to confiscate property, it is the same way we can do it at the other end. 

So, in 105, where there is part six discussing international cooperation, these other states are from the other side, and I think that could be the arrangement when we are discussing this. We could get where to fix it in this part so that it is different from seizure, freezing and forfeiture of assets in connection with money laundering.  

So, if we put it under international cooperation, it would give more meaning in such arrangement in the Bill. Otherwise, if money is stolen in the UK and somebody comes and invests it here, the country is free to request. It is the same way we can do it if a man steals money and invests it in Rwanda or anywhere, we can do it and we are allowed. After all, all other countries are fighting to stop people from getting free money under dubious means.

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: I thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. I think there are two issues here; one is about speculation, concern and anxiety of money or property that is tainted with crime but apparently, according to the international law and other obligations, we cannot legislate in this law to say that we can request them to assist us. 

Therefore, I would like an assurance from the Attorney-General that if any Ugandan commits this crime of money laundering, and invests it abroad, there is a mechanism to trace, locate and cease this property even if it is not explicitly stated here as you want it because I thought the Leader of the Opposition had a point. However, we cannot put that point in this law. So, I need assurance, chairperson and I will be moving a motion that you put a question to this section 45.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: That will be after I have given you information. Mr Chairman, I hold a book, which I laid on Table and I do not know whether it is the copy you have now but this - International Standards on Combating Money Laundering and Terrorism financing and proliferation, recommendation 137 reads: “Countries should rapidly, constructively and effectively provide the widest possible range of mutual legal assistance in relation to money laundering, associated predicate offences and terrorist financing investigations, prosecution and related proceedings.” Related proceedings may be calling for that laundered money from other countries.

“Countries should have an adequate legal basis for providing assistance and where appropriate, should have in place treaties, arrangements or other mechanisms to enhance cooperation. In particular, countries should:
    (a) Not prohibit or place unreasonable or unduly restrictive conditions on the provision of mutual assistance.” 
That means that if other countries have ratified these recommendations, then they are also legislating in their own countries, as we are now doing.
“(b) Ensure that they have clear and efficient processes for timely prioritisation and execution of mutual assistance requests. Countries should use central authorities and other established official mechanisms for effective transmission and execution of requests to monitor progress on request that a case management system should be maintained.  
(c) Not to refuse to execute a request for mutual legal assistance on the sole ground that the offence is also considered to involve fiscal matters.
(d) Not to refuse to execute a request for mutual legal assistance on the grounds that laws require financial institutions to maintain secrecy or confidentiality.
(e) Maintain the confidentiality of mutual legal assistance requests they receive and the information contained in fundamental principles of domestic law in order to protect the integrity of the investigation or inquiry. If the requested country cannot comply with the requirements of confidentiality, it should promptly inform the requesting country.”

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Just to back up the provisions the committee chairperson is reading. I wish to refer Members to page 20 of our report, where we are looking at clause 103: Request for mutual legal assistance. There is a new sub-clause that we intend to introduce and it reads as follows: “The Attorney-General or the authorised officer in Uganda may make a request to the Court or other competent authority of another state for legal assistance related to a civil, criminal or administrative investigation, prosecution, proceedings or enforcement of court orders.” I think that should satisfy what Members have been complaining about. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, now, you have seen clause 103: court orders, production orders. We must have here a production order, which will be from Uganda. Then, it will be the one we shall go with to that foreign country. (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition for giving way. The information I would love to share with you is that to allay our fears, we could consider clause 3 (about the jurisdiction); it is covered there. And because – I take the presumption that everyone has a copy of the Bill – Clause 3(2) says, “The crimes provided for in part (2) of this Act shall be investigated by a competent authority, tried, judged and sentenced by a court regardless of whether or not the crimes occurred outside the territory of Uganda.”

Mr Chairman, the point I wish to make is that the fight against money laundering requires every state – the argument of those who are opposing this would only hold water if they could provide a case where a certain state did not provide for a similar provision to clause 45. The provision in clause 45 is envisaged to exist in all other states in the fight against money laundering – that every state should be able to provide for the request to be made and they would be able to honour those requests. 

But if there is anybody in this House who currently has information that there is any country with legislation on money laundering, then we could be able to concede to the argument. I believe and I know, for a fact, that this is purely handled state by state and such similar provisions are there. And this should put the matter to rest. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, are we ready to proceed now?

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, I think the worry of the Leader of the Opposition has been cured by the submission by hon. Akol. I think that is under clause 103 - on Uganda making a request. Now, coming to the production order and in relation to what the Leader of the Opposition is suggesting under clause 45 – that it must be provided for here, I think it can be provided for under clause 45 because here, we are describing procedure of procuring production order – who can apply for and how can it be obtained in Uganda? Clause 45 says that even if there is a request from a foreign state for a production or for a seizure of any property suspected to be from the earnings from money laundering crime, that foreign order must still follow the same route in Uganda. 

And that is why it was said here that “mutatis mutandis” – meaning “all necessary changes having been considered”. You still apply for it but it must be in conformity to our procedure as provided for right from clause 41 up to clause 44. Now, if we go ahead to say, under 45, that when Uganda is making a request for a production order in a foreign country – under clause 45, the presumption is that even there, the same procedure as stated from clause 41-44 must be followed, which is a nullity because they may be having their own producers. Nevertheless, our fear has been cured under clause 103 and also basing on the international law – here, we are basically on municipal law – the bridge between the two laws is the treaties. 

The treaties we are trying to talk about, part of them is already imported under part (6) on what we call international cooperation. So, I think a question should be put so that, under clause 45, we do not need to try to bind foreign countries to our own procedure of procuring a production order. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are we clear now? That is the point we have been trying to make for a long time, because clauses 41, 42, 43 and 44 all relate to the issuance of production orders in Uganda. (Interjections) No, only in Uganda; it is clause 45, which now says that if anything is done outside the country and we want it to be brought to Uganda, it should follow this same procedure. That is all it is saying. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to get more clarification. Does it mean that if we are following one person in Uganda and we have followed all this - if he is in Dubai or wherever, is it covered that we can follow this; that even if Dubai does not accept, we can have the order? Does it mean that?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You can have the order wherever the person is. You can have the order under clause 42. The court may, if it considers that there are reasonable grounds for so doing, make an order requiring a person to produce to an authorised officer at a time and place specified in the order, any documents or documents of the kind referred to in section 41.

When you have got this order, that is when you see: is this person here or is this person out? Then you go to the issue of cooperation after you have got the order. The order is under clause 42. It does not mean whether you are here or out. You get the order under clause 42 within our courts here. Once you have the order in your hands, the execution is the matter of cooperation, which is now covered under another subject. 

Should I put the question to clause 45 now? But on the issue of foreign crimes on the head note, I do not know what foreign crimes are. Are there foreign crimes known to me? Production orders in relation to foreign crimes. It is talking about foreign crimes.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: In addition to foreign crimes, Mr Chairman, does it necessarily mean that they should request? They may not request but you might see that this is an issue and Government of Uganda assists.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Under this provision, Uganda has got to be moved by the country that is doing the investigation somewhere else because you might not even know. What I am saying is that under this, you might not even know but once they are doing investigations in Kenya and they have come to those conclusions and they have got the necessary orders, then they come to Uganda and say, “Uganda, help us. We have this situation in your country,” then they go under clauses 41, 42 and 43 with necessary modification.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, why I am raising this is that we have investors. A man will come as an investor, he wants land in Namanve and he says he has $2 million. Because we are desperate for them, we accept without us doing a double check on the person. Due diligence on investors should be done because how will we be sure that we are not getting an investor who has fleeced another country of resources?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I will put the question to clause 45 now but I need clarification on foreign crimes.

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, I think it should be in relation to crimes committed in foreign countries. The title could simply be rephrased-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: On the head note of Clause 45, there is “foreign crimes” and yet it is not defined anywhere what foreign crimes are.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I admit that there is no definition of foreign crimes but you can say “production orders in relation to crimes committed outside Uganda.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, they might even have been committed here.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Okay.

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, I think “foreign crimes” here is also self-explanatory in the statement below where it says “A foreign state,” it is to do with a foreign state, “requests andassistance to locate or seize property suspected to be tainted property in respect of a crime within its jurisdiction…” jurisdiction of this foreign state. So, that crime in this paragraph is assumed to be a foreign crime. That is what I would think.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that now. I put the question that clause 45 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49, agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53, agreed to.

Clause 54, agreed to. 

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 56, agreed to.

Clause 57, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62, agreed to.

Clause 63, agreed to.

Clause 64

MR RUHINDI: I think the committee should move first. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: We want to insert a new clause. Clause 64 is “emergency searches and seizures”. We have (1) and we have (2)(a) and (2)(b) and we want to include (2)(c). Clause 64(2)(c) will read, “An authorised officer who carries out any action pursuant to this section shall, within 48 hours following the search, entry or seizure, present before court a duly sworn statement of information.”

The justification is that it is necessary to formalise the actions of the authorised officer carrying out an emergency search or seizure without a warrant issued under clause 60 but acting on reasonable grounds of suspicion that that particular property is tainted or that such tainted property is about to be concealed, destroyed or lost and safeguard against misuse of this authority through this check.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The amendment is that “The authorised officer who carries out any action pursuant to this section shall within 48 hours following the search, entry or seizure, present before court a duly sworn statement of information.” That is the proposed amendment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think the framers were looking at a situation of searching without a warrant. But this is very dangerous. If you give people authority to search without warrants, any time they can do anything. A person will just have a disagreement and they will come over to search. What you can do is maybe to ask the Police to secure the place as the authorised officer goes to secure a warrant from court. 

Mr Chairman, I will never agree to the fact that anybody should be searched without a warrant.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, are you talking about clause 64 in its entirety? Okay, can we first deal with this particular clause? Can we take a vote on this, Attorney-General?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we cannot take a vote until we get done with the entire clause. The moment we take a vote on that – it is coming to beef up clause 64, where we are saying that the person searching should carry a warrant.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, it will not affect it because that decision will be taken on all clauses. That amendment, if agreed to, will apply to all of them.

MR OBOTH: I have listened attentively and I thought that clause 64 provides for circumstances where obtaining a warrant would not be feasible. The title indicates emergence searches and decisions. If this is not agreeable to other people, I am wondering whether we will not provide a law with general principles and exceptions so that other people can also benefit from it. Much as this can be abused, other people can demand for a warrant in a bid to frustrate an investigation in this matter.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, one will just hear of a rumour that they have applied to search their houses and they will do one or two things to disorganize the process.

MR ODOI: Thank you, Mr Chair. The proposal by the committee is very good. It moves together with the whole of clause 64. There is however one problem. If we insert it as clause 64 (2)(c), it simply will not flow because it provides a reporting mechanism. You have done a search pursuant to clause 64(1) to (2)(b), where do you report to? I thought it would stand alone as clause 64 (3).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yeah! That is correct. That is the wise man from the East. 

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Yes, I am a member of the committee, but the information I want to give concerns the search without warrant. We foresaw a situation in the course of benchmarkingMauritius. What we came to realize is that there could be some urgent situations where the financial intelligence unit for Uganda could have detected cases of money laundering, for example, in a bank or at the airport or some other place where they might have seen somebody crossing over with a sack of money. For such conditions, to say that the authorized officer first goes to process a court order or a search warrant, gives an opportunity to the culprit to escape. That is why we had to cater for such emergencies. That is the information I wanted to give to the House although of course it is subject to our internalization. Otherwise, that is the spirit in which we looked at it. It would be more helpful than when it is left open.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the information coming from Budadiri binds everybody from Budadiri. (Laughter)

MR RUHINDI: I thank the hon. Member from the East who has just been holding the microphone. You see I come from North, East, West, and South in the small Uganda. Mr Chairman, I agree with the reasoning he has presented. The flow of this clause has been corrected and it can now read as follows: “An authorised officer who carries out any action pursuant to this section shall, not later than 48 hour following the search, entry and/or seizure, present before court, a duly sworn statement of information.”

I also agree with another wise man from the East that this should be captured as sub-clause 3, distinct on its own. With those few amendment, Mr Chairman, I move that –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Should we say, “not later” or “shall within 48 hours?”

MR RUHINDI: No, it should be – you see all it is saying is that after taking action, you should, within not later than 48 hours, after that action, go to court –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, the thing is;should we use the phrase “within 48 hours” or “not later than 40 hours?”

MR RUHINDI: We should use the phrase “Not later than 48 hours following the search.” Everything is just in there. Do you have a copy of the report?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you are aware that in this House, sometimes people will stand to give information, but before that is done, another Member will stand on a point of order.

Have you looked at clause 63 (4)? It says that where the court refuses on insufficient grounds to give – they can decide to apply – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, read it in full, hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have read it in full.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, you haven’t because it says that where they consider the grounds insufficient for seizure – it is specific and it says that it shall order the authorised officer to return the property to the owner immediately.

So, I now put the question to the amendment as proposed – yes, Shadow Attorney-General.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. There is something I am grappling with in my mind and maybe the learned colleague or the chairman of the committee can assist me. I also would like to protect the interest of a person who has been a victim of some over enthusiastic officer who might have unreasonably seized the property – money and so on, but eventually it is found that that was not subject to the seizure under this law. Don’t we need to provide some sort of indemnity to that particular person in some clause because we are trying to do a fair law?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Similar to Clause 63 (4).

MR KATUNTU: Clause 63 (4) just talks about return –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I meant something just similar to that. If on the basis of the duly sworn information the court finds out that well, based on this, you had no basis for doing this, then some orders –

MR KATUNTU: Yes, some remedial order can be put in this law.

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, those circumstances are covered under clause 66, where seized property can be returned. It says, “Where property has been seized under section 58 up to 64, otherwise than because it may be evidence of commission of a crime, a person who claims an interest in the property may apply to the court for an order that the property be returned to the person”. The procedure also in (2) covers those circumstances: “The Court shall make an order for the return of the property to that person -” that is under clause 66.

MR KATUNTU: I think that is where the problem is. You see, the court is only empowered to make an order of return of the property. But by the time you go to court, you have spent money; you hired lawyers – depending on the property and so on – it is possible, maybe, it was a transaction that was about to fall through and without reasonable cause, maybe some officer has acted irregularly or illegally until the law catches up with him and court finds out that there was no basis for him to take such a decision. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Don’t you think those should be covered under the general civil representation issues?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, there are many provisions I have seen here, which would certainly be covered under the general provisions of the law. Take, for example, search and seizure; that could even have been covered under our laws here if there is some money being kept illegally, we can proceed under our general provisions. 

But I think this is a specialised law to deal with these sort of circumstances and my view is we are trying to cure an unreasonable act. If an officer acted reasonably, then there was cause for it; but if the officer acted unreasonably, we need to protect our people and the investors in circumstances where they have not committed any crime and somebody acts in a careless manner.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Let me read from the Bill clause 72; “Before making an order, issued as the court considers appropriate with respect to payment of damages or costs or both, in relation to making and executing of an order -” (Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, when you go to damages, that is a little bit farfetched. Let us look at the harshness of the emergency search. My concern is how we can mitigate a situation where someone just rises up in the name of authorised authority and commissions an emergency search that later proves to be unreasonable. 

So, before we go to damages, let us limit the powers of this authorising officer in issuing an emergency search without any reasonable cause. We should limit that authority just like clause 63 limits the conditions for the search. There should also be a provision to check on abuse of powers in authorising any emergency search. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: “Where an authorised officer suspects on reasonable grounds -” –it is there in the opening paragraph. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, the reasonability of that ground is dependent on the officer – (Interjections) – the excesses of that reasonability must be checked. We know over-stepping of powers can happen – the reasonability is determined by him. But finally, if I suffer, what are my rights; if I suffer unjustifiably under that “reasonability” of the emergency search?
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, hon. Member, legislation cannot stop abuse; it can never. But it is the remedial issue that is sought here, like hon. Katuntu was saying. You cannot say that by this legislation, we have stopped everything; they will still do it. You can only prescribe penalty for those who exceed the reasonable grounds that you talk about here.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I agree with that submission of the learned shadow Attorney-General. Once you say in Clause 64 – you have got sub-clause (1) and (2). The expression “Reasonable” is very much highlighted. Now, Clause 66 says, “Where property has been seized under section 58 up to 64, otherwise than because it may be evidence of commission of a crime, a person who claims an interest in the property may apply to the Court for an order that the property be returned to the person”. 

To me, that is the essential part. Now, unless hon. Katuntu, would want to put here that all the prayers – you as a lawyer normally go to court – be included here. Then you may put here that he may also claim special damages, mental anguish – may be, you wanted to put here “Or other appropriate remedy”, I would not have a problem with that.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, I want to seek clarification from the learned Attorney-General. If in the process of having my property back, I spend money on legal representation and so on, why should I be punished by a crime I did not commit? First of all, you prove that I have not committed any crime and further, you want me to lose in the legal fees without necessarily restoring me back to the position I was in – I think that would be very unkind to our people. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, you agree with the proposal that “Any other remedy -” should be inserted to take care of that?

MR ANYWARACH: Yes.

MR SSASAGA: Mr Chairman, in the wisdom of the committee, we saw that there is no way you can cater for what you are saying under the law. We are providing for the financial intelligence unit which is composed of competent staff- that is the assumption - and it is drawn from Bank of Uganda, Police Intelligence and these are the people who will sit and put up parameters- (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The people you are talking about are past – the people of Bank of Uganda were removed. But our worry is, if you get people like these judges; I do not want to mention names – (Laughter) – if he comes with his over-zealousness and carries out seizure, what is the remedy for the person who suffers damage? That is why we want to look at that issue. 

MR SSASAGA: Thank you for that information. I did not have all the amendments. I was away and I am sorry. But what I know is that since we have the Financial Intelligence Unit, which is going to sit and make parameters or indicators that will show aspects of money laundering, this will mean that should they suspect that may be there is money laundering taking place or about to take place, they will be empowered by this to go and search. In that wisdom, aware of the good judges, that is why we moved and now catered for the damages and costs, for example, when somebody’s rights have been violated and on no reasonable grounds, this person will seek for court remedy such as compensation and costs will be awarded in respect of that.

That is why clause 72 now comes to cater for that in case there is a violation or unnecessary abuse.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I thought it would not attract this whole debate but I do not what the committee chairperson and the learned Attorney-General would think of it if under clause 66(2)(c) we said that “The court shall make appropriate orders including the return of the property to that person.” I do not have an objection to that such that under appropriate orders, the court could have discretion within which to determine the claims the lawyer is making in his pleadings.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, it would have to be the other way round. You do not start by the extraneous one.

MR KATUNTU: I do appreciate, Mr Chairman. So it should be; “Shall make an order for the return of the property to the person or any other appropriate orders.”

MR OBOTH: I thought that I was just standing to agree with that. I do not know whether it would be a difficult thing - we all want to be compensated and be re-instituted back to where we were –

THE DEPUTY CHAIPERSON: Okay, can we now go back to 64. 

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Chairman, before we go back -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We cannot go anywhere else, except back. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA MAFABI: I have understood emergency searches. You remember the issue of Ministry of Health where it was transferring money to another account. That can be one of the emergency searches. Now, I have understood. But it should be for those properties, which can lose identity. That is what I want to look at quickly. For instance, electronically, somebody can wire money to Washington -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we deal with that clause now? You see, we can only move forward if we finish a clause that has been agreed upon.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: But, Mr Chairman, before I agree on it fully, if it is cows, those ones cannot be concealed –(Interjections)– there are no cows in Bugisu.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, please, the amendment proposed in now new sub-clause (3) of 64. We will take a vote on that one. I put the question.

(Question and agreed to.)

Clause 64, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 65, agreed to.

Clause 66

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I move that clause 66(c) be amended to provide –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It would be the overriding provision now, not only (c), it will (2).The court shall make runs through (a), (b) and (c).

MR KATUNTU: But the amendment we are seeking to cover is under clause 66(2)(c). 

THE DEPUTY CHAIPERSON:No, it is 66(2)

MR KATUNTU: Okay. It shall then read, “The court shall make an order for the return of the property to that person or any other appropriate remedy.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 66, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 67, agreed to.

Clause 68
MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Clause 68, Mr Chairman, we intend to redraft the entire clause to read; “Where a person has been charged with or is about to be charged or convicted of an offence or where a criminal investigation is on-going, an authorised officer may apply to court for a restraining order in order to restrain the disposition of;
    1) The property that is reasonably believed to be proceeds from crime or any other property in which the person has interest.”

The justification is to provide for preventive action pending the due court process. 

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, I appreciate the concerns of the committee but I would like to say that the proposal be rejected because the current provision is sufficient; it caters for the period when a person is charged or is about to be charged. It also relates to clause 68, which speaks about the content of the application for the restraining order. It does not speak about the period when the person is convicted. It should also not be assumed that the person will be convicted–(Interjections)- yes, you are going to assume that a person is convicted. It does not talk about the period when the person is convicted.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, this one is trying to say that this person can use the proceeds received to commit more crimes, to begin with, from anywhere. I think the committee is trying to say that when somebody is under investigation, all the assets must be blocked until the case is settled and I think that is the best way to go.

The reason I am bringing this is that somebody can sell the property and run away or change money to another form or transfer like we have the case of where one person transferred the assets which were titles of Bank of Uganda. While Bank of Uganda had titles, he had already transferred and sold them to another company, a third party. I think this is very good.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think you still need to reorganise the last line; “authorised officer may apply to court for an order restraining the disposition of…” There are very many orders that might run smoother.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I would not have any problem with both sides as the Bill is and as proposed. I believe that the two positions are both covering the same thing and it makes me – this is my thought; where a criminal investigation is ongoing is almost the same as where a person is about to be charged - unless we want to be generous with words, which does not hurt.But I felt that those two words - the criminal investigation of any category here - that if here it is the same act, we are saying that a person is about to be charged. You cannot be charged without being investigated. 

That is my understanding but if it is being different, I would be glad to be educated.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I think that his drafting is –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But you see, you can be investigated and you are never about to be charged.

MR KATUNTU: “About to be charged” is what lawyers call prima facie evidence so far gathered and it is just about to take a decision. For example, investigations are done by the Police and they are actually convinced that there is some reasonable evidence assembled for either the Directorate of Public Prosecution to take a decision on what charges. But investigations going on - once they say, “come and make a statement”, then investigations have started. So, they are really not necessarily the same depending on which -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You may actually end up being cleared by the investigation.

MR KATUNTU: Exactly. You could be cleared after investigation but if you are about to be charged, it is unlikely that you are going to be cleared.- 

MR OBOTH: I thank you. 

MR KATUNTU: And you were the prosecutor.

MR OBOTH: I am the prosecutor, yes, but that was then. Mr Chairman, what is our role as legislators? Should we open our wings and prolong the seemingly long arm of the law to such a wide – that even where taking his example, that you have been summoned – that they say, “hon. Abdu Katuntu, come the issue of anti-money – [MrKatuntu: “God forbid.”] –(Laughter)– God forbid that – I know you will not get there. Then, from that day, your presumption of innocence and we are aware of that but from the day an investigation starts  - if we allow this section to apply, then we may be giving the issue of reasonableness another meaning. 

Mr Chairman, what I was proposing is that if a person is about to be charged, which should be the case, there should be a high level of reasonableness not prima facie case. Mr Chairman, you belong to that profession and a prima facie case is not determined at the point of being charged. When charges are being preferred against you, that is not the level of determining a prima facie case. A prima facie case is determined at the level when the trial is - my understanding here is that we are using many words trying to mean the same thing and I do not have any problem extending it to criminal investigation, even if you are saying criminal investigations ongoing but I was just being cautious and I know hon. Fox Odoi is about to give me information. But if the criminal investigation is ongoing, it sounded so wide for my mind to comprehend. But this is purely our law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You know “about to be charged” means it has already even left the police. It has been sanctioned by the DPP - that is how far it has gone for that person to be “about to be charged.” But the process leading to sanctioning of a file for court can be a long one and a lot of things could have happened in that process.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, in line with your guidance, I would like to be clarified on whether when you are about to be charged, there is a reason for you to be denied your property right to the extent of, for example, freezing your accounts and so on. For me, my problem is with freezing when I am about to be charged. Why should you freeze my account, deny me property possession when I am actually innocent until proved guilty? I thank you very much.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, this clause 68 is under the headnote “restraining orders”. So, I think we should concentrate on the process of restraining orders and we are saying that the authorised officer may apply to court. So, that is also a process - apply to court for a restraining order to restrain disposition of the property that is suspected to be laundered. So, it is a process and we are not saying we are going to just seize the property without any process. 

If the headnote is right, then the proceeding clauses 69 – contents of the application of the - we are describing the process after this clause. We shall describe the process under the contents of this –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, the issue here is just restraining the disposition, transfer of your interest in this property is what is being stopped. You can own your property but do not transfer it - that is what it is saying here. 

THE KATUNTU: The operating word, Mr Chairman, is “freezing.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Which clause is this?

MR KATUNTU: Clause 68.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Clause 68? No, I am looking at what they have proposed as an amendment, on page 18, on top of the committee’s amendments.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I just want to seek a clarification. The clarification I am seeking from the chairman of the committee, is; are you telling us that this law we are making does not apply - are you going to put up a “forgiveness commission” to forget about the past because there might be some crimes of the past? How do we deal with those ones? I want you to help me also because I am looking at it - the way they are looking at it, can’t we also put it that even this should be applicable to already –(Interjections)– why are you saying “why” because there are issues to deal with?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I understand the thinking of colleagues who are saying, “Look, if I am about to be charged, why should you freeze my property?” I think the way we should understand this is that there are criminals who are very fast. 

The essence of this is because when they restrain you, they are not dispossessing you. They are only saying that you are being restrained from disposing of your property or dealing in your property in one way or the other. But they are not dispossessing you.

If you leave it lax, criminals are very fast. You arrest a person and you have some credible evidence against that person and you are about to charge that person but you cannot take this action and in a split second, there is nothing to look forward to in terms of his property. It is all gone. That is the essence of this provision. So, here I agree with “about to be charged” or “charged” simply because in any case, an application is to be made to the court and it is up to the court to evaluate all the circumstances. The court will say, “Okay, this man or woman is about to be charged.” The evidence is such that we do not have to take this particular direction of freezing; the court will do that because it has powers to do that. Otherwise, why should the application be made to court?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I think for us to appreciate clause 68 as amended, as proposed, we have to read clause 69 too because it details everything. Clause 69(d) for example, says, “The grounds for the belief that the property is tainted…” So, you have got to convince the court because the application is ex-parte – the other party will not be there. And “about to be charged” – like I think the chairperson was explaining – there is a process of investigation. Sometimes, the investigating officers finish their investigations and forward the file for sanctioning. The file may be sanctioned but it may take even two days for the charges to be drafted. That process, I am sure hon. Oboth knows very well – he used to be good at that some years after many other colleagues had left. So, during that time, a criminal – because if sanctions have already been made but somehow they have not been finalised, some suspect may dispose of the property. I think we should not spend a lot of time debating this, Mr Chairman.

MR OBOTH: If I understood both the Attorney-General and the “other Attorney-General” well, my problem is, at what stage should this application be made to restrain the person from either disposing of or changing or whatever? My fear is that this law can easily be abused. The way this law can be abused if you say, “If there is criminal investigation on-going…” why must police or anybody else be given such powers; just when there is an on-going investigation, you apply to court? The very reason that this goes to court is that when a person is about to be charged, court could be able to see that things are serious. The same court that is going to handle the other part of the case could be able to handle the same application. But where it is just criminal investigation – when a plain-clothed detective is still investigating X, should you go to court at that point because you are investigating X? Mr Chairman, at what point should this application be made? My view is that it should be made when a person is charged or is about to be charged.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I think we are now beginning to legislate on the discretion of the court. I think it will depend on each case. For example, I have just got information about a particular case and I am starting investigations now. But the circumstances are such that the minute the investigations kick off, there are likely to be some movements. Yes, by the time you apprehend him, you do not know who he has instructed to do what and things like that. We should leave some minimum discretion to the authorised officer and the court to assess and see whether it is a case where they can give this order. 

It is the court really; it is not the authorised officer who can only take a decision that “I will apply to court”. Not so? If he has applied to court, then it is up to the court to exercise its judicious discretion to give the order. 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, the order we are looking at – very rarely can court say “No” to it; something is about to happen and you run to court, very rarely does court decline your request. 

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, I wish to tell Members that we are dealing with money laundering and these are people who will want to be even faster than the law may provide. So, for the circumstances surrounding money laundering, even the law should make it too tight for them to make any manoeuvre. Anyway, I am not a lawyer but for section 72, I honestly do not think court will issue this order without serious suspicion that tainted property – because section 72 is about undertakings by the government. And it says, “Before making an order under section 70, the court may require the Government of Uganda to give such undertakings as the court considers appropriate with respect to the payment of damages or costs or both in relation to the making and execution of the order.” 

So, I believe that the courts will exercise restraint when issuing these orders because there is a provision that Government may have to pay charges if such an order is made without critical review of the issues brought by the officer who is applying for this order. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, there are two positions; the position in the Bill, which the minister has asked to be retained and the new position proposed by the committee. Of course, there are some improvements on the committee position in terms of drafting. I will put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 68, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 69

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend sub-clause (e) by adding the following phrase “that the alleged offender has an interest in the property”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you talking of sub-clause (e)?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Yes, sub-clause (e). At the end of it, you add: “that the alleged offender has an interest in the property”. So, the whole statement will read: “Where the application is seeking a restraining order against property of a person other than the person being investigated, the grounds for the belief that the property is tainted property in relation to the crime under investigationand is subject to the effective control of the defendant and that the alleged offender has an interest in the property.”

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, I thought that this proposal may not be necessary because there is a phrase there, “…is subject to the effective control of the defendant,” which is sufficient for purposes of determining that the defendant has an interest in the property. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, I tend to agree with the amendment by the Chair of the committee because here we are looking at three parties: probably the Government, represented by the authoring officer or court; and then you have a person who has interest in a property you suspect to be a property that is directly or indirectly a proceed of money laundering; and then you have the person who transacted the property that we are now calling the defendant- that is effective control of the defendant. And now there are these two parties: you have a case against me because someone transferred the property to me but you know this other person- the real money launderer against whom there is a case also does exist. So, we are trying to look at these two people- me and the actual money launderer- not to avoid the law. So the amendment is trying to say, “Well the property is in the possession of A but that property was transferred to him by B who is the actual man,” and so you are trying to put all the two people in check. That is my understanding.  

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, our civil procedure rules are very good because I remember one time I successfully argued a case in court where somebody had a transaction in his car and in order to defeat this transaction, he transferred the car in the names of another person but remained in possession of the car. In other words he actually remained in effective control of the car. If our civil procedure rules were lax, a person like that one can easily get away with a case because if you talk about interest and say, “must have an interest,” you must verify what kind of interest you are talking about. Is it ownership? What is it?

I think what is important even under our civil procedure rules as I have said is the control- that you are in control of that property or you are in possession of that property and action will be taken. But if we have got them to say does he own it? Then you actually defeat the whole purpose of this Bill.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, that is why actually the amendment by the committee is relevant; we are looking at one being in the possession of the property but one is still manning the effective control of the property and the one manning the effective control is the actual money launderer.

MR KATUNTU: I think we need to take a second reading of the clause. I see colleagues talking about control of the property. The clause is not talking about the property, it is talking about, “…is subject to the effective control of the defendant.” So, it is in control of the action of the defendant. It has nothing to do with the property. You just have to read it again. And I think that is the mistake my learned colleague was making too –(Interjections)– why? It is here. But the clause is talking about effective control of the defendant. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, I have been asked to read it again: “Where the application is seeking a restraining order against property of a person other than the person being investigated, the grounds for the belief that the property is tainted property in relation to the crime under investigation and is subject to the effective control of the defendant…” That is why we are saying there are three parties here. The actual money launderer, that is still manning control or probably let us say he is in possession of the property; then the other one who is the defendant, the one there is a case against and who is the one having effective control of the property. So it brings all the two parties so that you do not say that, “This is not mine; it is actually for B,” when actually you have interest in the property. So, the amendment of the committee is putting all the two people in check. I think Government should concede to the amendment of the committee. To me it is excellent.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, I am a member of the committee. Why we added this amendment was because we envisaged the problem- take an example of the case of Bad Black. In that case, money was stolen from a certain person then they shared it and had some properties. Also another party was buying shares and had an interest in that property but court went ahead and that interest of that third party was confiscated. That is why we are saying that even when it is alleged and you have an interest in that property, it should also be restrained because that share which is owned by that offender should be brought to check. That is why we added that one that where an offender is alleged to have an interest, a certain percentage of their shares should be also held. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 69, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 70, agreed to.

Clause 71, agreed to.

Clause 72

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think here it should be mandatory. They are saying, “The court may…” I think it should be, “The court shall ask Government-”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, the court never “shall”. Hon. Member, the court acts on discretion. You cannot never“shall” the court. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, why I am raising this-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then you do not have to go to court. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Mr Chairman. That is clause 72. Clause 72 is the undertakings by Government. If we leave it, the court might refuse to ask Government to do undertakings. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, you are very correct. You cannot legislate against the discretionary powers of court under Article 126. That is why, Mr Chairman, you have the important case of Susan Kigula. It should be a very good precedent for all of us to read and understand where you actually say, “Shall suffer death.” That is no longer there. Maybe, we say, “Is liable to suffer death.” In other words, you set the maximum and leave the discretion with the court to determine an appropriate remedy. And that still applies to this one. You cannot say, “shall do this and that”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 72 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 72, agreed to.

Clause 73, agreed to.

Clause 74, agreed to.

Clause 75, agreed to.

Clause 76, agreed to.

Clause 77, agreed to.

Clause 78, agreed to.

Clause 79, agreed to.

Clause 80

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: On Clause 80, about the application for confiscation order or pecuniary penalty order, we propose to insert a new sub-clause (c) to read as follows: “A confiscation order against property in which the person convicted has interest.”

The justification is to provide for a confiscation order against property in which the person convicted has interest so as to recover the value of benefit derived by the convict from the commission of the crime or loss caused to the State.

Two, for paragraphs 24, 25 and 26, we believe it is imperative to harmonise the provisions relating to applications for restraining and confiscation orders under the Anti-Corruption Act with clauses 68, 69 and 80 of this Bill.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, I just want to seek clarification from the committee, why they are talking of not later than one year - clause 80 – I find that period too long.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, but the proposal from the committee is – on the provision of the Bill, it should be the minister to clarify on that. Which sub-clause are you talking about?

MR WAFULA: The sub-clause that talks about “where a person is convicted of a crime, an authorised officer may, in not less than one year” – Why not six or one month or just one day because the person will have been found guilty of stealing?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Maybe, we should read the sub clause out because it says: “Where a person is convicted of a crime, an authorised officer may, not later than one year, after the conviction, apply to court for one or both of the following…” I think we are just providing for sufficient time within which the officer will do it. But the minister can -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, it seems you want the tainted property to disappear. After the person has been convicted, this order to confiscate property should be applied for within one or less than one month. When you give one year, the property will disappear.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is even enough time to apply for replacement of a lost certificate of title and get it cleared. 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I want us to inform ourselves - and I thank the Leader of the Opposition for giving way – that this could be applicable because you will have already applied for a restraining order under clause 68. So, you cannot be afraid of property changing ownership. I hope you know where we are coming from – after being charged, is about to be charged – criminal investigation. So, LOP, this is already covered.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, when you read clause 68, you realise that it only says, “… may apply for a restraint order…”But supposing the officer does not apply for this order -[MR OBOTH: “That is their problem”] –no, this is where we need to be careful – (Interjections) – we know you are a lawyer, but I think the moment a person has been convicted - in fact, after even two weeks - otherwise, this property can change hands at short hand. We need to reduce this period to within 14 days. So, it should say that after being convicted, the authorised officer should apply to court to have this property confiscated within 14 days.

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, I was about to make exactly the same point, except the Leader of the Opposition, without your permission, got onto the microphone. (Laughter) However, I stand to support that position. Even if the authorities had gone to court to ask for this restraining order, that court may not have issued it. So, you cannot assume that because there is a restraining order on the property, it cannot be sold. One year is too long. It should not be more than a month. We can even go with two weeks.

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to be guided here. When you say that when someone is convicted under this case, are we trying to say there is no appeal – are you saying within 14 days the opportunities for an appeal shall have been exhausted? Supposing within 14 days, the convicted person has appealed against the sentence and the process drags, will you still execute this order within 14 days?

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I do not know whether Members are interpreting this clause correctly. The statement, “not later than one year” can mean within one hour, two days inclusive of the two weeks you are talking about. What I believe is that here is that the authorised officer is left to act reasonably. They can act within two days or even within one year. It does not mean the officer will act after one year.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, tell us why one year? 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I also would like to seek clarification from the minister. If a law provides time within which to deal with something and you do not do it, you cannot go to court because you will be out of time. And time is set by statutes – like we are doing, courts of law do not have discretion to extend that time.

I am looking at a situation where you have said it should be done in two or three days or two weeks but somehow it does not happen in those days. It means you will never go back to court because they will plead to be out of time, unless there has been provision for extension. So, we need to be very careful before we begin putting a timeframe in such a law. And you know our Uganda; the authorised officer may deliberately not act within time, then what happens? The case in court will be, you are time barred. Therefore, before we demand it to be done within one or two days or one year – even after a year, these people will sit on it and will not be forced to do it and after that time, the door will be closed. So, that is the clarification I would like to seek from the hon. Minister.

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, I would like to agree with the honourable members that once one has been convicted of a crime – here they give the rationale that the authorised officer – it is not automatic that once one has been convicted, then confiscation will be automatic. They are giving him a timeframe within which to apply. 

So, it is incumbent upon the authorised officer – and we are saying “Not later than one year”, it should be done as soon as possible. Unless an order for confiscation has been made originally by court, there has to be another order made for the confiscation of the property. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, in the charge sheet, when you are asking for the prayers, do you ask for a term of imprisonment for ten years and two, confiscation of the property, so that it is dealt with at once by that court. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think this one is terrible. Let us say, “Where a person is convicted of a crime, court shall –(Interjections)– the asset was stolen and it has been found. The same court should be the one to issue the confiscation order because one of the things Court will do is to convict that person. But if you leave it to the authorised officer, he may not apply and things will go wrong. So, I propose we remove the authorised person and leave that to court. 

DR OMONA: Mr Chairman, I want to seek clarification from the minister especially following from the angle from which hon. Katuntu has put it, which I surely buy. What harm will it do if we do not provide the time? Sometimes, we have seen circumstances where people give excuses that we did not have manpower, just to buy time for this period to elapse. 

So, supposing we simply say that the authorised officer may apply to the court for the following orders without specifying the time? As others have put it, if you put a very short period of time, which can be intentionally ignored that means the officer cannot apply for the confiscation of this property. So, I want the minister to help me; what harm does it do if we do not specify a timeframe?

MR FOX ODOI: Mr Chairman, I think the first thing we should deal with is to cure the introduction of a statutory time bar in clause 80 and hon. Omona’s proposal is very attractive to me. Therefore, I would want to move that we delete the phrase, “Not later than one year after conviction”, so that clause 80 reads as follows: “Where a person is convicted of a crime, an authorised officer may apply to court for one or both of the following orders: (a) and (b).” I beg to move. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the word, “May” is very dangerous; because it means, he may or may not. He may say that the law grants him discretion. So, once the authorised officer agrees that there is tainted property, then we should use the word, “The authorised officer shall apply.”

MR FOX ODOI: Mr Chairman, in respect to the authorised officer, I concede, we can use the word, “Shall”. But there is also the phrase “Confiscation of tainted property” so that there are three orders: 
    a) confiscation order against property that is tainted property; 
    b) The pecuniary interest and 
    c) Confiscation of property in which the offender has interest. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is an amendment on clause 80 sub-clause (c) on page 18 of the report. Had we taken a vote on the addition proposed by the committee?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I am sorry, this (b) is ours on the government side. But we want to come out wiser. I think the reasoning of the Leader of the Opposition – may be, we stand over this provision, because the tainted property is the property in question. A conviction has been secured. Why does a person have to apply again? My proposal is that we stand over this, think over it on our side and at the end, we shall harmonise our position. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, clause 80 is stood over as requested by the learned Attorney-General. The minister seems ready to proceed but the next clauses are dependent on this clause 80.

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, I think we could wait for the Attorney-General.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But he is the one who prayed for the standing over.

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, when you look at subsection 3(3) of that clause 83, it says, “an authorised officer may apply to amend the application under (1) to include any other tainted property or benefit as the case may be and the court may, upon being satisfied that tainted property or benefit was not reasonably capable of identification.”

I think the assumption here; why they are giving time is after conviction, more property may be identified, which is also tainted according to this three.At the time of conviction, there was insufficient evidence because evidence available was not enough to identify all the property and in the interest of justice, the application is amended so that all tainted property is captured.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Clause 80 is stood over.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Aston Kajara):Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “Anti-money Laundering Bill, 2009” and passed clauses 41 to 79 with amendments and stood over clause 80. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members, for this. At beginning of this sitting, we had some discussions. One, we required that there will be a ministerial statement on the question of the fire arising from the accident. The Minister of Health will be giving the statement tomorrow. 

Two, we also requested that there should be a statement from the minister in charge of ICT on these issues of SMS that are not controlled and sometimes cause chaos and panic in the public arising from the case that was cited in Kasese where SMS all of a sudden showed up saying the water system had been poisoned and there was panic. So, we need the minister to come and help us with this. How can these matters be controlled? This is from the minister responsible for ICT.

We also expect a motion on the issue of the death of one of our staff from one of the forums in Parliament that will be coming from the hon. Member for Namutumba. That motion is already seconded by the Member for Kyegegwa. 

I think there was a request on the issue of cultural institution but this was not fully defined; we will see how to formulate it properly. I am sure the minister responsible will take due regard to the concerns of the Members on this particular issue of cultural institutions and an appropriate statement can be made at an appropriate time. 

Hon. Members, thank you very much for today. This House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.38 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 3 July 2013 at 2.00 O’clock.)
