
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Official Report of The Proceedings of Parliament

FIFTH SESSION - 15TH SITTING - FIRST MEETING

________________________

Friday, 01 July 2005

Parliament met at 10.52 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning session and thank you very much for the work you did yesterday. I would like to alter the Order Paper slightly to permit hon. Johnson Malinga to make a statement concerning the food situation in the IDP camps and then we shall proceed with the other business. 

10.55
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on two matters of national importance. The first matter that I would like to address myself to and for which I need a response is in regard to the symbols that we as a country intend to use during the forthcoming referendum. As it stands, one of the symbols for the “yes” side is a tree and the one for the “no” side is a house. This has not gone down well with some people, especially those at the grassroots because the manner in which campaigns for either side are going on suggests that the population is being misinformed. 

People who are campaigning for the “no” side are indicating to the community that they would rather have a house than a tree. The question they are posing to the community is, “Would you rather sleep under a tree or in a house?” This is definitely going to distort the outcome of the forthcoming referendum. I foresee that if this continues then we shall continue to be conscripted within the Movement arrangement. I believe that there is need for something to be done immediately to avert a possible catastrophe.  

The second matter that I would like to raise is that of intolerance, which is affecting our people, especially government officials. I have received reports that sometime last week a 17 year old girl from a school in the West called Charlotte Katutu, and this is reported in the Monitor of today, was questioned for two hours by officials from the RDC’s office and the DISO’s office for reciting a poem that apparently they did not like or take very well. This young girl was subjected to mental torture and questioning, which I feel suggests a high level of intolerance -(Interruption) 

DR MALLINGA: I think in this House we have to be careful how we proceed. Does the honourable member have definite information that the girl was questioned for a long time and tortured? Torture is a very serious allegation to make. Do you have definite information?

MR AMURIAT: I respect my senior colleague, hon. Mallinga, and I know that he is aware that there are different forms of torture. In fact just being subjected to fear is one form of torture. I am sure that this little girl, having been interrogated by security agents, might begin to believe that she did something terribly wrong and it could affect her performance in school. I would like to confirm this because I studied psychology just like you did, hon. Mallinga. I suggest that this kind of interrogation is a form of torture that should be investigated. Otherwise, we might ruin the education of this little girl who seems to be a very brilliant poet if she were groomed because the poetry she recited conveys her brilliance.

I would like to request for a response from -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not know whether you can really assess that poetry. I think we should leave that to the teacher.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of procedure. My colleague has raised very important issues especially the issue concerning torturing a girl of 17 years. I propose that the honourable member finds more information about this incident and helps the ministers in charge of security, internal affairs, the presidency and the RDCs so that this issue can be investigated.  

This is because I am finding it difficult to pave a way forward. How can we move when he is quoting newspapers and yet we decided in this House that coming with newspapers and moving points for debate are not part of our rules? I suggest that the honourable member gets the relevant information, passes it on the relevant ministries so that we can investigate the matter. Otherwise, how can we respond to this very important issue he is raising?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I know that since you have introduced this subject you need answers. However, I think you should give us a few more details then I will direct the ministers to respond.

MR AMURIAT: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I do not have the capacity to investigate and the onus is on government to do this, I believe.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am glad hon. Amuriat has raised the issue of intimidation and violence, which actually FDC seems to be perfecting. They have been intimidating us as Members of Parliament and they are intimidating the public that they are going to cause violence because we have voted overwhelmingly for lifting the presidential term limits -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have the highest regard for my honourable colleague in charge of Parliamentary Affairs but at the same time when the one I hold in high esteem rises to the Floor and says things, which are not consistent with the truth, is she in order? I am referring to the statement she made that among other things we Members of Parliament have been intimidated by the FDC. I am a Member of Parliament and I have never been intimidated by FDC or anybody in this august House, and I have the capacity to respond in kind should anybody attempt to intimidate me. 

Is she in order, therefore, to mislead this August House that we have been intimidated when she is referring to herself or to the two of them? She cannot even name who else has been intimidated. Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to appeal to all of you to be tolerant and accommodative. I received a report from one of the members of this House who had received a very stressful message, which he brought to me in my office. I do not know who is doing it but there is some intimidation going on. I appeal to members to consider this a place for debate and ideas, not for intimidation.

MR KAKOOZA: Hon. Deputy Speaker, in reference to what you have said, hon. Aggrey Awori has mentioned before that there is violence here yet now he is saying that members are not threatened. I wonder if he might be part of it.  

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, is my honourable colleague in order to insinuate that the Speaker has condoned the intimidation of members in this House without taking necessary measures to call the errant members to order? Is he in order to further allege that honourable Aggrey Awori has been intimidated when he cannot produce the relevant copies of the Hansard to prove his case? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us leave this matter of intimidation. This place is for debating ideas not for frightening colleagues. Whoever is doing it must stop.

MRS MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, an e-mail message was laid on the Table of this House when we were discussing the Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill. On the website of FDC there are many intimidating documents naming Members of Parliament. In fact some of us are thinking of taking legal action against the FDC. I would like to use this opportunity to say that while Aggrey Awori may not be one of those intimidated and he knows why, many members have been intimidated. I would like to call upon everyone to be tolerant and mature as we debate, and -(Interruptions)

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have great respect for the Member for Kabale and Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs. However, I am disturbed that she continues to accuse all members of FDC of engaging in intimidation against her, without naming names. I have never intimidated you, and in fact I opened the door for you as I came in this morning. For you to try and impute bad motives and malign the entire image of dignified members of the FDC like me is to be very unfair. So unless she can name the people who are intimidating her, she should withdraw those statements because they are incompatible with her status as a minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, even ministers can be intimidated. The point is that an e-mail message was laid on the Table here, it is part of the records of this House now, and it contained intimidating messages. Please, let us not intimidate one another. That is not what we came to do here.  

MR WANDERA: But it did not have the FDC address. I think this House must be fair to us. We know FDC may not be liked by some people, but to try and paint us as villains is unfair. Can it be proved that the e-mail was from FDC?

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, on Tuesday the FDC organized a demonstration, which headed for Parliament and the purpose was to intimidate Members. Officially the FDC sat, discussed and agreed to come here and try to intimidate members with the demonstration.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have ruled that we stop this matter.  

PERSONAL STATEMENT

11.09
MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Madam Speaker and my dear honourable colleagues, under Article 79(1) of our Constitution we are mandated to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda. You will recall that we in this August House have passed a number of resolutions regarding the welfare and security of the people in IDP camps neighbouring Karamoja and those within Karamoja. It is against this background that I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me leave to make this statement and highlight the silent crisis in Kapelebyong and Katakwi.

Kapelebyong County has had some of the oldest internally displaced people’s camps in this country. People in parishes like Kamotong, Agonga, Erabet, Okoboi, Ameru and Angolebwala have lived in camps for not less 20 years now. This camp life is a result of persistent incursions from the neighbouring cattle rustlers from Jie, Pian and Bokora counties of Karamoja, who possess illegal guns contrary to the laws of this country. The Lords’ Resistance Army incursions to Teso in 2003 only aggravated the already existing situation by massive relocation of small camps to giant camps in Obalang, Achowa, Oditel, Kapelebyong and others in Soroti and Kaberamaido districts.  

However, some parts of Usuk that were not disturbed by the LRA still have IDP camps. Places like Palam, Acang, Magoro, Ongongoja, Ageta and others have had camps for a long time and are in fact still in camps as I speak. What is the problem? The problem is massacres, rape and raids by Karimojong thieves. 

What is the situation on the ground? After the defeat of LRA by the UPDF and Arrow Boys in the Teso region, a picture has been painted that all is well in the Teso region. This is a very false image and I would like to bring it to focus.  

As I speak there are 26 IDP camps in Kapelebyong alone. In these camps people are still in the Stone Age. We are living lives that one should not be talking about in Uganda in this century. Our people are not able to meet the very basic needs of life and we are living in the age of Adam and Eve where the two survived on fruit and tree leaves. To-date my people are surviving on mangoes, wild fruit and tree leaves. 

The attention of government has been very minimal and we think this attention has been drawn elsewhere. I have tried to bring out the suffering of our people to the limelight but the crisis has continued. We are trapped in danger and the Government of Uganda; you my honourable colleagues and the world out there must rise to save us. You must - unless we the people of Kapelebyong and Katakwi are to be used as an experimental human zoo where primitive life is preserved for tourist attraction.  

You are all aware that when the LRA invaded Teso in June 2003 the people of Teso responded appropriately by forming a volunteer group of fighters code named “Arrow Boys” headed by Capt. George Micheal Mukula and co-ordinated by Musa Ecweru, to support the efforts of the gallant UPDF soldiers in fighting off the marauding LRAs. This response produced very tangible results. By December 2003 the LRA menace had been brought to a halt in the Teso region and in the process we lost 102 Arrow fighters. However, the Government of Uganda in appreciation of the support of the auxiliary forces decided to pay each of them a monthly token fee of Shs 60,000. 

Unfortunately, these fighters are faced with a number of challenges that have negatively impacted the force. Only 2,000 of the whole team have good uniforms. The rest are in rags and it would be very difficult to differentiate them from a group of renegades. They have not been paid since January this year despite the fact that we in Parliament passed the budget in time. How can a soldier on full time duty survive without pay for half a year? Paul has been quoted in 1 Corinthians in this House asking a question, “Who serves as a soldier at his own expense?” Let us give Caesar what belongs to Caesar. I pray that we stop feeding Arrow Boys on promises, headcounts and documentation exercises for this is very counter-productive. If anything it has led to desertions and indiscipline in the force, and sometimes petty crime.  

As I conclude I would like to once again appeal to members of this August House, the Executive and all mankind to help our people meet their aspirations and wishes. It is the desire of my people to have food for survival. It is also their desire to see the auxiliary forces paid and cared for because they have guns and it is difficult to tame people who have guns when they are hungry. It is also the desire of my people to see that all government institutions in place are operational and that they have access to their homes and land. 

It is the desire of my people to have Christmas in their homes, to participate in the transition process while in their own homes and not in camps, to be at par with the rest of the country in terms of peace and development and to see the lawlessness in Karamoja stopped by this Government once and for all. Support me, honourable colleagues, stand by our side, let us move together, let us break the silent crisis and let us get our people out of the dangerous IDP camps. 

I implore you, Madam Speaker, together with the Committee on the Humanitarian Situation in the North, to come to Kapelebyong and see for yourselves the tragedy that has befallen our people. Together we shall rescue the trapped.  Thank you. For God and my country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that was a personal statement. I hope the Government has noted the issues that are very painful to our colleague. I have been to his constituency and interacted with those people so I also add my appeal to the Government to alleviate their plight.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, thank you. I know that under our rules this statement is not debatable. I just want to find out from you how we could proceed on this statement because certainly the issues that have been raised are very serious issues. I was in Kapelebyong in Obalang sub-county on the 15th of this month -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you contributing now?  

MR AMURIAT: I am not debating, only trying to find out -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have asked a question so let me answer. Personal statements are not debated in this House and I am not sure whether the Speaker had an opportunity to read that statement before the honourable member asked for permission to present it. If I had had the opportunity to do so I think I would have advised the honourable member not to raise controversial issues in form of a question. 

What I can say is that the Government has heard you and I would like to ask the Minister for Defence and the Minister for Disaster Preparedness to come back to us and answer your queries. I think that is what we can do and we shall debate when they come back. I do not want to introduce new rules at this stage.

MR AWORI: I need your guidance on the Rules of Procedure. I am seeking your guidance on rule 36(1) and 36(2). Rule 36(2) reads as follows; “Any statement other than a personal explanation may be commented upon by other members for a limited duration of time, not exceeding 30 minutes.” The guidance I am seeking from you is that for a matter of this nature, is it possible for you to exercise your discretionary powers and put it under rule 36(2)? Because rule 36(1) states definitely that this is a personal explanation, whereas rule 36(2) states a personal statement. I am wondering if you can give us room to treat it under rule 36(2)?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Earlier this week the Minister of State for Defence came here with a statement on these issues: people in the IDP camps, auxiliary forces not being paid and not having uniforms and all these things were debated upon. So I cannot accept that we do it again in the same week. As I have instructed, the Minister of Defence and the Minister for Disaster Preparedness will take on this statement and come back and advise us about the suffering people in Kapelebyong. I will take charge of that.  

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (RATING) BILL, 2003

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, yesterday we had stood over clauses 17 and 18, and the Second Schedule. 

11.22                                              
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Madam Chairperson, one of the areas of concern on clause 2 was on the definition of “owner”. May I request the chairperson of the committee to present on this?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Ignatius Besisira): Madam Chairperson, the committee revisited the clause, which was stood over and we came up with the response under clause 2(1). 

Under the condominium arrangement, the individual owners of the property form an association. The property is valued as a whole then the association apportions the rates to be paid by each individual. The association collects and pays to Local Government. This would be catered for under the regulations to be prescribed by the Minister of Local Government. 

In part II we shall amend the definition of “evaluation court” by inserting the words “by district, city or municipal council” between the words “appointed” and “under”.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am the one who raised the issue of condominium ownership. I am not sure whether the relevant section read by the vice-chairperson is correct. Maybe you could check on the Condominium law again, I do not think it is correct.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I thought this was a definition section. The way it has been presented is a bit confusing. 

CAPT. BABU: Madam Chairperson, I just want to give information about Condominium law in terms of ownership. The association has nothing to do with the ownership of the condominium flats. Each condominium flat has got a title and this title has got a lease, which is issued by the Ministry of Lands. The title owns part of the land on which the block is standing and, therefore, the owner of the apartments and not the association pays the rates. The association is formed so that they could provide services, which are equal to everybody who is staying in the flats. They do not get involved in individual flats in the payments of their rates and taxes that are required by the local authorities or any other form of authority. I wanted us to understand this. 

I could get the actual definition if they so wish. However, everybody owns a title of a condominium flat and, therefore, you pay your own rates. The association is there to ensure that everybody gets equal services and that other maintenance is done appropriately. The association also gets interested in things like painting the whole block. They would sit down and agree on how they are going to do it. Otherwise, each individual has some portion to pay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Awori, have you got the answers you wanted yesterday?

MR AWORI: Madam Chairperson, it is now correct. I did not want the record to go down as the honourable colleague had put it.

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, the concern raised by hon. Awori yesterday was whether under the Condominium law the definition that we have given in the Bill is exactly the same as in the Condominium law. We have looked at the Condominium law and established that the two are not in conflict. In the Condominium law, “owner” is defined as follows: “Owner means a person who is registered as the owner of: 
(a)	Free hold estate in a unit.
(b)	Mailo estate in a unit.
(c)	The leasehold estate in a unit where the parcel on which the unit is located is held under a lease.”

In the Bill we say, “Owner means a proprietor whose interest in a particular piece of land is registered under the relevant laws of Uganda or any person who has a right to or concession over that particular land for an indefinite period.”  So the two do not conflict because in both cases “owner” refers to land. 

I also want to agree with my hon. Babu as far as ownership of the property under the Condominium arrangement is concerned.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I am looking at this Bill, I hope I have the right one, and “owner” is not defined. I have not seen the text of what you want us to insert. My Bill does not have it.

MR YIGA: Madam Chairperson, I am a Member of the Committee on Local Government and Public Service. In the committee’s proposed amendments we are trying to persuade Parliament to include the definitions of “occupier” and “owner” in the law. For this matter I would like us to go by the definitions as per the amendments, which were brought forward by the committee, since hon. Awori is in agreement with what hon. Babu said. I do not think the minister would reject this.

DR OKULO EPAK: Unless I am mistaken, I do not recall that the committee moved that amendment. In fact I was wondering were the word “owner” comes from because it is not in the text of the Bill we have. The Condominium association is not compulsory; it is just permissible. Not all the condominium owners must form an association. They will not be obliged to perform the function, which the committee is giving them.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker, for the last two days we have been considering the Bill and the committee report. We would have wanted to include “occupier” and “owner” under clause 2. Therefore, when my colleague says that this is not mentioned in our report I get the impression that either he does not have the report or he has not read it.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  We did not conclude the matter of “owner” and “occupier” yesterday because the minister was supposed to come back and report. But when they came back the committee moved to condominium. So, we need the committee to move specifically and we take them one by one. If you are in agreement with the minister, please move on to clause 2.

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to know if the definition of “ownership” has been clearly understood. When that has been done then I will move to the next stage because there are more amendments under clause 2 to be moved.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Where are the other amendments? Do you have them? Chairperson, please move the amendments of the committee on clause 2. 
 
MRS BALEMEZI: Madam Chairperson, the committee agreed with the definition of “owner” because it is in agreement with the explanation in the Condominium law. Therefore, the committee is retaining the word “owner” to mean a proprietor whose interest in a particular piece of land is registered under the relevant laws of Uganda. This will include all persons who have a right to or concession over that particular land for any definite period. In this case this clause was stood over to consider whether the word “owner” was in agreement with the Condominium law.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that clause 2 be amended by introducing the definition of “owner” as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you have another amendment?

MRS BALEMEZI:  Madam Chairperson, the committee had to consider the valuation courts.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We are still on clause 2; the interpretation section.

MRS BALEMEZI: We are retaining the word “occupier” because we also found that it was in agreement with the definition. The word “occupier” includes any person in actual occupation of rental property without regard to the title under which the property is occupied. That is why we are suggesting that we retain this word.

MR BAMWANGA: When you define the word “occupier” I would have been more comfortable to hear that it includes any person in possession of rental property. Instead of actual occupation I would have preferred possession of rental property. How do you define “occupier” by using the word “occupation”? I do not know whether the minister and chairperson see my point. “Occupier” includes any person in actual possession of rental property. 

DR NDUHUURA: Hon. Bamwanga is proposing that the word “ratable” is incorrectly spelt. It should be “rateable”. “Occupier” means any person in actual occupation. The element of ownership is the concern of members here because occupation does not necessarily mean possession. I may be a tenant occupying some property. I can see my colleague nodding. 

MR BAMWANGA: You may be in possession of some property but you may not necessarily be the owner of the property. You can also be the owner of the property without necessarily being in occupation of that property. I am saying, you are defining “occupier” with “occupation”. It is just a matter of the English language. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You are saying “occupier” includes any person in actual possession? Is that what you want the committee to include? 

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. There is no consistency. I would have expected the minister to come up with the same definition of “occupier” and “occupant” as defined in the Land Act and Condominium Act. If one contradicts the other then its inconsistency could be a legal problem. Can you check on the Land Act? 
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Could the minister in charge of the Condominium law tell us the definition of “occupier”?

CAPT. BABU: Madam Chairperson, you once said that one should never define anything unless they have the actual text. You said that you learnt that in the first year of law school. Therefore, what I would have liked is for us to get the Land Act and the Condominium Act so that we are consistent with the definitions. That way we will have covered everything very clearly instead of assuming expertise in definitions, which will cause us problems. But they already exist in the Land Act and in the Condominium law. If you so wish I can even go and send for them right now.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We have those laws in the library except that I do not know who is going to get them for us. Honourable members, while we are establishing the whereabouts of those two laws, let us move on to the other parts. Mr Minister, you are supposed to define “necessary cartilage”.

DR NDUHUURA: “Necessary cartilage” was also a point of concern and we have decided to define what it is: “Necessary cartilage means any property including residential houses used exclusively by clergy or recognised religious leaders.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But does the clergy cover all denominations? I do not want people to start matching here to complain that we have excluded their leaders. Does the clergy include the Sheikhs, the Imams? 

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, this is why I have provided for “recognised religious leaders” to cover all religions.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you said clergy.  

DR NDUHUURA: “Necessary cartilage means any property including residential houses used exclusively by clergy or recognised religious leaders.”

MR AWORI: My honourable colleague is using a wrong theological definition. When you say, “recognised religious leaders”, do you have a registry of religious leaders to which we can refer?

MRS BYAMUKAMA: I would like to get this issue clearly. In the first instance, clause 3 proposes that for exempted properties we should state which are exclusively for public worship. When the minister defines the “necessary cartilage” to include only residential premises, it narrows the scope of what he had intended in the first instance.  

Under clause 5 we have all property used exclusively for purposes of any charitable or educational institution of a public character supported only by endowments or voluntary contributions. When we talk of public character, residences of various religious leaders can fall under clause 5 because indeed these premises are open to the public. Therefore, I propose that we provide for any property used exclusively for public worship and stop there. Then clause 3 would cater for the residential premises of religious leaders, rather than limiting the definition of “necessary cartilage” to only residential premises of religious leaders. This is what I had proposed and I would like to be clearly understood.

MR WACHA: Let me try to elaborate. The “necessary cartilage” should be an extension of the usage as provided for under clause 3. The usage here is for public worship. So anything, which is for public worship that would be “necessary cartilage” but really it should not extend to residential property. This is only if the minister wants to introduce another concept and I cannot envisage anything else, which is used for public worship except Churches and Mosques. Therefore, it would do us a great service if we removed the phrase “necessary cartilage” and if the minister so wishes he may introduce residences for religious leaders, et cetera as another sub-section.

DR NDUHUURA: I would like to concede but propose that we provide for residences of religious leaders.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, could somebody formulate a definition? It must be under the interpretation section.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: I would like to accept the minister’s proposal so that clause 3 reads: “Any property used exclusively for the public and as a residence of a religious leader.” I beg to move.

MR BAMWANGA: While talking of religious leaders and areas of public worship, unless the said residence is within the precincts of the place of worship, you were going to be tied down with some religious groups putting up houses in Kololo for rent. And since the House belongs to a Bishop or Archbishop, it would be exempted from taxes. Therefore, we should strictly look at property that has an attachment to the place of worship rather than a religious leader. 

MR MUTULUUZA: We have so many religions here including those associated with shrines. We must make a law that isolates and identifies the religious bodies we are talking about. Otherwise I may put up a shrine tomorrow and say, “This is the residence of Kifaru’s religious leader.”

CAPT. BABU: The reason these religious organisations are exempted from this is the social services they offer. They are not money-making organisations, they do a lot of social work for which they are not even paid and I feel we should not spend so much time on this. If we are going to exempt them then we do and discuss something else. 

The committee should decide who is entitled to this and state it clearly within the law. It would be very unfortunate to exclude such organisations as schools and health centres. It is only fair that these people are looked at with special consideration. While our shrines, as somebody said earlier on, could come up but these are more money-making than they are social. Therefore, we must agree as to what we mean by these religious bodies and those that offer non-governmental organisation services. This would clarify what we should exempt. Some people said there are too many religions here. What is wrong with that? After all, these people cleanse our souls. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But doesn’t No. 5 cover what you want to say? It covers property usage exclusively for charitable and educational institutions of public character supported by endowments and voluntary contributions.

CAPT. BABU: Hon. Wacha made the point clear that the two should be separated.  

REV. KABUSHENGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think it is important that the relevant ministry certifies what a legitimate religious entity is and points out what is not. That is very important. This is not only for spiritual reasons but also in social theory anything that promises benefit is bound to be abused. Human beings have a nature that seeks to invest the least and reap the most. If I have got a business that is not doing well, the temptation to brand it to religion so as to get tax benefits is not healthy. 

So, if this is flowing out of a country whose motto is “For God and my country,” this God tends to be spelt with a capital “G” and if you are offering social services yet you are worshipping the Nyabugoto cult or something that cannot be certified to be the true and living God, there should be some controls.  

I think the Government should have a system, I do not know which ministry is the responsible, I heard sometime ago that the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity had responsibility for the regulation of religion. There should be a system where all sound religious entities are registered and these registered entities should be the ones to certify that that little thing in Kanungu or in Karamoja is part of us and we recognize it for what we believe in or do. Thank you, very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So you are proposing an addition to the Second Schedule to give powers to the minister?

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, the point raised by hon. Kabushenga is very pertinent and I do realise that under the NGO law religious organisations are expected to register. The Attorney-General is here, he can advise. At least that is what I have been advised by my technical team that religious organisations in this country are expected to register. That is why I earlier on alluded to registered or recognised religious leaders. That is exactly what I meant that religions must be registered.

MR KABAREEBE: Madam Chairperson, registering will not be enough because for example the cult in Kanungu that killed many people was a properly registered NGO. But they went ahead and burnt up their followers. 

Then there is the issue of the clergy who own private property yet all these institutions have got titles for their property. So, those registered properties under the institution are the ones to be exempted especially when they are used as residences but not necessarily being at the jurisdiction of the Church.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I think there was a member who suggested that the cartilage should be limited to the precincts of the place of worship, the house inside where the Church is, not the estates owned by the Church. Why do you not confine it?

DR NDUHUURA: We are not talking about estates. You will find that some places of worship are just on a limited plot and that organisation finds it very difficult to put the house or the residence of the leader on the same premise. So they will find some other plots where they can build the residence of their leaders. 

In any case, as I pointed out yesterday on page 23 of the Bill under part 2(2), it reads: “Not withstanding the provisions of part (1), nothing in this Schedule shall be taken to exempt the owner of any property from the payment of rates on property from which he or she derives a rent or income used for any purposes indicated in paragraph 2, 3, 4, 5 or 6 of part I.”  So if a religious organisation has got an estate, which is rented and it earns an income from it, then they will definitely not be exempted from paying property rates.  

MR AWORI: I note with great concern that my honourable colleague is deliberately avoiding using the word “shrine” and yet a shrine is a place of worship. Our problem has been this question of excluding our traditional rights. We tend to look down upon them because we have –(Interruption)

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want to ask for clarification from hon. Aggrey Awori, a son of an Archdeacon –(Interjection)– Archdeacons are Canons, my father happens to be one. How can hon. Aggrey Awori argue that a shrine is a place of worship?

REV. KABUSHENGA: I wish to inform the honourable son of an Archdeacon that when we are talking about religions, we have got voluntary regulatory bodies. We have the Uganda Joint Christian Council who can sign and say, “That is one of us”. We have the Uganda Muslim Supreme Council, and the National Association of Pentecostal Churches. So, all who worship the true God have come together to endorse each other and to hold each other accountable for what they teach and what they do and I fail to see any association under which people who worship what we do not understand – gods spelt with a small “g” - I really think we cannot take that on board.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: On a procedural issue, I have been educated on what is a shrine and what is not but the essence of what we are doing is to specify properties, which we would like to be exempted. Article 3 specifically talks about a property used exclusively for public worship.  

The minister is also introducing the aspect that if a place is exclusively used for residence of a religious leader that could also be exempted. I agree with him. On page 23 it clearly states that if any property including that of a religious institution were rented, then that particular property would not be exempted. So, taking all that into account I think we could talk about property that is exclusively used for public worship or exclusively used as a residence of a religious leader, and then we move on.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So you are proposing that it should be more definite in No. 3 to say that a place of worship and residence of a religious leader exclusively?

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Yes, exclusively, so that we do not have any other category.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Would that not solve our problem, honourable minister?

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, I am in agreement with the proposal by hon. Dora Byamukama.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now, you agree that we should amend the Schedule, but are we still defining?  Because we had said that you create a definition under Clause 2.  No more definition?

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, the definition was for “necessary cartilage”, but I conceded that we delete “necessary cartilage”; therefore, we do not have the definition.  So we shall now have (3) reading as, “Any property used exclusively for public worship and exclusively used as residence, or exclusively used as residence of a religious leader”.

MS SEKITOLEKO: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson.  I to add, “recognized religious leader” or “registered religious leader”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Minister, is there a requirement in this country to register religious organisations?

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, the Attorney General, as I had earlier said, is here. He could advise.  But my technical team informed me that all religious organisations are expected to register under the NGO law.  However, there are some big religious organisations, which refused to register.  But now, to benefit from this exemption, we are proposing under this law, that there is no way they will not register.  Otherwise, they will not have their properties exempted.  I think this is a one way of bringing them to register as required by the NGO law.

CAPT. BABU: I want clarification, because I heard that, a religious leader or religious leaders.  I wanted someone to explain to me, this freedom of association to some of these religions, and there are some several religions that have refused to register because they do not agree that religions should be registered; yet they are recognised religions internationally. Now, how are we going to separate, because that is what the Minister is saying?  Their faith does not believe in this.

Secondly, in the faith I subscribe to, we have nunneries, convents which are very big sometimes, and we also have seminaries where these people reside.  What do we do with this?  Where do they fall?  I would like somebody to help me with this so that I can understand.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Minister, I think our Constitution does not allow us to make discriminatory laws.  So, we need to resolve this matter.  The Attorney General should help us.  Are they required to register?  Because if we say that now register, it means we are locking out all those who do not want to register; but they are carrying out God’s work.

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Chairperson, I think it is difficult to give an instant answer because there is a constitutional position and a legal position under the Non-Governmental Organizations Act. There is also the actual practice, which is empirical, and what we have accepted is this.  But we have to be careful because of the constitutional dispensation of freedom of worship.  The thing to be careful about is to ensure that this law, which we are making will not impinge on this freedom of worship.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, honourable Members, I know that we have very many beliefs here and very many convictions.  But we are making laws for the whole country.  So, maybe they say, “registered organisations”! I really think that we should leave that out.  

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, with our experience with Kibwetere and that problem, I thought that we would urge Government to come up with a law specifically to regulate the faith-based organisations.  Because what do we do if we leave these people? We have a country, we have suffered injustice through a religious based organisation and we cannot continue like that.  Probably if they do not want to be NGOs, Government should come up with a law to register church-based or religious based organisation so that we can monitor them. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: A cult is different from a religion.  Whether we have got a religion, registered or not, a cult can emerge any time.  Therefore, I am of the view that we leave out the word, “certified” or “registered religion”; we go ahead with the amendment.

MS MEHANGYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I would like to get clarification from the Attorney General.  When religions are performing certain duties, like providing wedding certificates, they do it on behalf of the State. So I thought that it would be in the interest of the State to know who are these organisations performing duties on their behalf.  If these organisations are not registered and we just accept them in goodwill, how do we -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I think that our problem is that we do not actually have a law dealing with religions in this country.  We do not have that law.  So I think we should agree with honourable Janat Mukwaya that the government should find some mechanism of establishing who is doing what and where.  

But currently, we do not have a law. We cannot compel anybody to register.  They are free to worship.  

Honourable members, before we proceed, I would like to welcome the members of Jinja District Council; they are in the gallery.  They are on their way to Wakiso, but they thought that they should spend the morning here with us, to see what we are doing.  So we thank hon. Nabeta, hon. Tuma, hon. Migereko, hon. Kasigwa and hon. Nabwiso for bringing them here.  (Applause)

MR KIZIGE: Madam Chairperson, this law is referring to local government tax, and in each local government, churches or religious organisations, are very well known.  While the Apostle’s Church of Righteousness may be well known in Jinja District, it may not have been heard of in Kabale.  

So, if registration is referring to registering with a local government, I do not see any problem with that.  While it is difficult to say, let the Catholic Church register at national level, each district knows where there are parishes and sub-parishes; they know where the churches are located. So it will be these local governments to levy the rates.  Therefore, I see no problem with registering with the local government.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson; we know well that in politics and religion, the first stage to regulate or manage any organisation starts with registration.  Once we get in this culture of registration, that is the preamble to regulation and control.  So, to avoid confrontations with the Church, let us leave out that operational word, “registered” or “recognized.”  Let it be “a religious organisation.”  Once we get into definitions, “recognized,” “registered,” we are getting into very slippery ground.  

MR KABUSHENGA: Madam Chairperson and honourable members, the missing element, which we need to bring out or create a law for, is charitable status.  When you say that an organisation has charitable status, it means that the State recognises its existence and that it is exempted from certain economic obligations. 

When you say that the Church should register as a non-governmental organisation, that causes offence because you have Anglicans, Catholics and Muslims saying, “We preceded Government and you want to downgrade our status.”  But what we want to do is not to downgrade status, but to grant charitable status.  

So I do not know what law we need to make or what wording we need to use, but charitable status is always given on a case-by-case basis.  A non-governmental organisation could even be religious in some ways, but when they are promoting a micro finance and making billions of money.  So I think what Churches need is not to be forced to become non-governmental organisations. What Government needs is to establish the nature of charitable status and how one attains it.  Thank you very much.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think there is a solution to this matter.  First, I think we expect that the valuers will value that property. Then, when you go, you may say, “I am exempted because I am doing a, b, c.”  Is it not so?  

So there is no problem because the exemption is not in advance.  You must present yourselves there and say, “Please exempt us because we are Church and this is the residence of the Bishop.”  Is that not how it works?  Or do you exempt in advance?

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, I want to agree with you because within this Bill, we are giving powers to the Minister and local governments of remitting or reducing the tax payable.  So what you have proposed is in line with the wishes of Members of the House. I think we could go with that and leave it to the local government or the Minister in his regulations will indicate the circumstances under which remission can be effected.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, I would like to know whether the exemption we are talking about takes into consideration the interest of polygamous religious leaders.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Sebaggala, do they really live at the Mosque?

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Chairperson, we talked about their residences.  Polygamous religious leaders may have three or four houses, so does it cover the interests of polygamous religious leaders?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Sebaggala, I am aware that there is always the first official residence.

MR WACHA: Madam Chairperson, let me help my colleague.  If that religious leader is using them exclusively as residences, then there is no problem.  But if he is renting them, then there will a problem.  (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we were considering this Schedule as part of the definition, but since we have dealt with it at length, let us take a vote on it here.  I put the question that the Second Schedule be amended as proposed by hon. Byamukama.

(Question put and agreed to)

The Second Schedule  as amended, 
agreed to.

Clause 2

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are there other amendments on clause 2?  You are to define the valuation court and the local governments.

DR NDUHUURA: Yes, Madam Chairperson. We have found it necessary to amend the definition of the valuation court, having heard the concerns of Members yesterday, especially with regard to the number of valuation courts that we talk about in this Bill.  

It is appreciated that if we leave the Town Councils with their own valuation courts, the number of valuation courts in this country will be immense.  We are talking of about 65 districts now, each district has got at least one Town Council. So those talking of 70, I do not know where you get the number.  I am the Minister of State for Local Governments and I am aware of about 65.  

So, Madam Chairperson, that gives us a minimum of 130- not including districts, which have more than one Town Council.  So, we could end up having about 160 valuation courts in this country, which number would be too big, especially since we intend to have professional engineers, and valuers on these committees.  We do not have an abundance of that human resource.

I want to move an amendment on the definition of Valuation Court to insert the words “by district, city or municipal council” between the words “appointed” and “under”. So, after the amendment is effected: “Valuation Court means, the Valuation Court appointed by the district, city or municipal council under this Act.”  So, that we will now have the District Valuation Courts to service the Town Councils. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think there is no objection to that. 

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Chairperson, I think there was also the issue of numbers whether we should have three members or five, and then there is also the issue of appointment Madam Chairperson.  It is not very clear so maybe the Minister could –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: That will come under clause 17.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Okay, Madam Chairperson. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, hon. members –(Interruption)

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Chairperson, one of the problems that local authorities were experiencing was the delay in effecting the valuations. Knowing that these are adhoc bodies, which are not permanent, what are the reservations of the minister in making it easy for these bodies to create valuation courts as the need arises? Delay in payment was due to delay in valuation and that is what we are trying to cure.  So, could he throw more light on that, please?

DR. NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, what has been obtaining is that the chief Government Valuer was the only person charged with the function of appointing valuers.  We are now kind of decentralising and giving every local government in this country that function of appointing valuers for their respective local governments.  So, I do not see that problem still on after having this law in place.  I believe this is really satisfactory; we are going to have valuers for every local government including town councils. We are going to have valuation courts for every district, municipality and the city. So, this is going to ease the work as far as valuation is concerned.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the definition of valuation court be amended as proposed by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 2 as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 17

DR. NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, clause 17, was stood over yesterday and one of the reasons was for provision of gender; there was also an issue on the numbers.  We have looked at this matter and we feel that we should go with the amendment of the committee which was talking of reducing the numbers from 4 to 2 –(Interjections)- yes, but at the same time we provide for gender so that it would now read:  “the valuation court shall consist of a chairperson and two members at least one of whom shall be a woman and all of whom shall be appointed by the District, City or Municipal Council.” We are deleting “local government” for the very reasons I have already talked about, because we are removing the functions of appointing valuation courts from the town council.  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move.

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Chairperson, there were reasons that were advanced yesterday as to why we should not have 2 people, because it would mean that if one is sick then court would not sit. Now, I want the minister to give some justification of reducing from 4 to 2. Is it because the other one was going to produce 2 women and this one is going to have 1 woman?  

MR BAMWANGA: Madam Chairperson, yesterday I was trying to argue that if we increase the numbers to 4, we would not be able to get sufficient personnel. 

Secondly, the justification I am giving is that the current valuation court sittings have always been three.  For Kampala City Council there are three members of the Valuation Court and they have been doing their job very well. I want us to make sure that when we are passing this law, we do not create the impression that we are creating jobs.  That is what it is supposed to be. People will have to give their expertise on this matter, not that they are going to be earning a fat salary. So, these other local governments will not be able to pay for these big numbers that you are trying to impose on them. That is why we should stay with three people per local government.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, when we were making this amendment we looked at the cost implications to local government.  When we increase the number, all the costs by local government will go up.  So, the cost implication is what made us reduce the number to three.

MR KABAREEBE: Madam Chairperson, I want to put my case forward. First of all, we may have a court presided over by a judge but also have assessors.  Assessors may not necessarily be qualified in law but persons of integrity. For example, when I was Town Clerk in Entebbe, we had 2 or 3 people sitting to determine the destiny of who the property owners were and they were there on their own discretion.  It is important that we have 1 or 2 technical people but also have people of integrity to make 5 people. The quorum can be 3 to ease cases of appeal raised by people because the valuation would have been done technically.  Thank you.

MRS SSENTONGO: The clarification I want to seek is in regard to the fact that if we have wrong numbers, the remuneration part of it could be a problem but is it possible to co-opt any technocrat on that court where necessary?  

MR RUHINDI:  Madam Chairperson, there is a problem here because some practicing advocates in this House maybe aware of the nightmare in the District Land Tribunals.  If there is any lawyer or practicing advocate who has concluded even one or two cases in any District Land Tribunal, they can testify here, but I think there is none.  The major problem facing the District Land Tribunals is lack of quorum.  The chairpersons are constantly molested there, but the other members are pursuing further studies in Makerere. They are ever absent; when 2 are present, the other one is missing.  

Based on what hon. Muzoora is saying, treat these other people like you treat assessors, let the person - after all you are appointing a chairperson who is technical; a lawyer of not less than five years standing.  If they feel that they need technical advice from those areas we have specified, let them co-opt that person and let the work proceed. 

 Madam Chairperson, we want expedited justice; we have investors coming around; they want their properties valued; they want to pay their rates and yet they want to complain. My proposal is, let us have this one person, the chairpersons, handle the cases and let them co-opt those they think they can co-opt from those areas you have mentioned.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Ruhindi, you are now saying we should get the provisions for 4 members and even for 2 and we have 1 person?

MR RUHINDI: There is no monopoly; what is the monopoly?  These complaints, your judges in the courts of law, hear all kinds of cases; you tell me where there are certain cases, which for instance, do not go to the High Court?  

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Chair, even when courts are presided over, they are not presided over by one person. You have a lead Judge and you need a Coram.  Honourable Steven Bamwanga has already said; the current valuation courts are composed of 3 people.  So, why do we not go by that and then support that particular position?

MRS MUKWAYA:  I wanted clarification from those 2 learned friends.  Even in the High Court, you always have more than 1 judge.

MR RUHINDI: Thank you hon. minister. I do not know whether the hon. member knows that in the High Court, you have one judge presiding over a case with unlimited jurisdiction, and you have expedited justice, what is this myth about three people in a court!

MR YIGA: Madam Chairperson, the problem with our land tribunals is basically lack of facilitation. Somebody will not use his money once, twice, thrice going to attend to tribunal work when he is not paid.

But for these valuation courts, since they are going to deal with generating revenue for local governments, local governments will have to facilitate them and these 3 members will turn up for as long as they are paid. 

 Madam Chair, I suggest that we go by the 3 members, who will be very easy to pay by the local government. I move that you put the question so that this matter is put to rest. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this valuation court does not sit everyday. They will be sitting to hear objections. You might get an assessment and accept it, and go and pay, so you do not have to go there. It is those who have objections who will be going there.  So, we could start with the 3.

MR WACHA: Thank you Madam and thank you for accepting the three but I just want to polish the clause by removing all the words after “members”. You remove the words: “and shall be appointed by the Local Government or any other valuation that would come” because we have already provided under the definition clause that the valuation means, “court which will be appointed by district, city or municipality.” So, these particular words are not necessary; even what the minister is proposing is not necessary.  I do not know whether you are following this, madam.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yeah, we defined the valuation court to mean, “a court in the district, municipality and the city,” but he is saying now who will actually appoint them because somebody may think the Minister appoints them.

MR WACHA: Madam, could you read for me what the definition clause says, what the valuation court is defined as.

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, I think hon. Wacha is right because we have already defined valuation court to mean the valuation court appointed by the district, city or municipal council under this act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we have agreed that we abandon the idea of 4 members and we stick to the 3 and start off from there. That will actually come under 18 but the main one for the composition, can we move formally so that we can vote on it?

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chair, it will read: “the valuation court shall consist of a chairperson and 2 members at least 1 of whom shall be a woman.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 17 be amended as proposed by the Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, I am moving an amendment to introduce a new sub-clause which will be numbered 17(1)(b) so that the one we have just dealt with will be re-numbered 17(1)(a) and 17(1)(b) I am proposing it will read, “The district valuation courts shall give service to the Town Councils within the district.”  The justification is to make this very clear since we have already agreed that Town Councils will not have valuation courts of their own, so we make it very clear in this amendment that they will be serviced by the District Valuation Courts.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a new sub clause be introduced as proposed by the Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18

DR NDUHUURA: We had stood over Clause 18 because of the numbers, Madam Chairperson. Consequently we now say, “the chairperson and 1 other member shall constitute the quorum of the valuation court.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you also have other amendments, isn’t there something else?  

DR NDUHUURA: Yes, I want to move an amendment on Clause 18 to delete the words after “member” in the third line and substitute for “the decision shall be by consensus.”  So 18(2) will now read: “the decision of valuation courts shall be according to the opinion of the majority but where the valuation court consists of the chairperson and 1 member, decision shall be by consensus.”  
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But how can there be consensus when there are only 2 people? 

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, it is consensus by the 2, otherwise there will be no decision made until they can raise all the 3 members of the court so that they have the majority.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Maybe you will have to re-formulate this, because you are saying there is a difference of opinion, then you say already different opinions have got consensus, how can that be?  You see, you said that where there is a difference of opinion; the decision of the chairperson should be the decision of the court, then you have changed to say “consensus”.  So if we have a difference of opinion, how can we have consensus when we are 2?

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, maybe I will need a clarification from you because what I am proposing to delete is after “member”, so the words which were reading, “and there is a difference of opinion, the opinion of the chairperson shall be the decision of the valuation court.”  I am proposing to delete all that and substitute for it  “decision shall be by consensus”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Supposing there is no consensus, what happens?

DR NDUHUURA: If there is no consensus then there is no decision taken at that very meeting; they would have to wait until they get the third person and get the majority taking the decision.  

MRS. BYAMUKAMA: Madam Chairperson, if we provide in the law a structural constraint, whereby you may have to convene the valuation court more than once due to lack of quorum, it will be against the maxim: “justice delayed is justice denied.”  I would like to propose that because we had agreed on 3, let the quorum of the valuation court be 3 and then Article 18(2) would remain valid.  But short of that, we have a problem.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, you are proposing that we retain the original provisions?  

MR WACHA: Madam Chairperson, I also agree that we retain the original version because the principle here is that the other two members or the other member who might be disagreeing with the chairman is just giving advice.  Then the final decision should be that of the chairman and this is what is here. I do not see why the minister is deferring with it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, you know even in our courts, if the quorum under law says it is 3, they must be 3, you cannot sit when you are 2.  So why don’t we revert to the original position?

DR NDUHUURA: But, Madam Chairperson, the quorum is 2; because in Article 18(1) it says the chairperson and one other member shall constitute the quorum of the valuation court.  So as long as the chairperson and one other member are there, then the quorum is there.  But why we are proposing the amendment is to avoid the chairman’s decision overruling the other member because they are only two.  

MR BAMWANGA: Madam Chairperson, looking at Article 18 on the question of quorum, the experience has been that you cannot permanently have 3 people; even when 2 people meet, the chairperson and 1 member, form the quorum.  So, why can’t we say that the chairperson and one other member shall constitute the quorum of the valuation court?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, do we retain the quorum as 2 people?  I put the question that Clause 18(1) be amended as proposed by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 18(2) be amended as proposed by the minister –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: Madam Chairperson, I implore the minister to withdraw his amendment. Honourable minister, if there is a difference of opinion, there can never be a consensus; never.  The basis of a consensus is that there is a meeting of minds, now if there are two people and there is a difference of opinion, there is no meeting of minds.  I propose that we retain it as here, that the chairman’s opinion becomes the decision of the court.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, this is very important.  First of all, I agree with hon. Wacha on Clause 18(2).  But if we have to retain Clause 18(2), we have to readjust Clause 18(1). Clause 18(2) is in conflict with Clause 18(1). Clause 18(2) presupposes that the quorum can be 2 but where there is a difference of opinion, the Chairperson’s opinion takes precedence. That means that the quorum can be 2.  So Clause 18(1) should then read: “The Chairperson and one other member shall constitute the quorum of the valuation court”.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  That is what we have just passed.  

MR RUHINDI: If that is the case, then Clause 18(2) remains the way it is, Madam Chairperson.

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that Clause 18, as amended do stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Title do stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

12.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

12.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered Clause 2, Clause 17, Clause 18 and the Second Schedule of the Bill entitled, “The Local Governments (Rating) Bill, 2003” and passed them with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF
THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

12.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Nduhuura Richard): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR RECOMMITTAL

MR RUHINDI: After some necessary consultations, Madam Speaker, I move to recommit the Bill, to introduce sub clause 3 in Clause 27.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that this bill be recommitted to permit consideration of introduction of a new Clause 27(3).

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (RATING) BILL, 2003

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, we have many developers of different kinds. There is a big difference between my constituency in Nakawa and many other constituencies because of the self-help based initiatives.  People come together, work on a road and sometimes they get lost.  What do we do now?  We have spent our money on this road. This is work, which would ordinarily be worked upon by the Local Government, but they have not. A good example, just a week ago, I inaugurated a road called “Bukoto Crescent” in Naguru. The residents worked on this road and we spent Ugshs 35 million on about 700 meters of the road.  

So, I propose, Madam Chairperson that we insert a new sub clause 3 in Clause 27 to read that, “Where the owner of property, upon approval by the Local Government, spends money on any infrastructure work meant to be done by the Local Government, that expenditure shall be offset against his or her pending rate”.  I beg to move.

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Madam Chairperson, whereas hon. Ruhindi’s proposed amendment could be plausible, it presents the problem of verification.  In a sense, that the owner of the property may engage a contractor of his own at terms which may not be very consistent with the work actually done. You could have a situation where the local authorities, the urban authorities, would be over-flooded with demands for offsetting the due funds to the councils, or to the local governments.  Could he clarify to me before I give my support to his proposal, as to what mechanisms will be in place to ensure that there is no collusion between contractors and the property owners to defraud local governments and town councils?

MR BAMWANGA: Madam Chairperson, there is already a precedent in Kampala City Council where owners of properties have been seeking permission of the council to carry out these works. In principle the council has agreed on condition that the city engineer must approve those estimates.  

I have a case in point, Madam Chairperson, where I organised the residents of Muyenga, Nyangweso road, which is 300 meters. Residents contributed Ugshs 28 million. When we wrote the letter to the City Council, the Mayor and the Town Clerk have accepted to top-up a difference of Ugshs 12 million to make it Ugshs 40 million.  We also wrote asking for the actual amount of money that individual property owners have contributed. In principle they have agreed that they are going to offset it against their tax liabilities. So, already this case is on-going and I support hon. Ruhindi for that amendment.  Thank you.

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, I oppose the proposed amendment because it is going to create anarchy in our local governments.  Whereas the intentions are very good and progressive, I believe this can be catered for under the regulations to be made by the Minister rather than putting it in the law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Minister, the regulations emanate from the substantive law.  If there is no provision for that in the law, how will you make regulations?  You cannot.

DR NDUHUURA: But since we already have in the Local Governments Act the provisions of these services as one of the functions by the respective local governments, what would be the importance of having it in this law, especially when we know that – somebody is talking about emphasis – but as I explained yesterday, this matter was raised by hon. Sebuliba Mutumba. I explained that we are for the first time going to use this law to create a special fund from the property tax.  

What has been happening hitherto is that money collected from property rates was put in a general pool. So it was put to other activities other than providing services to the taxpayers.  But this law makes it mandatory that a special fund is created for property tax, and that the money put in that fund is put specifically to provision of services, which will actually – I think somewhere we are even saying that the people have a right to demand for the services.  So, I do not see why we should specify this in the law.  The local governments will be in charge of the fund; they are mandated to provide these services.  

So, Madam Chairperson, I oppose the amendment on the grounds that it is likely to create anarchy. Now if we take this amendment, it would mean that an agreement has got to be made before these activities are undertaken by the taxpayers –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Minister, it says: “upon approval by the local government.”  They make a plan and go to the local government, and if the local government approves, they do the work.  That is what he is proposing.  

MR MADADA: Madam Chairperson, I can find a lot of abuse in the amendment being proposed by hon. Ruhindi, unless he clarifies on a number of issues that I would like to raise. Normally there is a procedure on how Government takes on public works.  There must be a tender board, in this case a contracts committee, to authorize public works to go on.  

Now this is an issue where an individual has taken an initiative to do a road or public works and it has not been accepted in the normal Government procedures of making public works.  So, if you allow individuals to decide on paying back this money without going through the normal public procedures of making contracts, we are likely to have corrupt audit reports.  Therefore, this is where we need some clarification from the member who is proposing this amendment.

MR BYABAGAMBI: The information I wanted to give the member is that I live in Mutungo. The residents of Mutungo some time back, I think two years ago, contributed money to make their road.  After contributing that money, the City Council added on and they went ahead through the tender board to secure a contractor who came and did that road.  

Therefore, all the procedures are followed; money passes through the normal procedures.  It is only that residents do not want to delay the development of their areas. If those people have got money, they can contribute and that money goes through normal procedures. If it is tendered for, then why do you deny them the services when they can do that?  So, I support hon. Ruhindi that, that should be included.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like members to be very realistic.  I do not know whether you know how people live for years and years waiting for services, their houses are flooding, there are no roads, waiting for City Council. This is the reality.  

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Chairperson, I thought before any construction work is undertaken, the city or urban engineer must approve and inspect the works.  So what is the problem with the amendment? In any case, Madam Chairperson, the amendment is saying there is approval. I see no problem why the Minister should –(Interruption)

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, this is going to save us time. I would like to refer honourable colleagues to the provisions of Clause 6 on page 6.  Clause 6(1), which reads: “Subject to sub-section (2) a local government may reduce or remit the payment of any rate in respect of any property.”  

Clause 6(2) says: “A Local Government may only reduce or remit payment of any rate in any case prescribed by the Minister by regulations.”  So –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: First of all, we amended that clause. But why does the Minister want to be the one to approve the work?

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, what the Minister should know is that once a property is serviced, its value goes up.  The local governments get more of the property rates when the property is easily serviced.  That is number one.  

Number 2, no civil works can be carried out in any rural or local government without the approval of the engineer.  That one is a by-law, so it has to be on approval.  So, without the approval of the engineer, no civil work can be carried out and the property goes up when the value is serviced.

MR BAMWANGA: Madam Chairperson, there was a case in Kampala City Council Valuation Court between the residents of Muyenga, Kayonza Zone v. Kampala City Council. The ruling that was delivered was in respect of an objection raised by those residents against the imposition of rates on their properties by the City Council without providing them with corresponding services.  This ruling was passed on to the City Council. 

After examining the proposals of the residents and the problems that were ascertained, the Executive Council of Kampala city Council agreed in principle on the following:

1.	The residents of any area may agree to carryout a service for the benefit of their area.
2.	The residents should submit the proposed project in writing to the City Council for examination and approval.
3.	Where possible the council could supply machinery or expertise to supervise them.
4.	The approved cost will be submitted to the relevant division of the City Council, which will divide it among the participating residents and their rates will be reduced accordingly. 
5.	This scheme shall apply to the whole of Kampala City Council in the area of jurisdiction.
6.	This court realises that the City Council account will be deprived of this revenue and this might interfere with the development priorities, which the City Council may have planned.  But the scheme would give an advantage of eliminating the subsidy currently being rendered by the residents of the City Council.
7.	It will also hasten the development of the City in that instead of waiting for years for actions to be taken by the council, each area will endeavour to develop itself. 

This document was signed by Mr Paul Sebalu (chairman), Steven Bamwanga (member) and Mr Muganga (member).  This was the judgment. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is the judgment of the valuation court of Kampala City Council and it has already set a precedent. So, I do not know whether we now want to – Honourable Minister, do you have to read the amendment that will solve our problem? 

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, I am now in possession of the proposed amendment. Having read this amendment and understood that it would be upon approval by the Local Government, I do agree with the mover of the amendment. So, we can proceed. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that a new Clause 27(3) be introduced into the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 27 as amended, agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

1.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered Clause 27 of the bill entitled, “The Local Governments (Rating) Bill, 2003 and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF
THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (RATING) BILL, 2003

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Nduhuura): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled, “The Local Governments (Rating) Bill, 2003” be read the Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I would like to thank you for the work you have done today. I wish you a good weekend.  The House is adjourned to Monday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 1.10 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 4 July 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)

