Tuesday, 22 July 2014

Parliament met at 2.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. I thank you for the work so far done but let us be reminded that there is still a lot of work to be done and let us do our best to expedite the business that is still before us.

I am informed that we have so far received only a limited number of Ministerial Policy Statements and we all know that the law commands us to do this by 30th June. Today is 10 days to 30th July and we still have not received some Ministerial Policy Statements, which is not a proper way of doing business if we are to facilitate the committees to do their work and we complete this process by the time provided for in the law – 31st August every year - because if the Ministerial Policy Statements delay, that means that the committees will also be delayed and we will not be able to do the work within the time that has been provided for by the law.

So, I really urge the ministers whose Ministerial Policy Statements have not yet come here to make sure they are in here before the end of this week. We definitely need an apology from the ministers coming to bring these Ministerial Policy Statements late because the law is clear on when they should have presented these statements.

MR SSEWUNGU: Guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You mean procedure?

MR SSEWUNGU: Procedure. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, procedure. (Laughter)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank you for that good communication and actually, I am not happy with the Ministry of Education. I do not know whether we have a policy statement ready and worst of all, we know that committee clerks have been changed but we do not know our clerk because we don’t have any information. 

But the most important thing about policy statements is getting them and reading them. You cannot just get a policy statement today and start debating it in a committee without reading and internalising the matters. This is very dangerous and I am calling upon the Ministry of Education where I belong – we are the ones suffering with capitation grants here and so many other issues. Why do they always bring their policy statements late and we always start fidgeting? Even when we go to the committee, Mr Speaker, we take time to get these ministers sometimes. 

So, I support your communication but sincerely, we need the policy statements in time to read them and then we see where our money is going and how it is performing. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As I said, we will need apologies from those who will be bringing their Ministerial Policy Statements late. On this matter, hon. Member for Budadiri?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You are right that we need policy statements on time and if they are not there, I think sanctions should be put into place.
The procedural issue that I am raising is on the Order Paper. Last Thursday, when you were in the Chair, the issue about capitation grants was raised and the Minister for Finance said that on Tuesday, she will come with the report about that issue of capitation grants. 

I have gone through the Order Paper and I do not know on what page it is but I do not see it and as we talk, it is one of the serious issues in our UPE and USE schools. For example, where I come from, there is Namputu Secondary School where students had to strike because they had been told that there was no money to go for games. As we talk, the primary schools in our area are doing music competitions but they are saying that they do not have money to be able to go for the competition.

So, Mr Speaker, I am seeking your indulgence as to why the issue of the capitation grant which was agreed to last week on Thursday is missing on the Order Paper? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Member, in our meeting this morning to prepare for this sitting, the ministers called and said that the statement was not ready today but would be ready tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock because they needed to give comprehensive coverage so that they handle it once without anything outstanding. So, I agreed to it and they will be coming here tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock. Point of procedure from the Member for Mukono Municipality.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure in relation to the recently tabled ministerial statements. The Minister for Local Government whom I shadow presented before this House a policy statement for financial year 2014/2015 last week. In that policy statement on Page 123 under Vote 001, vote function 1349, output 134975, the minister proposes to purchase 111 vehicles for the LC Chairpersons in the country and another six vehicles for the ministry with an initial deposit of Shs 4.8 billion.

Under Article 154 of the Constitution, a relevant committee of Parliament, and in this case the Local Government and Public Service committee, is supposed to discuss and review the estimates of the revenues and expenditures laid before it and make recommendations to Parliament.

In addition, under Rule 138 of our Rules of Procedure, it is provided that a Ministerial Policy Statement is supposed to be discussed by the committee. The purchase of 117 vehicles for both district chairpersons and the ministry is still a proposed subject to be discussed by a committee and to be approved by this House. However, contrary to this, the Ministry of Local Government has kick-started the process to procure the said cars by calling for bids for the provision of the said vehicles. The minister has even assured the bidders that they have already allocated the funds for this item and issued a calendar for bid submission, evaluation and signing of the contract.

This particular contract is meant to bind this country for three financial years and needs to be handled carefully; and it is worth Shs 14 billion. The advert was in The New Vision of 21 July 2011 on page 38. I find this irregular as it violates both the Constitution and our Rules of Procedure. Acts like this one reduce this House to being a mere rubber stamp for the Executive. I therefore request you, Mr Speaker, to cause the summoning of both the minister and the acting Permanent Secretary of Local Government to explain why they are by-passing the procedural requirements and committing our country for years without parliamentary approval. 

It should be remembered that it is this same ministry which caused us the bicycle scandal. I do not want to imagine that the minister and the acting Permanent Secretary would wish to join their colleague, Mr Kashaka, in Luzira. With this I rest my case. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Certainly that does not sound right and I do not see the Minister of Local Government here and the Leader of Government Business – is there a Leader of Government Business in this sitting? 

2.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Betty Nambooze for raising that issue. I will bring it to the attention of the Minister of Local Government that this matter was raised and request him to come and respond to it as quickly as possible. I can even go out from here and try to reach him so that this issue can be addressed. Thursday, may be more appropriate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister and honourable members, if it is indeed true that a proposal has been submitted to this House for the purchase of the said vehicles, and if it is also true that the advert for the bid for the same have already gone out in the newspapers before we have acted on that, then certainly there is a serious problem. I am requesting you to communicate with the Minister for Local Government to come and make a statement before this House by close of business today because it is a serious matter. (Applause) Please pass the information to the Minister of Local Government that he is required to come and make clarification on this subject today. 

MR BABA: Mr Speaker, I am going to convey the message, but supposing he is not in town?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Someone else should come; it should be today. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, first I want to thank you very much for stamping the authority of Parliament in the history of the Ninth Parliament. You have directed and the Leader of Government Business now must implement your direction. Is the acting Leader of Government Business, hon. James Baba, in order to contest your directive and quarrel with you - (Laughter)? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I can see your effort to try and aggravate the situation – (Laughter) – but I do not think you have been very successful on this occasion. Honourable minister, it is my order that that statement or clarification – even if it is oral - has got to be made today! (Applause) 

MR BABA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay –(Interjections)– wait for the minister then you can lay it on the Table. If they contest it, then you can lay it on Table and if they do not contest it, then there is no point for it. 

2.25
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the misuse of roads by drivers from South Sudan. My district borders South Sudan and the road I am talking about in particular is the Juba Road that links South Sudan to Gulu District. 

Mr Speaker, after crossing the border, the drivers from South Sudan seem to forget that they have crossed into Uganda. In South Sudan, they keep right. When they cross into Uganda, they continue driving on the right hand. As I talk, we have had so many accidents taking place on that particular road. One month ago, a truck carrying traders from Amuru going to the border market in South Sudan had a head-on collision with another driver from South Sudan. So many people were injured and many of them are still in hospital. 

Not only that, we have a Gulu University lecturer who was riding a motorcycle. He was knocked dead by a driver from South Sudan; he was still driving on the right hand. And since they claim they do not know how to drive on the left, the lecturer, Mr Nyeko Balaam, was knocked dead. Also last week, a boy was again knocked dead by another driver from South Sudan. 

Mr Speaker, our prayer is that the Minister of Internal Affairs through the traffic department should set up an office at the border point so that when these drivers are crossing to Uganda, they are given some training. Let them know that in Uganda, we keep left – (Interruptions) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, that is an urgent matter; do you need information on it? I thought you had the information. Give us the information and if the member wants to supplement then she can supplement. 

MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, we appeal to the Minister for Internal Affairs through the Police to set up an office at the border so that these drivers are trained before crossing to Uganda. 

Secondly, the road is very smooth and it does not have any arms. We pray that Government establishes some arms especially in the major trading centres of Atiak Sub County, Pabo Sub County, Lamogi Sub County and Lacor Hospital just before Gulu town. I hope that will reduce the rate of accidents. I beg to move.

2.28
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to supplement on the issue of bad driving by our colleagues from South Sudan. We have double standards with our neighbours. A year ago, my cousin brother knocked a chicken in South Sudan and he almost survived death –(Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does that mean he died because you said, “He almost survived death.” Does that mean he died?

MS ANYWAR: He survived death. It is annoying when you go to South Sudan and make any mistake like knocking a chicken or goat, you will be chased and you could be killed because they equate it to a life. Yet when our colleagues drive into our country – we who drive to Northern Uganda almost weekly - they even do not respect the road signs; they overtake and would literary push you off the road. 

So, I want to emphasise what hon. Olanya has said that the traffic OC of that place should tighten the traffic rules in regard to the way our neighbours use our roads. They go against the traffic rules and are literally killing so many of our children and yet, Mr Speaker, you know how traumatised our children in Northern Uganda are. So they should respect our traffic laws. This should be done and we should even caution our neighbouring government to learn to treat our people the way they want us to treat them; they should treat our people with respect. It is very unfortunate and it is double standards. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have just requested the Minister of State for Internal Affairs to make a communication to the Minister of Local Government but he is not in the House. So, can the Clerk to Parliament make the following extractions to formerly communicate to the Ministry of Internal Affairs about the status of people shifting or coming from countries where they drive while keeping right and driving into Uganda where we keep left while driving but not observing traffic regulations. Can the Clerk to Parliament communicate that to the relevant minister?

2.31
MR RICHARD SSEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is also a point of utmost importance and it regards the recent displacement and eviction of people in and around Kampala by the authorities in the city. This is happening in Kawempe South, which I represent in Parliament, where people have been given notice to vacate the areas from where they have been working in 28 days. These include people working on the road stretch right from Wandegeya to a place called Kavule. These are people dealing in carpentry around Mulago. They have been told that if they don’t develop these places by building permanent structures on approved plans, they will be evicted.

Mr Speaker, we are talking about a big number of people. But I also wonder how the authorities in Kampala are moving without consulting with the leaders in the city and government agencies, ministries and departments. This is important because if they don’t do this, this will create a lot of problems in and around the city. Most people employed in those carpentry workshops are youth. And as you may know, Mr Speaker, 80 percent of our youth are not employed; they are just trying to create their own employment. So, to give a tenant 28 days to put up a permanent structure, and that if they don’t do so they get evicted, is farfetched.

My prayer is that the minister responsible for the affairs of this city together with other government departments, agencies and leaders should sit down with all of us such that we can talk to the people and we move amicably well with them rather than giving these orders and directives. They are going to create a lot of problems in the city; already there is a lot of insecurity. People are being murdered – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please finish raising your matter.

MR SSEBULIBA MUTUMBA: My prayer is about the insecurity that may accrue as a result of this move. I am a student of systems analysis and I know that if one component of the system is affected, definitely another component will be affected. We need coevolution where we move in tandem. This business of sitting in our offices in our comfort zones and we give orders to our people before knowing the issues and background of these places, we are going to face problems.
Mr Speaker, my prayer is that we should move in tandem and put a halt to these evictions and displacements such that our people are given breathing space on how to develop their small scale business. Thank you.

2.34
MR YONA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is a matter of national importance different from the issue of evictions that my colleague is talking about.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you know the rules in that case. Hon. Member for Rubaga North.

2.34
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to supplement on the issue raised by the hon. Ssebuliba Mutumba. First, I want to inform him that those evictions have also been made in parts of my constituency around Mengo and Nakulabye where a number of people – and in thousands - have been evicted. Some are being evicted even after charging them money for operational licenses. Before the expiry of the financial year, somebody has paid for a license but they are being evicted. The Authority at the Kampala City Council no longer sits and so, we wonder who is approving those policies under which these evictions are being made.

Mr Speaker, there is actually a bigger problem in Kampala. For example, orders from the courts of law are not honoured. Today there is a High Court order restraining the RCC of Kampala from creating new villages in Kampala but new villages are being created in Makindye Division. We are scared that this is going to spill over to other divisions as well.

Mr Henry Kitambula, the Assistant RCC of Makindye Division, received a court order restraining him from creating any illegal village but he has not heeded to it. Mr Speaker, if it pleases you –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, if the order is stopping him from creating any illegal villages, does that stop him from creating legal villages?

MR KASIBANTE: Mr Speaker, I beg your pardon. This is a court order restraining him from creating any new villages because the court found out that they are illegal. But if it pleases you, Mr Speaker, I want to lay a copy of the judgement and a decree that arose out of that judgement in regard to what I am talking about on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who are the parties?

MR KASIBANTE: Mr Speaker, the parties include a one Mr Moses Musoga and Others v. the Electoral Commission, the Attorney-General and the RCC of Makindye. I beg to lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me first look at them before they are laid. No, we will not accept this on record but the information is taken. Please wind up; you have already raised the matter. Can we now move on to other business?

Hon. Members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have constituents from Rubaga South, represented by hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi and hon. Nabilah Naggayi Ssempala. They have come to observe the proceedings of Parliament. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have in the gallery this afternoon, pupils of JB International School in Mbarara District. They are represented by hon. Dr Medard Bitekyerezo and hon. Emma Boona. They have come to observe how business is conducted in the national Parliament. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Hon. Member, can I give a direction on how to proceed with your matter on evictions? Can somebody follow this up? Government Chief Whip, can you follow up on this matter to see what is going on with these evictions and we see how this House can be guided? That notice of evictions of people along Bombo Road.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Mr Speaker, I will follow it up with the minister in charge.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And can we be advised by Thursday about what is going on or just to update the House about what is going on?

MS LUMUMBA: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, on Thursday afternoon, we expect a response of the issue raised by the Member for Kawempe South. Yes, hon. Otada, I have already taken 30 minutes of today’s debate; can we do that tomorrow first thing? Is that okay with you? Thank you.

2.40
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, can we do that tomorrow because we have already had five urgent matters?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, since I am already here, I think let me do it now – (Interjections) – He is asking and not ordering – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us do it tomorrow.

MR OGUTTU: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have already spent almost 40 minutes on this. Let us do it tomorrow first thing.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO A SELECT COMMITTEE TO INQUIRE INTO SPECIFIC MATTERS PERTAINING TO MISMANAGEMENT OF NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (NSSF)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this matter came before the House and a debate resulted into the constitution of a select committee to inquire into specific matters pertaining to mismanagement of the NSSF by a letter reference AD199/19901 dated 17 July 2014. The hon. Speaker constituted the select committee and also made the terms of reference which I would like to make reference to, to the House:

“The following members have been appointed on this select committee to expeditiously handle this matter: 
    • Hon. Vincent Ssempijja, Member for Kalungu County East will be the chairperson of this select committee;
    • Hon. Ruhunda Alex, MP Fort Portal Municipality, will be a member;
    • Hon. Ssewungu Joseph from Kalungu County West will be a member; 
    • Hon. Nankabirwa Ann Maria from Kyankwanzi District will be a member; and
    •  Hon. Nabulya Teopista Ssentongo, MP Workers, will be a member. 

The terms of reference of the select committee are to inquire into specific matters pertaining to mismanagement in the NSSF.

Following the debate in the Parliament on the 10th, 16th and 17th July 2014 touching on allegations of mismanagement at the NSSF, you have been appointed to serve on the above committee in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

I have designated hon. Ssempijja, MP Kalungu County East, as chairperson of the committee. The terms of reference of the select committee are to inquire into -
    1. allegations that the NSSF irregularly acquired shares in Umeme;
    2. allegations of irregularity, nepotism and unfairness in the recruitment process of staff at the NSSF;
    3. allegations of irregularity in the disposal of NSSF assets;
    4. any other matter related to the above.

You are requested to commence this assignment as soon as possible and report back to Parliament by Tuesday, 19 August 2014.

Signed, Rebecca A. Kadaga (MP), Speaker.”

So that is the constitution of the select committee that will handle this matter.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In 2012, I brought here a petition by the Lord Mayor, division mayors and councillors of Kampala. At the presentation of the report, issues were raised which pushed this Parliament into forming a select committee to look into the circumstances under which the report was made. The select committee presented a report here and it was adopted by this House and the ruling of the Speaker was that a select committee was going to be set up to re-examine the petition by the Lord Mayor, the division mayors and the councillors of Kampala and that was in March this year. Since then, I, together with the petitioners have patiently waited for the formation of this select committee.

The point of procedure I am raising is whether it is proper for this Parliament to keep these petitioners waiting this long since 2012, and when shall this select committee be formed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Citizens access this Parliament to get redress matters that affect them and when they do, this House must respond and where they have not responded, we have the responsibility to make sure that they do so. We will do this as Parliament and get these matters out of the way. Thank you.

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, I rise in accordance with Rule 179(3) of our Rules of Procedure in regard to constitution of select committees. If I may read for the benefit of the members who may not have it: “At any time after the nomination, whips and independent members may appoint one or more additional members to a select committee and if for any reason a member of a select committee is unable to act, another member may be appointed in his or her place taking into consideration party proportionality in the House.” 

Rule 179(4) also talks about the appointment by the Speaker in consultation with party whips. Mr Speaker, I had discussed with the Speaker, the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, that it would be prudent for this committee to have amongst them a lawyer because issues of NSSF are very legal and very controversial. I was just seeking your guidance -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, this is an order already put in writing by the Speaker. So, your recourse may have to be in consultation with the Speaker to raise this issue. I do not think that you are calling upon me to rule on what the Speaker has already done. That would not be fair. I think let us leave it; if we need further discussion on this matter, you will raise it with the Rt Hon. Speaker, who did the constitution of the committee.

MR OTADA: Most obliged.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

    I. ON THE SUSPENSION OF AIR UGANDA OPERATIONS

2.48
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Mr Speaker, in view of what is going on and what has appeared in papers, I beg that tomorrow I bring a robust statement to contain all that will be necessary. I beg your indulgence that I present this report to the House tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the word is very carefully selected “robust” statement. (Laughter) So, hon. Minister, we will be waiting for the robust statement. It has to be robust, by you own definition. He did not consult earlier with the Office, we would have pushed it to tomorrow but we will receive it tomorrow.

MR OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, this issue of ministers asking for time every day –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we will handle it administratively.

MR OGUTTU: It is unacceptable to us to continue this way. Every day the ministers are never ready and yet they are put on the Order Paper. We come here prepared and the ministers come unprepared. There must be some ruling that obliges these ministers to be ready and synchronise their workings with Office of the Speaker. We cannot just continue like this. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, these rulings have been made, and they are several. Maybe we should see how to get further sanctions and how it can best be handled but certainly, Leader of Government Business, these are matters that we need to see how to resolve so that when an undertaking is made to the House, it is fulfilled or if it is not going to be fulfilled, we are notified in advance so that we stop debates of this nature. Next item.

II. ON THE KILLING AT OPIT IN GULU DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Killings in Opit and hon. Minister, that is where I come from.

2.51
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): I thank you, Mr Speaker. This matter arose on the Floor and my colleague, the hon. Minister of State for Defence has been handling this matter and indeed he was prepared to come to the Floor this afternoon. Unfortunately, last evening he got bereaved. I was not in town and he had to rush to Teso for the burial. So, I would request that we leave it up to tomorrow when he will be back in town.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Minister, I saw a copy of that statement. Do you not have a copy?

DR KIYONGA: As I said, Mr Speaker, I just got into town this morning. So, I had not updated myself on this document. As you know, Mr Speaker, when we make statements, a discussion ensues and one needs to be properly briefed to be able to respond to colleagues. So I request that we make this statement tomorrow –(Ms Anywar rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Kitgum, if you are rising on procedure, I will accept but I do not know on what point you are rising. Is it procedure? Okay.

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I appreciate that the minister can tell us that he is not ready but a whole ministry with technocrats, and the minister stands on this Floor telling us that he has not gotten all the facts ready. Is it procedurally right, Mr Speaker, that our grief is treated casually and not taken seriously by the minister knowing that we are the people with a painful short history? Is he procedurally right not to come and tell us and own up so that the bereaved families get some comfort on this matter? Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that he quickly comes and presents the government position so that the family is consoled?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is definitely not right for the minister to not make a statement. Not only this minister but all the other ministers because the undertaking was made. However, the explanation given by the minister is that the person who was in charge of this statement, a copy of which I have seen, is not here. Nonetheless, the minister undertakes to present this statement tomorrow on the Floor. This statement is important, just like any of these other ones that have gone before. So, let us have it at 2.00 O’clock tomorrow. All those statements should come tomorrow. Next item. Point of Procedure on this issue?

MR KASIBANTE: A general issue, Mr Speaker. It looks like Government went for holiday and we are not aware. It began with the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and now another ministry. Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Leader of Government Business to come and confess that Government is not there as of today and that it cannot conduct any business so that Parliament is made aware and we do not waste time? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under what rule? You could assist me with the rule. (Laughter) I need to be guided. But the point is made, thank you.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION ON KCCA’S PLANNED EVICTION OF RESIDENTS IN RUBAGA SOUTH CONSTITUENCY

2.56
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Permit me, pursuant to Rule 29 of our Rules of Procedure to present the humble petition of the residents of Kironde, Nanfuka, Ndeeba, Sembule, Nalukolongo, Mutundwe, Nakayiza and Kajumbi areas in Rubaga South, which is part of Kampala District. Mr Speaker, I am aware of the issue of time and I will summarise the contents.

Your humble petitioners are under imminent danger of unlawful eviction from their respective residences and places of work as a result of the Kampala City Council Authority’s plan to clear the railway reserve, and expand the Nalukolongo drainage channel as per KCCA notice published in The New Vision of the 4 July 2014 on page 34 by the acting Director, Physical Planning Mr Atwino Moses.

Mr Speaker, the petitioners contend that the implementation of KCCA’s project without prompt payment of fair and adequate compensation prior to the said land acquisition would be tantamount to a wanton breach of the Constitution of Uganda. Your humble petitioners are aggrieved by the act and would like to raise the following prayers:

1. 	That Parliament sets up an ad hoc committee to investigate the legality of KCCA’s planned eviction of the residents of Kironde zone and other places for the purpose of clearing the railway reserve and expansion of Nalukolongo drainage channel.

2. 	That the ad hoc committee set up by Parliament on this matter does respond back to Parliament within 45 days.

3. 	That the Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority be urged immediately to halt KCCA activities in issue to allow Parliament to appraise itself on the same.

Your humble petitioners as duty bound will ever pray. Hereto your humble petitioners have appended their 400 signatures. I beg to move and lay the petition on Table. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the petition. Hon. Members, we have received this petition. The placement of this petition would have to go to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and Prayer No.2 is in the rules – 45 days; that is what the rules say. So, I refer this petition to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to handle within the timeframe provided in the rules and report to the House. I thank you. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

    A) MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR UGANDA BUREAU OF STATISTICS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister for Finance. Is the Ministerial Policy Statement here? Can somebody else lay it? 

3.01
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Uganda Bureau of Statistics Budget Policy Statement Vote 143 for the Financial Year 2014/15. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. I need an apology from the Minister responsible for Finance. This statement should have been laid before this House by 30th June and today is 22nd July.

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And also for coming late. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: We are only two ministers now in the Ministry of Finance. The others have been deployed and I apologise, on behalf of the ministry, for none of us being here in time but I am here.

MR CADET: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This morning, the Committee on Finance discussed and analysed this policy statement. The procedural point that I am seeking is whether it is procedurally right for the statement to come to the committee before it is laid before Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, you will recall the history of this. In the past, Members just used to find the Ministerial Policy Statements in their pigeon holes and we had a difficulty of accountability as to when they were brought. Since the law gives a timeframe or date by which this matter should be done, there must be a record of that date when it is submitted. So, by a subsequent order made from the Chair, all ministerial statements presented to this House must first be laid before Parliament so that we know that this minister has brought a policy statement. If it goes to the committee earlier, it does not cause any harm but we need to know that it has finally come. If it had come earlier, it is good to know that you are already acting on the Ministerial Policy Statement. I thank you.

Hon. Members, in the gallery this afternoon, we have pupils of St Agnes Primary School located in Entebbe, Wakiso District. They are represented by hon. Kawuma Mohammed and hon. Seninde Rosemary. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome! (Applause) 

B) FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can any Commissioner come and lay these? Can we have a Member of the Parliamentary Commission doing this? The Leader of the Opposition, as a Parliamentary Commissioner?

MR MUWUMA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. It is like these local governments are supposed to be handled by the Local Government Accounts Committee and the committee is chaired by a member from the Opposition – hon. Winifred Kiiza - and deputized by hon. Akora Maxwell. Under Rule 183 on chairpersons of committees, it says that a commissioner shall not be a chairperson or deputy chairperson of any committee. I wonder under what arrangement we keep putting a commissioner here to lay papers when we have committee chairpersons.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I was going to make a ruling on that subject and extend a ruling from what the Speaker had ruled earlier. This is as a result of consultation.

The report of the Auditor-General comes to this Parliament but before it is in this Parliament, how does it access Parliament because the Auditor-General is an officer of Parliament and is supervised by Parliament and who are the supervisors of Parliament? It is the Commission. So, that is why this is now being done like that but once it is done and received in the House, it is transmitted to the appropriate committee for handling. How does the chairperson of a parliamentary committee gain access to records outside Parliament? I think that was the basis for the ruling of the Speaker, which I have found.

MR CADET: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The finance committee oversees the Auditor-General’s Office and in this committee, we have got a subcommittee that is responsible for all the activities of the Auditor-General’s Office. Now, I would like to have clarification from you; in this arrangement, where is the finance committee and how does the Commission feed into the finance committee? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is a matter that has already been resolved for now. So, let us leave it like that –(Laughter). It has been resolved for now and when the need arises, it can be reviewed but as of now, that is what is obtaining. 

But, hon. Members, substantially on this issue – maybe I should say it now and then we receive the report. All these issues have been fairly challenging and as you see, we improve every day of our lives. If you look at Article 163(3) (a) of the Constitution, it gives the Auditor-General some functions and Article 164(3) if I can look at it briefly clearly states, “Parliament shall monitor all expenditure of public funds.” But when it comes to issues of local governments, the Constitution mandates Parliament to enact laws to deal with the details of what should be done. So, if you look at Section 87 of the Local Government Act, you will see that the accounts of every local government council, “An administrative unit shall be audited by the Auditor-General or an auditor appointed by him or her”. And in (3) “The Auditor-General shall give the report of the audited accounts to - 
    a) Parliament; 
    b) the Minister responsible for Finance; 
    c) the Minister; 
    d) the local government or administrative unit to which the audit relates;
    e) the Local Government Public Accounts Committee; 
    f) the Local Government Finance Commission; 
    g) the Inspector General of Government; 
    h) the Resident District Commissioner.”

And I am reading from the revised edition of the laws of Uganda, if you look at section 88(7) and (8). 
“(7) A Local Government Public Accounts committee -”, now this is a local government public accounts committee at the district; we do not have a local government public account committee in Parliament so this is at the district. “A local government public accounts committee shall examine reports of the Auditor-General, Chief Internal Auditor and any other reports of commissions of inquiry and may in relation to the report, require the attendance of any councillor or officer to explain matters arising from the report. 
8) The Local Government Public Accounts committee shall submit its report to the council and to the minister responsible for local government who shall lay the report before Parliament.” 

What we have been doing is to receive the report from the Auditor-General, transmit it to our Committee on Local Government Accounts in Parliament here and they begin handling it. The law directs the Auditor-General to send it directly to the public accounts committee of the district councils. So what we have ended up doing is to completely bog down our Local Government Accounts Committee. 

Let me take a recent example; on the 16th of this month, 71 reports and opinions of the Auditor-General were laid before this House. The next day, 17th July, 72 were laid. Today, we are going to receive 35 reports. Now, you tell me how our Local Government Accounts committee will be able to handle this? I am not talking about those which were laid before this. So structurally, it was not envisaged by the law to have it handled that way. Our committee cannot do this; it simply does not have the capacity to do it. That is why the law says it should go to the local governments. 

Even in our rules, particularly, Rule 170(1): 
“
    1) Subject to the delegation of Parliament’s power to the Local Government Accounts committee under section 89 of the Local Governments Act, 1997, the Committee on Local Government Accounts shall be assigned the examination of the audited accounts in relation to the report laid before Parliament by the minister under section 89 of the Act showing the appropriation of the sums granted by Parliament to local governments.
    2) The Committee shall report to Parliament at least twice a year.
    3) The clerk shall receive the Auditor-General’s report submitted under clause (4) of Article 163 of the Constitution, relating to Local Government Accounts, and shall deliver the report to the committee on Local Government Accounts and the committee shall consider the Auditor’s report in relation to the Local Government Public Accounts committee reports laid before Parliament by the minister under subsection (8) of section 89 of the Local Governments Act.” 

Now, how have we been proceeding? We have been proceeding by our committee examining the report of the Auditor-General on local governments. What the rules and the Constitution and the Local Governments Act say is that those audit reports should go to the Local Government Public Accounts committees in the districts. They examine it and submit their report to the minister and then the minister brings it to Parliament. 

Parliament will have received copies of those audited reports from the Auditor-General directly. Now in relation to that, they look at this report which was submitted together with what the minister had submitted and then they can take decisions on what they want to do. That is the framework envisaged in the law, the Local Governments Act and in our Rules of Procedure. So, we might need to find a way because I am advised that the Local Government Accounts committee – our own committee - is still examining reports of 2008 because of the volume of work. Now, if a total of 143 were given last week and today we are adding another 35 and yet we have been receiving those earlier and this is still of 2012, you can see the volume of work that is coming up. I am saying this so we can begin seeing how best to deal with this situation. 

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do take cognisance of the statutory provisions that you read to us a while ago. The guidance I seek from you as the head of this institution is, there are many districts out there that do not have public accounts committees. And that is evident. We also know that issues of financial impropriety take root at the sub counties where large amounts of money are passed on to them for service delivery. For the case of those districts that do not have such structures in place, how are we going to bring them to book knowing that that is where corruption takes ground? How shall we ensure that all the 111 districts –(Interjections)– they are 111; Kampala Capital City Authority is not considered a district. How shall we ensure that these districts have these committees in place so that the whole system of examining the audited books of accounts by the Auditor-General is not frustrated at any level? That is my fear. I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker, in that regard.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have stated for you what the law says. The law is implemented as it is not as it ought to be. This is the provision I have read; that is what the law says. Now, certainly there are implementation difficulties and gaps; for example, the case of districts without public accounts committees. Is the solution having it done by Parliament or having those committees appointed at the districts because that is a constitutional issue. 

Secondly, the question that we should seriously be asking is, has the Minister for Local Government ever submitted those reports, from the Local Government Public Accounts committees of the districts, to Parliament? If they have not, then we have implementing this law in part not in full and we might have to start doing just that. Then we need to find out where the reports of the district public accounts committees have been ending up because they have been doing some work. So, where have their reports been going? They are supposed to go to the minister and if they are with the minister, then the minister should have been bringing them to Parliament. That would have been the best way for our own Local Government Accounts committees operations. We would have now compared the two and advised us on how best to move. That is the situation we now find ourselves in and which needs to be corrected. So, today we are going to receive a set of 35 sub county financial statements and opinions of the Auditor-General –

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, we are not in disagreement; we are all rowing the canoe in the same direction but I think the most important thing for us as Parliament is to task the Executive – because I know that there is a conditional grant given to every district for facilitation of district Local Government Public Accounts committees but in districts where these committees do not exist, what happens to that money? 

So, can I therefore ask Government to come up with an assurance to this House about the roadmap on how they are going to ensure that every district forms a local government public accounts committee for us to take them on? Otherwise, if we leave it at that, my fear is that this night people will toss glasses of wine to say they are now safe –(Interjections)– no, we are not running away from the law. What we are saying is that these structures must exist in the districts to do their work. Otherwise, without them, I can assure you bureaucrats are going to toss glasses of wine to say they have survived us.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, you have clearly brought out the issue. I happen to be a Member of the Local Government Accounts Committee of Parliament. When I looked at Article 90 of the Constitution that defines the functions of committees of Parliament and the proceeding Articles and our hands are tied - there is nothing we can do because and that is the law. But on the ground, there are practical difficulties in terms of accountability and if we are not serious with this pronouncement you are about to make, we are going to occasion grand corruption at the district level.

Even when you go for the argument that the district Local Government Accounts committees submit reports to the Minister for Local Governments – we have been moving to these districts and one of the fundamental revelations we landed on is that many times, money is allocated to the district local councils as a conduit and after the financial year has ended and under some arrangement, money is returned to the headquarters and eaten by people at the Local Government Ministry. When you listen to the reports we have as they will be presented, you will realise that this is a common occurrence. For example, we were in Northern Uganda – from Zombo District up to the Karamoja Sub Region, billions of money have been lost and stolen and it is a syndicate between the CAOs, the district engineers and officials from the Ministry of Local Government.
Now we will be complicating matters when we say that our hands are tied as Parliament and that all we can do is that the very people who are supposed to supervise should be the ones to receive those reports.

Secondly, the Local Government Public Accounts committees depend on the local governments for finance and operation. Without financial autonomy of DPACs- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are DPACs the District Public Accounts Committees?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Yes, they depend on the CAO for basic operation and their composition – more often than not we found out that district chairpersons appoint their former campaign managers to head these committees. You canvased for votes for me here and there and so, you are appointed chairman of the public accounts committee or the district tender board. That is what happens at the district levels.

Therefore, much as we are a Parliament constrained by the law to supervise the monies we appropriate here - this is a profound function of Parliament and not the district public accounts committees. The constitutional burden is placed on Parliament and not DPACs. Therefore, for us to sit here and say that that is a function of DPAC is to negate our role fundamentally as Parliament.

My reading of the provisions of the law is that we may need time – and this is my humble request to both your Office and the committees concerned – to critically examine the full impact of the decision we are about to make. And I am constrained to ask and beg you that we delay to pronounce ourselves on this matter until part of the Executive, your Office and the Ministry of Local Government – we have gone through all that there is so that when we come about, we don’t do away with our fundamental role by hiding in the law. The law is that our first fundamental function is to supervise the money that we appropriate here, and that is a command of the Constitution. Other legislations and proceedings must conform to what the command of the Constitution says.

And, therefore, I also guess that the Rules of Procedure of Parliament – and that is why I quoted Article 90 of the Constitution that spells out the functions of Parliament clearly. But you have also quoted the section that empowers Parliament to provide – these are the commands of the Constitution. So, we have got to go back and examine the situation to find out whether the relevant sub legislations conform to that fundamental function of Parliament. 

Therefore, my bone of contention is that this is not a matter – we all come from various districts and we have been examining how the roads are done and how water extension is being done. Look at the money that was released for Northern Uganda rehabilitation. What is happening in the local governments is terrible. The competence levels at the local government councils – there are no qualifications for being a councillor. At least there is something for an MP – at least A ‘Level and we benefit from the rich professions that we have in this Parliament. But at the local government level – I chair a district local government roads committee and members of my committee have never seen a balance sheet, they have never seen a financial statement but these are the people handling billions of money. 

When you go to the LC III chairpersons, they still have no qualifications but they preside over a clerk who is a graduate or an agricultural officer who is a graduate. Some of these matters are so fundamental to the governance of our country that –(Interruptions)

MS ABIA: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, about two years ago, I had an opportunity to express this concern to the Head of State at his residence about the quality of our - [Hon. Members: “Which residence?”] - I will not bother about that, Mr Speaker. But I can tell you that we were in Entebbe and we met the President and I told him that if we want to curtail corruption, we will have to look at the quality of our councillors at both the sub county and at the district. He said, “Christine, you want to eliminate the ordinary people from the administration and governance of their districts. Why? You have already barred them from coming to Parliament by putting a bar at senior six. Why do you want to exclude them?” That is the question he asked me.

And so, any attempts here to say that we bring forth such a piece of legislation to put quality at our councils may not go well with the President. That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: As I wind up, Mr Speaker, the point I would like this august House to consider passionately is that our generation faces a fundamental fight against corruption. And this fight, at all levels, is a fight about the social welfare of our people. For any regulation or rule that we want, we must not lose sight of that. That is why I make a humble appeal that for today, until we have fundamentally interrogated this matter, it is so potent to service delivery that we need to have a non-partisan kind of spirit and come out with what can fundamentally alleviate the situation. If it requires an amendment to our Rules of Procedure - that is easy because these are our Rules of Procedure which complicate matters - in the name of service delivery and helping local governments, we should go for that. These Rules of Procedure should not tie us down. 

We are a Parliament and as Parliament, we have powers to even amend some of these laws. We can even go ahead to amend the Local Government Act, but what we cannot witness is for us to send a signal to the corrupt people at local levels that they can get away with it. For that, there is no way, whichever party or colour you are. There are villages where there is no clean water, there are no roads and yet these are cardinal to service delivery. Local governments are about service delivery.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, all those statements being made have got to be supported by a law. As we speak now, there is a gap in the law about what the honourable Member for Butambala has been presenting. There is a gap. So, the ultimate solution is not going to be in cutting corners about what the law says; it is going to be in dealing with it expressly to stop that. If it has to do with the way the district public accounts committees are constituted and appointed, so be it. 

My training is in legislative drafting and one of the principles of drafting is that a law must be capable of implementation. What we are doing now is not capable of implementation. You cannot pretend to be implementing things properly if to-date, you are still examining accounts of 2008.

You cannot say you are doing very well. It is not by operation of the law but by the way the institutions are operating. You simply cannot do it! You need a miracle to say, “Let there be things” and they are done, to be able to do this. 

Just within two weeks, you are going to receive - last week, you received 143, today, you are receiving 35 more and possibly tomorrow and the next day and before that, and this is still 2012. By the time you have finished receiving all those documents, and by the time you leave 2008 to come to 2009 and to 2010, we will be in 2020 to 2025. That is the challenge we have. So, we need to deal with this properly because as of now, what we are doing is simply unsustainable. We are now looking at accounts of 2008 and this Parliament is going to debate the reports from the Local Government Accounts Committee of this Parliament covering accounts of 2008. We need to find a solution to this; that is all I am saying. 

I am not going to make any ruling. I have just pointed this out so that we find a comprehensive way of dealing with this thing. Even now, what we have said is, we have not received any report from the Minister of Local Government. If we had a text of a report from the Minister of Local Government, which we were supposed to look at and compare with the accounts, maybe all this backlog would not be there because some of the work would have already been received and brought at a certain level by all these people in various places in the country. So, that is the point I was trying to bring to the attention of the House. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think that as Parliament we need to put aside a day to discuss the status of decentralisation in this country. Even before we talk about the District Public Accounts Committees, it is sad to note that even the officers who are supposed to be held accountable are not in the districts. Right now, 33 districts in the country do not have CAOs, 56 districts do not have Chief Finance Officers. This also points to our country’s lack of commitment to uphold the policy of decentralisation. When the officers are not on the ground, who are we going to hold accountable?

Mr Speaker, I would wish to request that this Parliament, as the mother of all these local governments - because it is here in Parliament that districts are created - sets aside a day on which we can discuss decentralisation in detail. It is over 20 years now since we decided to take that path but how are we performing as a country? Mr Speaker, I wish to make this humble appeal to you that the Minister of Local Government be called here and that Parliament sets aside a day to discuss decentralisation and how the country is performing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can actually propose a motion to ignite a debate –(Ms Kasule Lumumba rose_) - On what matter do you rise, honourable Government Chief Whip?

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: I rise on the matter of legal issues you raised, and I want to make a suggestion. Given what is happening in the local governments and the advantages that we have been generating from the work of the committee and the work of Parliament in relation to what happens in the local governments, this is a matter that is for all of us - the Executive and Parliament. I would suggest that you call for a meeting with the Leader of Government Business and his team and Members who sit on those committees or the leadership of the committees and we constitute a team and discuss how best to have this done for the good of this country, even if it meant amending the Constitution for the good of service delivery. I would suggest that this should be done.  What is happening right now is that whatever happens in local governments, it is Parliament that is looked at to play the role of a watchdog, especially on issues of corruption. 

I would suggest that we all take this as a serious matter because we all come from these districts; it is very important. Expenditure is made at a big level and when we are creating districts, we keep saying that this is bringing services nearer to the people. However, when you look at what is happening, there are question marks; it is therefore our responsibility as leaders to make sure we simplify work for our committees but at the same time make sure that everybody is accountable for whatever funds go to the districts. 

Mr Speaker, you have not said you are going to change procedure but I would like to suggest that at least, let this be done within some acceptable timeframe. If amendments are made, let these amendments be made in the Constitution if it is for the good of this country.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are discussing very serious issues concerning the local governments and a number of issues have come up showing shortfalls and hiccups in the way we are managing affairs right from the top to the local government level.

Wouldn’t it therefore be procedurally right that we call upon the Minister of Local Government, who is, unfortunately, as the Government Chief Whip is lamenting, not with us here, to come and give a comprehensive statement to this House? Probably, he already has some other issues, which we do not know, in his or her docket. From that statement of the minister, all these suggestions can be factored in to make a roadmap on how we smoothly proceed with the management of the local government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the same matter-

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, she said that I am lamenting about the absence of the Minister of Local Government in Parliament. I did not say anything in relation to that. I was talking about the subject, which the Speaker had raised, which had nothing to do with the minister in person.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, that is the correct record. From what the Speaker heard, there was no mention or any regret about the absence of the Minister of Local Government.

MR ALEX BYARUGABA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I have had an opportunity to serve on both committees of local government and public accounts and the problem is bigger than you may imagine. One, the manner in which these audit queries arise is very elaborate. An audit at a local level is carried out, a management letter comes out, a visit is made, there is an exit meeting to that effect and still, a query remains. When this query comes here to you and me, we again go into the sordid details of investigation, which I think is very misleading.

In most cases, we do not have that capacity to carry out a thorough investigation any more than what the auditors have already done. So, ours should be to look at query No.1 and ask, “What happened, Mr CAO; you failed to account for an advance of Shs 10 million in that particular financial year? What does the law say? If you do not do this or that, the money is recovered directly from you or your other resources that are attributed to you” and we go on like that. But now we go to the village in Kabale to investigate why this money was not accounted for hence taking a lot more time.

I think we also need to look at ourselves and the way we run some of the issues we are handling. We have had an opportunity to –(Interruption)

MR OCHOLA: Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give my colleague and the House is that the reason as to why the committee interests itself in going to the ground is because sometimes when the accounting officers come to have a session with the committee, they attach documents which may not have been there at the time they were interfacing with the Auditor- General. Sometimes there is, for example, a case of shoddy work and the committee will want to see the magnitude of that shoddy work. That is why the committee has to go there. Short of that, the committee cannot draw a conclusion on that matter.

MR ALEX BYARUGABA: I do not have any problem with the value-for-money audits, but regarding the day-to-day audits of non-accountability, really, we should be able to take a much shorter time than we have hitherto been taking. 

We had an opportunity to host the Kenyan Members of Parliament and they really laughed at us and said, “For goodness sake, a Byarugaba has had an opportunity to answer this query from the internal auditors and the DPACs and you give him another opportunity to take you two or three days and even allow him to go and forge other documents to attach! Why didn’t he attach those documents when there was an opportunity during the exit meeting with the auditors?” So, these are some of the processes that we should be looking at to change and quicken our work and maybe do away with this backlog.

Lastly, I think it is the law that forms the basis of justice. Always remember that in legislation. The moment the law is inadequate, you will expect more of this. We have been struggling with the Anti-Corruption (Amendment) Bill. For how long have we been sitting on it? Who has come up to say, let us expedite it? Nobody wants to touch it. Every other time, it is pushed to No. 10, next time No. 12, No. 15 and then it disappears and the year ends. 

There is a problem. We need to first act on the law so that if you are caught in this kind of situation and we make a recommendation, it really bites. (Applause) How many Treasury Memoranda have you seen since you joined this Parliament? You mean you have not been doing any work? How many of you have asked for them? It is now the Executive who should be coming out to tell us, “Look here, Parliament, when you made this kind of recommendation, we did this and that; we have implemented it.” How many recommendations have you made and how many have been implemented? The law forms the basis of justice. This is our own creation because we have failed to put a law that bites and scares the would-be corrupt. Thank you.

3.46
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last week, when they started laying those many reports from sub-counties on the Table, I actually got very scared because I think that whether we want it or not, we just have no capacity whatsoever as committees to deal with those reports. 

My imagination is even made worse when I think that the Auditor-General merely sampled. The day the Auditor-General gets equipped enough to audit all the 112 districts plus the more we will create in the next few months, it will mean that we certainly will be pretending about our capacity. For this House to make any meaningful intervention in monitoring the use of public funds, it cannot continue to preside over backlog and think you will change anything.

Mr Speaker, we are trying to sort out backlog in the various committees - COSASE, Local Government Accounts, Public Accounts. I will tell this House the truth; if you do not retire an audit query within one year, forget about it. The accounting officer will change, someone will die, documents will disappear and the trail will go cold. It just becomes meaningless to deal with audit queries of 2007. If I had the power, I would even tell the House not to bother with those reports of 2007 just because you are not going to get any meaningful intervention after that. You are not even going to locate the sub-county chief who presided over those reports.

I am having trouble following what is going on and as I told you, I was shocked. My thinking is that maybe, the framers of the Local Government Act really wanted the District Public Accounts Committees to deal with those reports in the sub counties. 

I also think that when the Constitution was framed, earlier on they considered a general view but by creating the DPACs, they were cognisant of the huge amount of work if everything came to this Parliament directly. So, the onus is on this House, first of all to ensure that the DPACs deal with those sub county reports and ensure that we facilitate the DPACs to sort out the sub-county reports. Once that is done, then our Committee on Local Government Accounts – this is the view that I hold - should sort out the district reports that the Auditor-General will present to the House, so that the work becomes a little lighter for the Committee on Local Government Accounts of this Parliament. Largely, it is expedient.

On the part of the minister, I want to think that, – I am just speculating - when the DPACs were created, maybe the thinking was that they should finish that scrutiny at district level. However, to complete the cycle, they should transmit the report on what they have conducted to the minister so that that report comes back to the House. The Committee on Local Government Accounts would then take note of the fact that those other audit reports have been retired. If we go that way, probably, as we talk now -

Finally, Mr Speaker, the last time a Treasury Memorandum was issued was in 2005. The Treasury Memorandum is an indication by Government that they have received a report from say the Public Accounts Committee, Local Government Accounts or COSASE and the Parliament of Uganda considered it, adopted its resolutions and these are the actions that they have taken in regard to resolutions. If we are as far behind as 2005, what will the addition of those hundreds of reports achieve to improving accountability in this country? 

My view, which I strongly hold – (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. One of the roles of the Public Accounts Committee is to monitor the District Public Accounts Committees and to monitor and supervise the lower local councils at the LC III level. However, we have a challenge with the District Public Accounts Committees. The law says that they must sit at least six times and not exceeding 10 times in a financial year. 

Looking at that law, it means that the District Public Accounts Committees may not be having the capacity to handle the backlog because within the financial year, they must sit for at least six times. Therefore, if they have to begin scrutinising right from the lower government and up to the district, it may be very difficult. This, therefore, calls for a change and amendment of the Local Government Act so that it gives more power and time for the District Public Accounts Committees to sit so that they handle all that work. I thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you, my colleague, for that information. The view that I strongly hold is that the DPACs have the mandate to deal with those reports. What the House needs to do to help the minister is to empower those DPACs. They can be empowered by way of resources. They can be empowered by way of technical capacity in the district to help them. 

I even think the provision that hon. Olanya has alluded to, of sitting for at least six times, does not mean six days. A sitting could have a duration of four days and another for another amount of days; so it can be as many as 24 days but it would be a siting of a DPAC and they would dispose of this work. That is my prayer, Mr Speaker. Please, do not add that work to the committee.  We will never dispose of the sub-counties.

3.55
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank you again because I raised this issue some time and I had to put it in context; I said that we have 2,200 sub-counties and if you are talking about three years, that is 6,600, which means that we would sit every day for 6,600 days to be able to finish those reports. So, it is good that you have brought this issue up. 

Hon. Byarugaba raised a very important issue. The cycle of the audit is that the accounting officer submits accounts by 30th September and the Auditor-General goes to audit; the Auditor-General has six months within which to submit the report, and that is by 31st of March. However, there is also an internal auditor in every district and there are audit committees, which discuss the internal auditor’s report –(Interjections)– The audit committee is defined in the Public Finance and Accountability Act and its job is to assist the internal auditor so that there is independence; it is like the external auditor who is the Auditor-General. 

Something turns out to be a query when it has not been resolved by the internal auditor, the audit committee, the accounting officer and the Auditor-General. There is also a meeting called the exit meeting, where they ask, “Can we solve this?” If the accounting officer fails to solve it at that point, this is when it becomes an audit query. 

What is an audit query? An audit query comes up when we give you money but you do not spend it as we told you to spend it. The moment it comes up like that, the first culprit is the accounting officer because we gave him the money. In fact, these reports should not be coming here because the accounting officers should be in Luzira; they should be walking there themselves because they have failed to spend money as we told them to. 

Secondly, the Police and IGG should be interested in these reports because if I give you Shs 100 million to spend and you cannot account for it, that means you have stolen it and that is a criminal matter. So, the IGG and Police should take interest; by the time they come to us, they should have taken action. 

There is also the Secretary to the Treasury. That is why when we are discussing this Public Finance Bill we should also put sanctions for the Secretary to Treasury. There must be punishments set for the Secretary to the Treasury because he or she is the one who appoints the accounting officers. When you appoint an accounting officer and you give him or her money but they do not account as you told them to, by the time the reports come out, the accounting officer should have been disciplined by the Secretary to the Treasury. That is another person we shall deal with as we make the law.

The other point is that a query has been raised but the Executive is not interested. I think that is where the mistake comes in. By the time that report comes here, the Executive should have taken action. By the time we think about going through the process, they should have taken action. Why? It is because they have not done what we told them to do and they will be blamed. They should take action so that the people who were responsible are brought to book before the report comes to Parliament.

Having said that, it is like having a dog and you do not feed it but the neighbour feeds it and instead of guarding you, it will guard the neighbour. My thinking is that the reason we have this problem - I am sure that the DPACs exist - [Hon. Members: “They are there.”] They are there and if they are there, I am sure they are guarding the neighbour. A district PAC should have taken action on this report. I am sure the law allows them to. If they have not taken action on these sub county laws, then there must be a problem. 

I am told the district PACs are put in place by the council and the minister must approve them. My worry is that because they are not being facilitated, this confirms the statement that money leaves the centre and goes to the districts and then comes back to the centre. If it was not coming to the centre, I am sure the centre would have acted. So now, Parliament has to act; we have to act. One, we must pass a resolution here that all districts must have functioning DPACs. Secondly, since we are in the budget process, we must give them money to clear the backlog. Thirdly, as hon. Alaso said, we should give them consultants to help them in examining these reports –(Interjections)– A consultant is allowed by law. 

Mr Speaker, I am sure we have the powers to delegate some of our authority. In fact, one of the amendments I want to bring at an appropriate time is that the district PACs should be a replica of Parliament. So, those councillors should be members of the district PACs –(Interjections)– Why is it then that in Parliament, the members of PAC are Members of Parliament and not outsiders? It should be the same at the districts because they are part of the administrative system we have in Uganda. 

Somebody may raise an issue that they are not competent, but who tells you that they are not competent? Where do we come from; we are also from there. So, they are also competent in their own way to do the work. 

Mr Speaker, I want to conclude by saying that Parliament should move a resolution –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him conclude; if you want to make a submission, you can submit. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: What I wanted to say is that at the right time, I will move a motion that a resolution be passed by Parliament to tell the Minister of Local Government to ensure that there are district PACs in all districts to handle all the sub county accounts, which have been audited by the Auditor-General. 

MR MULIMBA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for identifying the loopholes in the procedure we have in examining these reports. You have cited the law in the Constitution. You have also cited the provisions of the Local Governments Act, particularly section 88(7) and (8). The procedural point I want to raise is: would it be procedurally right, after you have identified the due process and the right procedure under the law upon which we are supposed to examine the reports of the Auditor-General relating to the accounts of sub counties and districts, to again go back and debate what we think is ideal? 

For purposes of refreshing our minds, let me read section 88(7) and (8) of the Local Governments Act: “A local government public accounts committee shall examine the reports of the Auditor-General, chief internal auditor and any reports of commissions of inquiry and may, in relation to the reports, require the attendance of any councillor or officer to explain matters arising from the reports. 

(8) The local government public accounts committee shall submit its report to the council and to the Minister responsible for local governments who shall lay the report before Parliament”. 

All the reservations that have been expressed by colleagues in respect to the backlog would be dealt with and I think we would benefit much if this procedure was respected. We would have all these accounts as audited by the Auditor-General examined by the Public Accounts Committee and then the minister would come to lay a report before Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, would it be procedurally right, after we apply the law as it is and after observing that we have been committing a mistake in the previous dealings – If you had not cited this, we would have reason to proceed in the normal way but now that you have observed it, this is a public domain and this debate is being listened to by all, including the people that we are going to examine. Somebody can come up with a procedural matter or even litigation and ask, “Was it the appropriate forum that handled the examination and production of the report upon which I am being tried?” and we shall have a hiccup. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I think this matter has been discussed substantially, but the work of the Committee on Local Government Accounts is not in vain. It does not even falter the constitutional responsibility of this House to be in charge of that oversight because it is about procedure only. The procedure is that they do it at that level; they submit it to the minister and the minister brings it here. 

If you look at rule 170(4), it says, “The chairperson of the Committee on Local Government Accounts shall, after consideration of the Auditor-General’s report and the reports laid before Parliament under sub rule (2), lay the report on the Table of the House for the purpose of debate by the House under clause 5 of Article 163 of the Constitution”. 

So, the missing link here, in my opinion, is the report from the minister. That is the report that should have facilitated this because the local government public accounts committees would have examined those reports, they would have come to some conclusions and would have forwarded their opinion or report to the minister and the minister should bring that report here. Once it is here, it goes straight to our Committee on Local Government Accounts who have already received the report of the Auditor-General. It is also under the law; we are also entitled to receive copies of the reports from those people just like we are receiving. 

Ordinarily, therefore, what should have happened is that these should have been sent to the committee but they would wait for the report from the minister, which would come from the different public accounts committees. They would then look at these two and take decisions, bring it back to Parliament and then we debate. That should have been the procedure taken; in which case, there would still have been outstanding queries brought to this House and then we would deal with them at that level. So, we would not have lost the cardinal responsibility of this House of carrying out its oversight function on the money that was appropriated by this House. So, we need to find a way, but now let us receive the reports and opinion – 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence. I do not intend to contest the guidance you are about to give. However, in your opening remarks, I keenly heard you say that you are not intending to rule on this matter –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Because the law is clear.

MR MUWUMA: Yes, Mr Speaker. I was about to start associating myself with the proposals of hon. Nandala-Mafabi but in the circumstances that these committees do not exist in most of the districts – (Interjections)– I serve on this committee and so I am talking from an informed point of view; Members should allow me to report what is happening.

Last month when we were in Arua, this committee had just been put in place and we were training them about what they are supposed to do. When we went to Maracha, they did not have one. There was none in Zombo –(Interjections)– I am mentioning these districts because the Member over there asked. I am just reporting.

Mr Speaker, these committees are not there and some districts are not providing for resources for these committees deliberately. We were even told that they are supposed to sit once in a year, implying there is a deliberate effort to stifle them. The guidance I want to seek is: now that these institutions are not in place and we have a barking dog that has been trying to scare off thieves and even biting a few, wouldn’t it be fair to maintain this as we ask the Minister of Local Government to direct that these committees be put in place and provide the requisite resources? Mr Speaker, I rest my case.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have talked a lot about this matter today. I think it was because of this matter that the Minister of Local Governments managed to come in. From the time he came in, he has been writing a lot, and since he has both a driver and an escort, I guess he came listening to what we were saying on UBC Radio –(Interjections)– I know that because I am a Ugandan and I follow everything. These debates are usually live on air. If you did not know that, I am teaching you now.  (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to hear from the Minister of Local Government on what he is doing in local government? Yes, we have heard a lot about it and we know the problems in local government but some of us have reserved these issues. We, who are new here, have learnt how to do these things from here and we are practising them and we are failing.

Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the hon. Minister of State for Local Government, Mr Alex Onzima, who is from Maracha where there are no DPACs - Even where we have the law, for example in KCCA, these committees are not in place. Sincerely, we should hear something from the minister and my heart will be okay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there are two issues that are disturbing the House. One is that there are districts without Public Accounts Committees. Two, there are reports that you should have received from these committees for onward transmission to this House, but the report we have is that we have not seen any of these reports. Those are the two issues that relate to your ministry. If you have something to say, please say it.

4.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Alex Onzima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Firstly, I do agree with what you said, that there is a missing link - the Minister of Local Government not coming here to present the reports from the district PACs on the Floor of this House. 

There is also the issue that was raised by the hon. Nandala-Mafabi, that these district PACs are constituted through appointments by the district local government chairpersons when in fact, in his view, it should be a replica of how the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament is constituted. For that matter, I need time to go back to the drawing board and come back with a comprehensive report, maybe by Thursday, so that we can see how to move on.

Also, something was said about the district PAC in Maracha District. The truth is that there is a committee. The chairman of that committee is a former member of this House, Dr Ajeani, who was also an ambassador. It could be that the committee is just not operational. (Interjections) So, for those reasons, Mr Speaker, I think on Thursday I will come back to present a comprehensive report.

Mr Speaker, I do not know whether I should come back later, but I am told that there was another issue raised in regard to the procurement of vehicles for the LC V chairpersons.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can use this time.

MR ONZIMA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I have a short response to that for now. This is a response to a question on the procurement of vehicles for district LC V chairpersons.

I now respond to the issues raised in regard to the procurement of the 111 double-cabin pick-ups for district chairpersons as follows:

1. 	The honourable members of this august House are aware that the district chairpersons face a number of challenges in monitoring and supervising the implementation of Government programmes.

2. 	It is also true that this same House passed the vote on account for the 2014/2015 financial year and the Ministry of Finance has actually released Shs 1 billion for the procurement of those vehicles.

3. 	Government took a decision to procure these double-cabin pick-ups and avail them to the districts through the Ministry of Local Government.

4. 	Accordingly, the Ministry of Local Government, in consultation with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and in light of the financial constraints, agreed that the vehicles be purchased on the understanding that the provider will deliver all the 111 vehicles in the financial year 2014/2015 but that they would be paid in three financial years. So, Shs 4 billion has been allocated for this purpose this financial year.

5. 	The Ministry of Local Government has advertised the procurement and will conclude it in September 2014; by which time, the budget for the current financial year will have been passed and, therefore, the contract will be signed in accordance with established procurement laws and regulations of the Republic of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Based on what hon. Nambooze raised, her concern was that the whole issue came to the Floor of Parliament minus the involvement of the relevant committees. That was the issue under contention. 

Mr Speaker, based on what we have just heard from the minister, I need your guidance as to whether there is a correlation between what hon. Nambooze raised and the response that we have just got. What I have heard from the minister is about what has taken place, the need to have vehicles and how far they have gone. However, the initial issue was: why is it that the relevant committee was not involved? I need that guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, from the point that has been raised, the issue is that a proposal had been made, contained in the ministerial policy statement, to procure vehicles and an advert had come out before the committee has analysed the policy statement. That was the issue - analysing the policy statement and possibly appropriating the money. 

What the minister has said, however, is that this Parliament has already approved a vote on account. The money for phase one of this procurement has already been appropriated by this House on the vote on account. So, the money is available to do this procurement. Parliament will be doing the final approval possibly by the end of this month and beginning of next month. They will be approving in final what they have already approved in part, which is leading to this procurement. In my opinion, therefore, I do not see any contradiction between the two statements.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you are right. However, we may need to know what the advert says. The advert may say they want to procure vehicles, but if it is saying that they are procuring one-third of what we gave them, I think we have nothing to do because we passed that budget. However, let us get the advert and if we discover it is more than one-third, then we shall not agree.

4.24
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The idea of buying chairpersons vehicles is a good one. I would even take it further and say that if we want to strengthen our counterparts at the local governments, the Speaker of the district council also needs to have a vehicle. The chairman doubles as an executive as well as a member of the district council but the person who is like us and who is like our Speaker here, doing the oversight work, is the speaker of the council. I found out that my district speaker suffers a lot and he does not have means of transport. 

For me, the issue of whether the process has been followed logically or not can be handled, but the idea of procuring means of transport for the district chairpersons is a good one. If they have enough money now, before we pass the budget with the little we have given them, which Parliament has already advanced to them, let them go ahead and buy. We shall scrutinise and pass the ministerial policy statement according to the law as provided for in our Rules of Procedure.

Mr Speaker, again, we were complaining here that work from local governments is pushed to us and has accumulated. If we want this work to be done well at the lower local governments like the LC V and LV III, then we must make an effort to empower them and equip them to do the work very well.

4.26
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Following the statement the minister has just made about the advert of the purchase of vehicles using the vote-on-account, which one-third of the total budget which is given to the ministry, I looked at the advert and the ministry has advertised to purchase 111 vehicles. You all know that the LCV district chairpersons were elected in 2011 and many of them have got vehicles and these vehicles are not even three years old. Can the minister tell us on what basis they decided to advertise to purchase 111 vehicles for LCV chairpersons? (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I seek clarification – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are supposed to process your clarification, not the Speaker. 

MR SSEWUNGU: I know he cannot refuse, Mr Speaker. You see, our major problem is the way the whole business is taking place. I would like to give you some background to what took place, and the minister knows this. They called all the LCV chairpersons for a Uganda Local Governments Association (ULGA) meeting and then after that, they were asked to pay a courtesy call to the Chinese Embassy. Reaching there, they unveiled a vehicle known as a Fontana and after that, the deal kicked off. This was some time back.

A district like Kalungu, where I come from, procured a car for our chairman and we are paying for it over a period of four years. Now, the Chinese Embassy gives a promise to these people that they will give all the LCV chairpersons a trip to China to support the idea and then they came up with the idea of procuring. (Interjections) This is a fact and he knows it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, no. 

MS AMUGE: Mr Speaker, I appreciate what the honourable member is saying but it borders on diplomatic issues. You are mentioning the name of the Government of China here and you do not have substantive information about it. Is he in order if he cannot substantiate what he is saying about the Chinese Government?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have an advert for procurement published in the newspapers. That means there is a process of procurement and that means there is no deal that has been concluded as far as the public matters are concerned. So, we cannot begin to debate issues that we are not very much aware of. 

Please, always try to respect these issues. When you are framing your issues, do not affront diplomatic relations of this country with other countries.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I understand what you are saying, but let me confirm this. I read the Animal Farm and there was an animal called Old Major who said donkeys live longer. Why did he say that? It was because they were asking him a lot of questions like, “What is happening to our animal farm?” So, he said that donkeys live longer. At the end of the story, the ones who captured the animals and those who captured themselves were similar to each other. They broke all the laws and they were fighting against man. We are here and I am giving a statement - When I say, “promise”, a promise can be violated; it is not a must. I am promising you, in case he does not do so it is not wrong.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable member, the issue is clear and that is the one you are seeking clarification on. You cannot begin to fetch things from far away. The issue is here before the House.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am the one who raised the issue of the advert. I have the advert here and I think we may have to discuss this issue as we are looking at the advert. It clearly says “We need 111 four-wheel-drive double cabin pick-up motor vehicles. All the vehicles will be required in a single delivery and payment will be made in three instalments: 40 per cent upon delivery, 30 per cent by July 2015 and the balance by July 2016.”

What does this mean, Mr Speaker? It means that in the budget for 2014/2015, they have budgeted for 40 per cent of the cost of these vehicles. So, when this advert goes through, they must be paid. It also means that they have not advertised for the one-third, which we authorised them to do.

Secondly, I have looked at the Constitution, which says that if you want to borrow, you must get parliamentary approval. In this context, we are borrowing money to pay in 2015 and 2016. I do not think this PS has parliamentary approval authorising him to borrow money so that he is able to pay in 2015 and 2016.

In the same context - because money has time value - the money for 2015 and 2016 will be charged interest and for any interest to be paid out from the Consolidated Fund, one must seek parliamentary approval and it must be budgeted for. From this advert, it is very clear that the Permanent Secretary, who is the accounting officer of the Ministry of Local Government, has violated this. 

For the minister to now come and say, “We have procured one-third”, he has lied to Parliament. In that context, the minister must be held in contempt of Parliament. He is my personal friend but he must be held accountable. So, you were right regarding the ruling in which you said that he should come and explain. He should, indeed, explain but in his explanation, he has made matters worse. In that context, Mr Speaker, I am sure you should rule that we hold my brother, hon. Onzima, accountable and he should be the first guinea pig to tell the others that it is wrong to do things against the rules of this country and also to be in contempt of Parliament. I thank you.

MR BYARUGABA: Mr Speaker, I stand to look for a win-win situation. I do appreciate the concerns of the Members of Parliament regarding our core roles and you have put them across. That is okay, but we are also looking for practical solutions for the good management and administration of our country. 

Whereas there could have been a mishap one way or another, I think this is well intended. So, how do we get a win-win situation? I suggest that we quickly and urgently require the ministry, together with the committee, to work out a programme regarding that particular item and roll it out immediately and as fast as possible so that the committee comes up with a report for us to consider and we give them or deny them a go-ahead. (Interjections) I am looking for a win-win situation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is the learned Attorney-General in the House? I see in the advert a time table of what is going to happen. Is it possible for us to allow our committee to look at this urgently and interface with the Minister and Permanent Secretary and then come back to the House and advise us on how to proceed on this subject? Would that be proper? However, it should be in such a way that the committee takes cognisance of the timeframe that is provided on the advert because the contract is supposed to be signed by 10th September. By that time, we will have also done - I am saying in the interim, let them interact and come back and advise us on this matter.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, once bitten twice shy. It is just last week that we had four officials from Ministry of Local Government convicted by the Anti-Corruption Court on the issue of bicycles. This was a similar procurement. We do not need to hurry this process. We need to do a thorough job so that we know the taxpayers’ money is going to the right firm or company for supply of the right goods. Otherwise, if it is just a matter of going by what is on the-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, we are not examining the procurement process; we cannot do that. We even have no authority to do it especially when the procurement is not yet done. We cannot do that. What we are saying is that a proposal was made for money to be approved for these processes but the procurement is already going on. The explanation we have got, partially, is that it is because of the approved vote-on-account that they are proceeding, but the percentages show something else. The honourable member has also raised the issue that when they part-pay and the rest is to be paid in future, that amounts to borrowing. 

Those are the issues that we want the committee to interface with the ministry about. They will come back so that we can be better informed because we do not really know much about what happened. Even this statement that has been brought by the minister, you can see that it is on one page that has been has been written this afternoon.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I am not saying that we should examine. All I am asking for is caution to be taken when we are undergoing this process; that is all. The idea of LCV chairpersons having vehicles to facilitate them is welcome, but let us move cautiously so that we are not bitten by the same snake again. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I have the Member for Serere, and can someone brief the learned Attorney General? We will need his opinion.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. From what I hear about the advert, it would appear that the process will be completed around September.  In the view of the honourable minister, by that time we will have done the scrutiny. The problem with this approach is that it is actually an attempt to circumvent scrutiny, and that is extremely dangerous for this country. 

It is agreed that we passed the vote-on-account. Actually, we had a lot of controversy with our vote-on-account this time round but we did pass it. I think that if the ministry were honest with this Parliament – Reading the provisions in Article 154 where it talks about vote-on-account, you get the impression that it is about the continuity of service delivery. It is about those things that cannot wait until you actually do full appropriation. If that is the position, I think it was erroneous for the ministry to even include this particular aspect on vote-on-account. 

The reason we are passionate about this is because our committees have the mandate to scrutinise procurement plans, work plans and whatever plans. This particular procurement is being done without that scrutiny. It would also appear to us as Ugandans that the Ministry of Local Government has forgotten everything and learnt nothing from the bicycle saga and they are willing to repeat it, without fearing the consequences that will follow. 

However, I agree with you, Mr Speaker. Maybe, we are caught up in a terrible trust, but we should find ways of wriggling ourselves out of this situation. One, let us mandate our committee to actually scrutinise this particular transaction even tomorrow. For that segment in the vote, convene the Committee on Local Government and Public Service. Let them call these people and let them talk to us about how they plan to procure and what the safety nets are so that we do not lose out on that money. That is important. So, we should enlarge it; we should not just focus on the question of only borrowing but also the question of this actual procurement even when they have already spent money on that advert. We should have the committee to scrutinise them.

Two, I think that this House should condemn this attempt to circumvent parliamentary scrutiny. Let our Government know that we take exception to this type of behaviour.

Thirdly, I would like to implore the Speaker’s office; while we wait to amend the rules at an appropriate time, is it possible that you could come up with a form of guidelines so that when the Executive includes matters that require committee scrutiny on vote-on-account, in the interim we have a provision that calls or requires our committee to actually scrutinise that particular aspect so that we do not lose out? I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we roll this up because we have other things still pending. Can we roll this up? What I was suggesting is that the committee would come back and the committee would give us recommendations on what we should do because they would have interfaced with the minister and the technical people who are in charge of this procurement. 

What I am very sure of is that when we tasked the honourable ministers to contact the Minister for Local Government, they contacted them and they did this to kind of just come and answer because there was a request. So, would it be so bad to give our own committee the responsibility of looking at this issue properly and coming back to us? All those points should then go to the committee now so that we come and we have a debate. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: The advert is running, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The advert is running –(Interjections)– The committee will recommend that. The committee can recommend that. I was now going to agree on a timeframe when they should come back to the House. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I am very grateful for your guidance but the issue I want to raise is about the fact that this advert is running and bids are being made. We all know that once companies get involved in an exercise, they will demand of us to fulfil the conditions of this advert because it is us who placed it in the newspapers. What do we do in the circumstances if the ministry continues to receive bids now?  

You have now directed the committee to look at this item; what will happen, for example, if the committee finds that this transaction should not go on and yet companies have already bid? Is it possible for this advert to be recalled in the meantime to allow the committee time to complete?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have separation of roles; that is an Executive function. They are doing this and the minister has heard. If he deems it necessary to go ahead and stop the processing of this advert if he is persuaded by the House, that would be his business, but we cannot direct the minister to go and cancel an advert. So, he has heard and everybody has heard.

MR BAKALUBA MUKASA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My concern is that we may not have to be in a hurry and so, we may not stop the advert, but we should also borrow a leaf from somewhere. Some time back, we received road units including graders and lorries in our districts. Most of these are disturbing us and are breaking down and this is because we normally rush these procurements. 

This committee this time should really be very serious because short of that, you are going to leave Parliament. We are tired of spending Government money like this. An advert is already out, money is soon going to be spent and that is how we lose out every time. What type of country is this that loses in every deal it gets, Mr Speaker? (Laughter) 

We are talking about bicycles and some districts have got while others have not got at all, and the culprits are going to Luzira. Really, do we love this country? Whoever we assign the responsibility does not fulfil it. What should we do? That is why, Mr Speaker, the other day you also lamented that this Parliament was really failing. It is not only Parliament but the whole of Uganda with the leaders from top to bottom.  I thank you.   
    
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is what we should be looking at. Honourable minister, the other issue that was raised before you came was that why are you procuring these vehicles when you are saying there is no money to procure bicycles for the rest of the districts? That matter should also be examined by the committee and they report. You have supplied half of the country and the other half is not supplied with bicycles and now, you are moving to procure vehicles and you are saying that there is no money. That issue came up. So, those issues will all be handled comprehensively and you get back to us. 

Honourable members, I think that we close this. I think, committee, you will help us with this and advise us on how to proceed. I thank you. Let us go to the next item. We shall lay the papers on the Table. Can we proceed and you move the papers this side - (Mrs Rose Akol) - Move them this side so that the Leader of the Opposition can lay them on the Table; you are a member of the Commission. 

4.49
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): I think it should be the Minister for Local Government. Mr Speaker, I would like to delegate the Minister for Local Government –(Interjections)– I beg for your indulgence – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, these powers were delegated to you. In law, you cannot delegate delegated functions. (Laughter) Honourable members, we will defer the laying of these papers to tomorrow and we will proceed from there. 

ADDENDUM TO THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015 FROM THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, this addendum to the ministerial statement – I am sure it never came from your office. Someone must have come and asked you to make an addendum. 

Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for somebody to come and disturb you; having disturbed you; he disappears and now he has disturbed Parliament. We have been waiting for the addendum to no avail. Is it procedurally right for a minister to disturb our peace?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Office of the Clerk had allowed this addendum to be laid. This is part of the ministerial policy statement. As you remember, we agreed that they should be laid here so that we take record of them before moving them to committees. Let us leave it for now and go to the next item. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE PETITION BY FORMER WORKERS OF COFFEE MARKETING BOARD UNDER LIQUIDATION

4.52
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Bakka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, this is a report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the petition by former workers of Coffee Marketing Board in liquidation. Honourable members, you already have this report, it is uploaded on your iPads –(Interjections)– you go to Alfresco, in activities. I could read it from my iPad for you to prove. 

This is a report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Petition by former workers of Coffee Marketing Board in liquidation. 

Introduction

The petition of the former workers of the defunct Coffee Marketing Board Limited (CMBL) was presented to this House on 25 July 2012 and referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in accordance with Rule 29(5) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.

The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs scrutinized the petition and now reports back in accordance with the Rules of Procedure.

Methodolgy

The committee in considering this petition interviewed persons named in the petition and received documents from them. It cross-examined them on the documents received in which they were either mentioned or implicated. The committee held meetings with the following groups and individuals:
    i. Former employees of CMBL, who included their representative, as mentioned.  
    ii. Officials from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who included the then Deputy Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury and others as you see. 
    iii. The former Attorney-General, hon. Prof. Kiddhu Makubuya, 
    iv. The former Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – Hon. Syda Bbumba.
    v. The former official receiver/liquidator, now Director General of Uganda Registration Bureau, Mr Twebaze Bemanya.
    vi. Officials from the Attorney-General’s Chambers, including the Attorney-General, hon. Peter Nyombi, the Solicitor General – Mr Francis Atoke and the Director of Civil Litigation.
    vii. Officials from the Auditor-General’s office.
    viii. Officials from Uganda Property Holdings led by the Managing Director, Mr Martin Kihembo. 

The committee further received details of properties previously owned by Coffee Marketing Board and conducted onsite assessment visits to the properties like properties in Mombasa, London and the former plant in Bugolobi Kampala.

The total number of petitioners is 1,568. They are all former workers of Coffee Marketing Board and they allege that they did not receive payment of their terminal benefits when they were retrenched between 1991 and 1998.

They comprise staff officers and non-unionised former employees who were not members of the National Union of Clerical, Commercial and Technical Employees (NUCPTE); an umbrella body under which some staff had unionized.
They were also not part of the 264 members of NUCPTE who took their grievance under a trade dispute to the Industrial Court.  They instead petitioned H.E the President seeking payment of their terminal benefits.

H.E the President in turn directed the Auditor-General to verify the total amount payable to all the former workers of CMBL, including theirs. A report of the Auditor-General on the subject was received by the committee and partly forms part of this report and is attached as annex B.

There were three distinct categories of former employees of CMBL; namely:

    a) The 264 members of the Trade Union who took their grievances to the Industrial Court.
    b) Unionisable employees who did not join the Trade Union and were therefore governed under the CMBL terms and conditions of service.
    c) Non-unionisable staff officers who were also governed by the CMBL terms and conditions of service.

The first category comprising a total of 264 former workers took their grievance to the Industrial Court, and the second and third categories did not and were not party to the Industrial Court proceedings.

When the Auditor-General’s report was presented to H.E the President, with clear distinction between the two categories of former employees and recommending payment of terminal benefits to the entitled former employees, H.E. the President forwarded it to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for payment. However, to-date, no payment has ever been made. The presidential directive is attached as annex C.

Terms of Reference 

The terms of reference were premised on the prayers presented in the petition. However, after perusing the petition, and in order to be specific in our investigations, the committee gleaned the following from the prayers of the petitioners and agreed on the following terms of reference:

    1. To determine whether the privatization unit (PU) had fully paid all the former employees of CMBL. If not, whether they had any credible reason why they were resisting paying whatever balances were due to the former employees.
    2. To find out whether the former Attorney-General, the former Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and all departments under them acted properly in handling matters related to the former employees of Coffee Marketing Board.
    3. To determine the background to Miscellaneous Application No. 074 of 2006 arising from Miscellaneous Application No. 066 of 1996 and find out whether it had any connection with the petition before the committee.
    4. To determine whether there was value for money for the assets and properties of Coffee Marketing Board sold and the application of the proceeds thereof.
    5. To do any other thing or act connected with or relevant to the above terms of reference.

Status of payment of former employees of CMBL

The committee made the following findings:
	According to the Auditor-General’s report, the total number of former employees of CMBL entitled to, and whose terminal benefits were partly paid by 1998 was 1,832.  At no one time did CMBL ever employ over 5,000 workers as alleged by Mr Moses Mwase, Head of Legal Services, PU and amplified severally and repeatedly by the Ministry of Finance officials up to the Prime Minister and ultimately to H.E the President.
	
The Auditor-General depended on the common figures supplied by both the Privatisation Unit and the petitioners to calculate and verify the claims of both unionized former employees and the petitioners. There were 264 registered members of the National Union of Clerical Commercial and Technical Employees, governed under a Collective Union Agreement, while the petitioners are 1,568 in number.  

While the 264 unionised former employees went to the Industrial court and got an award which was quashed by the High Court but, is now pending appeal in the Court of Appeal, the petitioners are not party to the case in court.

By 1998, at the closure of the defunct Coffee Marketing Board Limited, a total sum of Shs 6.5 billion had been paid to all the retrenched former workers. No evidence was received by the committee to prove that Shs 150 billion was ever paid to the retrenched workers as alleged by the Privatisation Unit and the Ministry of Finance.

However, there were balances that were not paid because the terms and conditions of service for non-unionised workers on the one hand and the collective union agreement for the 264 unionised formers workers on the other hand were not complied with.

The unionised former employees were members of the trade union whose employment terms were governed under the collective union agreement and went to the Industrial court under Industrial Trade Dispute No.01 of 1992 to claim what they alleged was the balance of their terminal benefits.

They were awarded Shs 1.34,4178,573 billion, verified by the Attorney-General after referral by the Industrial Court. The Auditor-General also verified and recommended a sum of Shs 10.336,013,506 billion for the non-unionised former employees – officers and group employees number to 1,568 whose employment terms were governed under the terms and conditions of service and did not go to the Industrial court.

Observations

The former employees of the Coffee Marketing Board were governed by the collective trade union agreement, signed between the Coffee Marketing Board Limited and the National Union of Clerical, Commercial and Technical Employees, governed under a collective union or the Coffee Marketing Board Limited, terms and conditions of service. This was clearly made out in the Auditor-General’s report and the Attorney-General’s office.

The Privatisation Unit and officials from Ministry of Finance should have recognised it. It is significant that the Auditor-General’s verification report was based on figures worked out by Ernest & Young and supplied to the Auditor-General by the official receiver or liquidator.

The committee did not understand why the Ministry of Finance turned around to disown it when it came to the execution of payments.

Recommendation

The petitioners should be paid their balances in accordance with the verified report of the Auditor-General since there is impediment to their payment.

Petitioners’ entitlement to terminal benefits and effects of Miscellaneous Application No. 074/2006:

Findings

The committee found out the following:
Mr Moses Mwase, the Head of the Legal Unit Department of Privatisation Unit, triggered an allegation that was echoed repeatedly by senior officials of Ministry of Finance, especially, Mr Keith Muhakanizi, particularly to the Prime Minister, who ultimately reported it to the President that paying the former workers of the defunct Coffee Marketing Board would cause a double payment of up to the tune of Shs 300 billion, Coffee Marketing Board having paid the claims of more than 5,000 retrenched employees. Minutes of these allegations are attached as annex B.

On the request of the petitioners, we received from the Privatisation Unit and presented to the Auditor-General a tabulated list showing payments already made and balances due to them.

His Excellency, the President later directed the Auditor-General to verify the same claims, which made the Auditor-General to again request the Privatisation Unit that had submitted the same list to the Auditor-General. It was this same list that informed the basis of the verification of Shs 10.36,013,506 billion for the petitioners and Shs 1,344,178,573 for the 264 former unionised employees.

The report of the Auditor-General in respect of the entitlements of the petitioners has never been logically contested save for what Prof. Apollo Nsibambi, the then Prime Minister later termed as misinformation that if the payment in the report of the Auditor-General was to be complied with, a double payment of Shs 300 billion would be occasioned given the fact that PU had already paid off 5,000 former employees.

The petitioners were bound to Miscellaneous Case No. Mc 74/2006 as if they were party to that suit whereas not. The officials of the Ministry of Finance defied the President’s directive to pay the petitioners even after the report of the Auditor-General verifying the payments of the petitioners was made. The Auditor-General’s report is attached as annex B.

Observations 

The committee observed as follows:
The misinformation fed to the Prime Minister and the President that if the former workers were to be paid their claim would stand at Shs 300 billion, was false, motivated by ill-will, malicious and alarmist intentions. It was calculated to draw the Prime Minister and the President to ensuring that the former workers do not get their hard-earned terminal benefits.

The unverified claim was apparently meant to show that about Shs 150 billion had already been paid. It further meant that the defunct Coffee Marketing Board had ever employed over 5,000 workers yet the actual number according to the Auditor-General’s report is 1,832.

Secondly, it was meant to show that PU had already paid out a total sum of Shs 150 billion and so payment to the former employees would double this amount to Shs 300 billion. This is a serious allegation that should not be taken lightly because it was repeatedly made many times by the senior people in Government including the former Prime Minister and the President.

This unsubstantiated claim that an amount of Shs 150 billion had been paid out could easily mean that the country was defrauded of that amount out of the Treasury by officials of PU and Ministry of Finance yet they were just finding a way to justify this money’s disappearance.

The petitioners neither filed nor joined the Industrial Court case. Instead they petitioned the President who caused the Auditor-General to verify and approve their claims, which were rejected by the Ministry of Finance. They could not therefore be condemned to wait for the outcome of that suit.

It was incomprehensive why, against all reasons, the officials of Ministry of Finance, especially, Mr Keith Muhakanizi, tenuously refused to see the clear distinction in the report of the Auditor-General between the claim of the 264 who had gone to court and that of the petitioners who had not gone to court. It was unreasonable to advise that the petitioners’ payments await the conclusion of the case in court.

Since the Auditor-General submitted his report verifying the petitioners’ payments to the President on 13 November 2009, the amount verified became due and owing to the petitioners as from the date of their retrenchment. The amount has since lost value in real terms.

Recommendations 

The committee recommends as follows:
Government should make arrangements to pay the terminal benefits of the petitioners, verified by the Auditor-General at Shs 10,336,013,506,000. The above amount should carry an annual interest at the court rate of 8 percent per annum from the date of the Auditor-General’s verification.

The Criminal Investigations and Intelligence Directorate of Police should investigate the claim by the Ministry of Finance, particularly, that they paid over 5,000 former retrenched employees of Coffee Marketing Board, a sum being half of Shs 300 billion or Shs 150 billion.

Miscellaneous App. No. 074/2006 arising from Misc. App. No. 066/1996 and its relevance to the petition:

Findings

The committee findings were as follows:
In 1992, 264 unionised former employees of the defunct Coffee Marketing Board went to court to seek relief and got an award for balance as what had not been paid to them when they were retrenched in 1991.

The Coffee Marketing Board employees being dissatisfied with the award, applied to the High Court and Justice Ntabgoba quashed it on the ground that the Industrial Court had not applied the correct provisions of the Collective Union Agreement governing the terms of employment to arrive at that award.

Secondly, the judge remitted the award back to the Industrial Court directing it to apply the correct provisions of the Collective Union Agreement in order to arrive at the correct figures for the award.

On its part, the Industrial Court referred the matter to the Auditor-General to apply the correct provisions of the Collective Union Agreement to calculate the correct entitlements for the 264 unionised former employees.

The Auditor-General calculated and verified the figure at 1.34,178,673 billion for them. Coincidentally, the Auditor-General also received a directive from the President to calculate and verify the claims of the petitioners according to the Coffee Marketing Board Ltd terms and conditions of service that governed their employment.

The Auditor-General calculated and verified a sum of Shs 10,336,013,506 billion for the 1,568 petitioners who were non-unionised former employees and were not part of the Industrial Court case because they had not been members of the trade union.

The figures used by the Auditor-General for calculating and verifying the entitlements of both the 264 unionised former employees and the 1,568 petitioners were provided by the Privatisation Unit at the Ministry of Finance.

The Auditor-General included both the 264 unionised former employees and the 1,568 petitioners in the same report but clearly indicated that the respective figures had been based on the collective union agreement and the terms and conditions of service.

Coffee Marketing Board through MMAKS Advocates applied to the High Court again Vide Miscellaneous Application No.074 of 2006 to quash the decision of the Industrial Court and the award verified by the Auditor-General. The High Court by its ruling of 26 January 2012 quashed the award of the Industrial Court.

Observations

There is no correlation between the claim of the petitioners and the Miscellaneous Application No.074 of 2006. The application stemmed from the Industrial Court case No.1 of 1992 to which the petitioners were not party but the petitioners’ claim stemmed directly from their petition to the President. The petitioners therefore were not party to the Industrial Trade Dispute No.1 of 1992 and could neither benefit nor suffer any detriment from any proceedings arising from that case. 

As a matter of fact, the Industrial Court clearly ruled on this when they said that they find it improper to consider the petition under the same suit. 

They instead advised them to file a separate suit which they did not. The petitioners are not in any way affected by Miscellaneous Application No.074 of 2006 because the application was about the interpretation of the collective union agreement which did not govern their terms of employment.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the petitioners claims be detached from the outcome of the Miscellaneous Application No. 074 of 2006 and the appeal therefrom and be paid immediately even if the claim of the unionised former employees must abide by the outcome of the Court of Appeal.

Conduct of the Attorney-General

Findings

The committee found as follows: On 8 December 2011, the Attorney- General, hon. Peter Nyombi, rendered the legal opinion to his Excellency the President in which he said; “It is my considered opinion that Justice Ntabagoba’s ruling settled the issues pertaining to the entitlements of the former employees. 
Pursuant to the above, it is my considered view that the former employees of Coffee Marketing Board be paid the total amount verified by the Auditor-General as the outstanding claim.”

After giving the above legal opinion to his Excellency the President, the Attorney-General later changed his opinion. Both opinions are attached as annex E.

Observation

It is apparent he failed to appreciate the difference between the petitioners’ claims and the suit arising from the Trade Dispute No.1 of 1992 affecting only 264 former employees.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that Attorney-General should always make well researched and informed opinions to avoid giving contradictory opinions on the same subject matter.

Conduct of the Former Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
When the matter of compensation for the petitioners first came up, hon. Syda Bbumba was the minister responsible for finance. She was the political head responsible for the supervision of the privatisation unit. She received the directive from the President either directly or by copies of letters to other government officials. Unfortunately, she did not act on them decisively.

Observation

The former minister did not show leadership in supervising the handling of the petitioners’ claim as most of the correspondences were handled by the then Deputy Secretary to the Treasury, Mr Keith Muhakanizi, without her intervention.

The conduct of the former minister showed defiance and resistance of the President’s directives to the detriment of the former employees of Coffee Marketing Board Limited.

Recommendation

Government should come up with a conclusive position in form of guidelines on how presidential directives should be acted upon.

Assets of CMB and Liquidation

Findings 

The committee found as follows:
Before the properties of CMBL were disposed of, an evaluation report was made and the receipt of sale of non-core assets was Shs 2.2,856,212 billion.

The real estate assets of CMBL which were not sold were transferred to be managed under Uganda Property Holdings Ltd both in and outside Uganda. We lent the properties in Uganda, Mombasa, Kenya and London, United Kingdom.

Beside the properties mentioned above, there was no plausible explanation given to the committee regarding the disposal process of the CMBL plant in Bugolobi Kampala which was for all intents and purposes fully functional at the time of the de-commissioning. It is alleged that this coffee processing plant was sold as scrap.

Observations

It is not an overstatement that CMBL was the economic hub of the nation for a very long time with the biggest asset base in the country. The committee observed that the privatisation process of CMBL was not properly managed.

Recommendations
The Auditor-General should carry out a comprehensive audit of CMBL to determine whether there was value for money in the entire process of disposing of the assets and the application of the proceeds of the sale.

Role of MMAKS Advocates

The committee found as follows:
MMAKS Advocates is a successor firm to M/s Mugerwa and Matovu Advocates. The firm M/s Mugerwa & Matovu Advocates was retained by the then CMBL to represent it in the Trade Dispute No.1 of 1992 and since then to date, the said firm which was succeeded under the trade name “MMAKS” has been representing CMBL in liquidation in all matters arising from the above trade dispute including the Miscellaneous Application No.74 of 2006.

Following that representation dating from the 1990s to date, MMAKS Advocates which had never been paid filed a bill of costs after the conclusion of Miscellaneous Application No.74 of 2006 to cover the work done from 1992 and it was around Shs 1.753,934,488 billion by the Solicitor-General and paid to MMAKS advocates. By the time the services of the predecessor of MMAKS were procured, the PPDA Act had not been passed by Parliament and therefore was not in force.

The committee observes that there was no wrong doing on the part of the government officials involved to continue with the services of MMAKS Advocates in handling all matters arising from Trade Dispute No.1 of 1992 and the fees paid were appropriate in the circumstances.

Recommendation 

In view of the amount already paid, Government should ensure that MMAKS Advocates handles the matter pending before court to its logical conclusion without any further payment.

Conclusion

This petition is another show of confidence in the legislative arm of Government as the representatives of the people. I beg to report. The committee report is duly signed by about 12 members of the committee out of the 28 and the necessary annexures have been put.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to lay a copy of the report?

MR BAKKA: I beg to lay a copy of the file on Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This matter has been outstanding for long and the complainants have not ceased in their quest for a remedy in this House. They have been checking on the progress and I am glad the committee has finally come to the conclusion of this matter.

The motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the petition by former workers of CMB in liquidation. That is the motion that has been proposed for you containing the report and the recommendations made. I now propose the question for the debate and the debate starts now.

5.18
MS GRACE NAMARA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the good report. I want to agree that committees of Parliament transact business on behalf of Parliament and it is on that note that I want to agree with their observations and recommendations.

On page 9, it disturbs my mind on why and how money can leave the Treasury then goes to Privatisation Unit (PU) and then it does not play the role it was meant for. Here is the Minister saying, “Yes, we released this money”; PU is saying, yes the money was paid and there is no justification at all to show the accountability of those funds.

It is clear that this money was not paid and I want to agree with the committee that the CID should investigate the ministry of Finance and PU. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, on page 13, regarding the assets and property of Coffee Marketing Board, if you look at the plant in Bugolobi, it is okay and functional. If you go there, it is operating. So if they claim that it was sold as scrap, this really disturbs my mind. 

I therefore want to agree with the committee that an audit be taken of the entire process of how these assets were disposed of. That report should come back to Parliament, we discuss it and the entire public gets to know how the property of Coffee Marketing Board was - (Interruption)

MR AYENA: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the information I want to give is that there is information we gathered from the grape vine that the value of the plant at Bugolobi -

THE DEPUY SPEAKER: Have we started growing vines in Uganda?

MR AYENA: It would appear so. The information that was availed was that at the time that this machinery was sold as scrap, it had just been installed and it was one of the most modern coffee processing plants south of the Sahara, valued at over US$ 30 million. Therefore, it beats our understanding that it should be sold as scrap. That is the information I wanted to give. It is a serious matter.

MS NAMARA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for that information. I believe that is the main justification as to why a thorough audit should be done. A lot of money has been misused and a lot of corruption has been appearing through these privatisation processes. So Mr Speaker, I want to agree with the recommendation made by the committee that a thorough audit be made. I thank you very much.

5.22
MS THEOPISTA NABULYA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to also thank the committee for the good work done and I agree with all the recommendations that they have come up with. I also want to thank the committee for being prompt on work and on a petition because there are a number of petitions that I have presented on the Floor of the House but they have never come up to be discussed like this one.

On this issue of the Coffee Marketing Board, workers from this Board have stayed for all these years since it was liquidated without any payment despite the fact that cases have been taken to courts of law. The Industrial Court, which is a court of justice, has never had justice implemented despite the fact that the President of this country gave directives to make sure that these people are paid.

It is true that some other corporations like the former Uganda Post and Telecommunications Corporation had the same problem. Cases have been taken to the Industrial Court, awards have been made in favour of workers but still money, which is released by Ministry of Finance is sometimes not seen where it is meant to go because people have not been paid.

I would like to request the Attorney-General, under his own prerogative, to investigate what is happening with the money that is released to pay workers. I am bringing another petition by the workers of former Uganda Post and Telecommunications Corporation on this Floor again. This is an embarrassment, which we should run away from.

The truth is that some officials are corrupt and they are using people’s money and people die without getting their money. I would like the government to make sure that the culprits are brought to book and penalised. Thank you very much.

5.24
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to agree with the report of the committee but somewhere I got mixed up. The Attorney-General had stated that they should be paid and later, this was withdrawn. I sat here wondering, what was the reason for the withdrawal? As we move forward and the committee recommends payment, are we not going to get a hick-up again? Can we be very clear as to what recommendation should be given to the Executive because at the end of the day, these people will again cry out for their monies? When we meet them, they say, “Yes, Parliament has mentioned this but when are we getting this payment?”

So I just want to get clarification from the committee. Why did the Attorney-General withdraw, having given us an okay? Thank you.

5.25
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for this good report and I want to assure you, Mr Speaker, that whenever I pass by that plant in Bugolobi, I shed tears and I will continue shedding tears. I am a son of a farmer who was always selling coffee to the same plant but I am trying to find out something regarding this observation on MMAKS Advocates. 

You have said these people were paid Shs 1.7 billion upon conclusion of execution of their work as a law firm and you are telling them to conclude each and everything. I do not expect that to take place because they were paid. How are you going to make them - you see, they changed from the original Mugerwa and Company Advocates to MMAKS and you have not attached any legal instrument, which transferred them to that law firm, which was paid fully. What do you expect from them?

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I want to find out something. Whenever ministers are caught in any scandal or mismanagement of funds, they say there was a presidential directive and they will always accuse the President for having directed them to do so. Remember the Basajjabalaba issue. Now here we have a presidential directive, which was not honoured at the cost of our suffering people. What type of ministers are these?

It is unfortunate that the honourable Attorney-General is not around. We have always had these problems with him. He gives his position and then somersaults. Today we have a problem with the Attorney-General. They gave land titles to the Kingdom of Buganda and now he is recalling them. So hon. Deputy Attorney-General, what is happening in your office?

Mr Speaker, when we talk about the 5,000 workers who were paid, can we know from the chairman of the committee whether he received any evidence? This is because they say they paid over 5,000 workers. Where is that evidence?

Lastly, you have talked about the property of Coffee Marketing Board. This property extended from Bugolobi to almost all the districts of Uganda. I want to give an example of my former district, which is Masaka. We had a lot of unions and majority of them are no longer there. The machines were sold and even the buildings were demolished. What did you investigate?

We need to carry out serious investigations regarding how these properties were sold. Coffee Marketing Board had vehicles. I remember they were called Leyland lorries. I do not know where they went. It is very painful but I want to thank you for the report. I am seeking clarification from you on how you are managing MMAKS, which was paid Shs 1.7 billion for the work it did and yet you are saying it has to conclude its work. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.29
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I support the committee’s recommendations but I feel there are a lot of things we should learn from this report. There are similar issues that have occurred. It reminds me of why, as Government, we cannot clear people in a timely manner. Regarding the years mentioned in the report, how many years have these claims taken? Why have we refused if we knew that these people existed and they are owed what they are asking?

There are a lot of tricks being played. I strongly believe that many people in civil service get a lot of commission when things get to court. In the report, I can see that there are two issues; there were those who went to court and there are those that did not. The petitioners’ case was not looked at immediately though in the report, there was evidence of truth and justification as to why we should pay them. Why do we encourage people to always go to court? Whose money are we using to pay court fees and yet at the end the court rules against us? So, we need to go into depth to understand why people always encourage civil servants who have worked to first go to court before we pay them.  

Secondly, the issue of the Attorney-General’s office has been on the Floor of Parliament before. I feel that we must investigate the weaknesses there because this is an office over which legal opinions are got, over which technical advice is at times got and therefore it means that it is an engine of our implementation. But when we reflect on what has been in this report, there has been two-way traffic movements. Today he says this, tomorrow the office says the other. So, where is the hope of the operation of the Government? 

We need to understand exactly what is happening. We believe that those who are there in that office know the technicalities and the legal aspects and that is why the opinions are taken very seriously. Without getting out the root causes, we shall continue having a lot of mess.

Thirdly, on disposal of assets, there is a lot of malpractice in Uganda over markets and other assets where the other assets are sold not because they are due to be sold. Therefore as Government, before we approve the disposing of assets, we must do verification; we must consent as Government at various levels because a times, individuals sell these things to themselves. I have seen that asset in Bugolobi – I did not enter inside but from outside, the structure is strong. 

As Government, up to now we are renting many places but we keep on disposing. What is the logic? You are disposing of what you have and you are renting which means that you are spending more money on other aspects as you rent.

Lastly, we need to be told whether these people were paid. There was an observation made against the former Prime Minister – there were the issues of inadequate supervision done by the former minister. Mr Speaker, those were the people entrusted by the people of this country. If they did not do their work – because one was the Prime Minister, the other a minister – they should be held responsible otherwise not everybody can come and do the same work. Why have they failed to come and give the President the right information? I thank you.

5.36
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for doing a good job. 

I also want to specifically put on record that it has been a lot of time and painful experience for these former workers. Some of them probably have died without receiving their payments. For some of them, probably, their children have missed an education and I hope that our country will learn to be civil with people whom we have a duty to pay their entitlements and try to sort out things we are experiencing.

I would like to propose an amendment to 8 (3); the committee’s recommendation on the Attorney-General. It has become very predictable if not very common a habit of the Attorney-General of this country to give very contradicting opinions and sometimes opinions that are extremely costly to this country. 

If you do not want to take it to be a matter of incompetence, you want to think that it is a matter of connivance. I want to think that this committee of lawyers – this legal committee - while they did a good job to take note of the contradictions in the opinion of the Attorney-General, were heavily constrained to recommend serious sanctions on their colleagues in the practice. 

As a lay woman, with no connection to the legal fraternity, I would like to take the occasion to recommend an amendment to clause 8 (3) which shall read as follows: “That the Attorney-General, the hon. Peter Nyombi, be held personally responsible for the suffering occasioned to the petitioners as a result of his inconsistent legal advice and also takes responsibility for the resultant losses in the management of the payment of CMB workers.” That is my proposal to amend the recommendation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who was the Attorney-General at that time?

MS ALASO: Hon. Peter Nyombi is the Attorney-General mentioned. He gave the two opinions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, it is alright.

MS ALASO: The report points out hon. Peter Nyombi as the one giving out those inconsistent opinions, varying opinions and it is not the first time anyway as it is like him to do that. 

Lastly, a child of cotton growers and who grew up in this country looking at some of those parastatals doing a good job – every other time that we review the performance of the privatisation exercise, we have very nasty stories to hear. When shall this House receive an honest audit of that privatisation exercise because it stands out very clearly that those assets to this country have been doled out in the name of privatisation? You find a structure and with that information from the grapevine that hon. Ayena gave to this House, serious assets of this country being doled out at scrap value in the name of privatization! 

Who is this ‘wolf’ called privatisation? Because that wolf seems to have swallowed up the entire wealth of this nation and something ought to be done. The peoples’ representatives ought to call them to order and get them to account for their conduct. 

I pray, Mr Speaker, that some day, you will create room for this House, whichever way we will move the House, to discuss the success or the failure of the privatisation process. I thank you.

5.40
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you committee for the good report that you have presented. I want to address myself on a few things. I wonder, when we shall have institutions where we can follow up things with integrity. Each time we talk about corruption, we are all affected and there is no institution that can follow up these things. 

I want to thank the group that decided not to go to court. But unfortunately, a senior person in this country ignored that good heart; people who have a good intention to build and honour the integrity of this country; he ignored such people until they were pushed to court and they lost a lot of money. You ask yourself, do these people know that they are exploiting and destroying our future? 

There is a very serious concern on this particular issue. They claim over 5,000 labourers were paid Shs 150 billion and yet the audited report says 1,832 workers are the ones who were genuine staff. How can somebody just report falsehood – I support the recommendation of the committee that serious investigations be done and these investigations should target those individuals who have been mentioned. 

You mentioned in the report the name of Mr Keith Muhakanizi; the name of the Attorney-General has been mentioned, the name of the former Minister of Finance was mentioned. No wonder she was pushed out. We should not stop there because our money was lost. She just sat there yet they failed to offer leadership at that particular time. 

Mr Speaker, when these petitioners were moving in the corridors of Parliament, they told us that some big shots ganged up and bought the Coffee Marketing Board machinery in Bugolobi. They were shedding tears; they said these are things which could develop Uganda. Now we are suffering, trying to add value to our coffee. Our coffee is no longer of the best quality as needed by the world market. By then, we were almost ranking no.1. Now our coffee is rated second from Brazil. This is because we failed to keep our assets. Some people with rotten integrity came and ate it up. 

This is a very serious matter for all of us to follow up if we are to build better institutions rather than asking people to go to court and yet they corroborate. The people of Finance are there, the Attorney-General is there – the group of people who eat the money supposed to benefit our country; that is a very sad situation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we will be rising at 6 p.m. because this is the holy period and we need to allow our colleagues to go. So please bear that in mind. 

5.44
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the committee for the good report. You are aware what we are talking about what touches the lives of the people and I suppose if we are going to rise soon, you would give people an opportunity to discuss this further tomorrow. They are many units that were privatised, which we have lost. 

Honourable members, I want to give you information because we have got the opportunity. Keith Muhakanizi has been in charge of the Privatisation Unit and now he is the PS and Secretary to Treasury. You have said that they paid 5,000 people yet the Auditor-General has discovered they were 1,800 – (Interjections) – whatever. Just get the difference from 5,000 to know how many were paid and a one Keith Muhakanizi knows about it because he has been in charge. 

For your information, when we last heard reports, we borrowed Shs 200 billion to privatize, and we got back Shs 120 billion. That means we lost Shs 80 billion. We sold our property at a loss and we already have to pay the loan of Shs 200 billion yet the properties we sold could not even cover the money we borrowed. 

Even under the law, it is clear that every year, the Privatisation Unit is supposed to report twice to Parliament. But they have never reported; I do not know when they last reported. That is why when we were making the PPP law; you remember the people of Finance wanted the Privatisation Unit to be converted into the unit managing the PPP. You now understand why; the person who was behind it was Keith Muhakanizi. He knows that is where he has come from and that is where he is going. 

Having said that, I want to disagree with the honourable members; I do not know why this committee is shy. You find the Attorney-General making two opinions – it means initially they had promised him something. When they withdrew the promise, he changed his opinion – (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are rules against imputing improper motive.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, Mr Speaker, I have withdrawn that. But he made the first opinion and then in the middle of things, he changed it. What motivated him to first accept and then change his mind? I cannot withdraw that because he made an opinion and changed it – (Interruption)

MR AYENA: Thank you my colleague for giving way. The information I want to give you is that not only did he change his own opinion to H.E the President, but when he changed it, he did not tender the second opinion to the President. So as of now, the President thinks the opinion he gave earlier still stands. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you can see. That is really very dangerous for a whole Attorney-General to make two opinions; we must investigate the motive. But before that, I agree that hon. Nyombi does not qualify to be the Attorney-General because you cannot give two opinions on the same case at the same time. 

Secondly, Coffee Marketing Board was built by unions; that is why I want to agree with my brother who talked of Masaka. Unfortunately, it is not Privatisation Union which sold Masaka Cooperative Union; it is you people of Masaka Cooperatives –(Interjections)– yes and I am going to explain further. 

As we talk about Coffee Marketing Board, what have they lost? The property we are talking about in UK, and in Mombasa which is now under Uganda Property Holdings, it is property for three institutions. It is for Coffee Marketing Board, Lint Marketing Board and Produce Marketing Board. Now the people who are enjoying these things are those guys in Finance under a company called Uganda Property Holdings.

I can give you some of the information on what we discovered when we did some inquiry. They would collect money from other property, for example, in the US and London and claim they were going to rehabilitate the property in Mombasa. That was being done every year and so this company would not make any profits. When we said that the company be scrapped, they immediately paid off dividends of Shs 100 million to the Treasury yet they had been declaring losses. So, I asked myself how the losses turned into dividends at such a short notice. And who was heading it? It was Mr Keith Muhakanizi who is the Secretary to the Treasury.

Mr Speaker, in 1993 – I wish the former chairman of Masaka was here, he would have heard this statement. Anyway, take the information to him. In 1993, we liberalised the economy, a process that saw us sell off cooperatives – there was the Coffee Stabilisation Fund raised. The money was supposed to be kept for farmers and it was Shs 59 billion.

In 1993 – as they compensated the workers, there was need to compensate the farmers because their money, Shs 59 billion, was in the Central Bank but had been taken because there had been a coffee boom. But still this money would be given to the farmers - and that is the reason why I am telling my brother from the Masaka Cooperative Union and those from the Banyankore Kweteerana – we have some money that we should quickly get up to demand. I have the values you are talking about and let me give them to you.

That Bugolobi plant was built – I will tell you because I have evidence – one of my uncles was a board member of the Coffee Marketing Board – at Shs $ 100 million. It was the best in the world at the time. The purpose was for it to process off clean coffee though they had put an extension for their own called The Uganda Nescafe, which was to do value addition.

But what happened is that the government that was talking about adding value was the same government that banned value addition. When they took over that Bugolobi plant, they started to uproot machinery and you know –(Interjections)– because you stay along that road, you know what has happened. 

Mr Speaker, that is why I want to thank Parliament for resolving to investigate PU. I am so glad about that. I am passionate about that. I have information that I will take there –(Interjections)– don’t worry, yes they have sold it – the people sold it – even when somebody dies, usually post-mortem is carried out. So, we should carry out a post-mortem to establish what led to the death of –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, would you like to conclude?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, I am considering that but you will recall that you made a comment that we need to debate issues here. (Laughter) Anyway, Mr Speaker, in that context, we need to conduct a quality investigation on PU. But there is this issue of the former employees who are suffering. Let me also inform the MPs for the workers that there are former workers of the defunct Uganda Hotels Ltd – you know them. I can tell you that there was an old man who used to travel from Mbale to Finance until he died. He used to work at the Mt Elgon Hotel and whenever they went to Ministry of Finance – you can imagine even when I wrote to them, they replied saying that those people had been paid but that through somebody who the former workers didn’t know. That is why we need to carry out an investigation on PU.

Mr Speaker, the Cooperative Bank was sold off – the resolution that – I am saying this because I am a farmer – but the amount at which it was sold has never been declared. And whoever knows something about Cooperative Bank will tell you that it used to help farmers so much. But worst of all, we had invested money into it; Masaka Cooperative Union, Bugisu Cooperative Union and some individuals like I, had invested money into that bank.

So, Mr Speaker, during the investigation, we need to find out what happened to Cooperative Bank. Where is the money that belonged to the investors or shareholders because I had bought shares in it as an investor?

In conclusion, but maybe before I conclude, let me say something about the Uganda Cooperative Transport Union where the chairman of the committee –(Laughter)– yes, you know. Of course at that time we would go with bear hands and with gloves. Let me tell you this. We got $4 million during that Parliament – hon. Felix Okot-Ogong, you know about it – that $4 million was used to buy trucks. But nobody has ever accounted for it. There are people who ate that money but are still walking on the streets of Kampala –(Interruption)

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, hon. Nanadala-Mafabi, for giving way. It is fortunate that I am around because when that loan was acquired – I wasn’t the General Manager, but I worked in the ICTU. Members may recall that UCTU provided its own trucks - incidentally cooperatives, as the member may be aware, are private. But at the time when Uganda had problems with Kenya, there was need to have an alternative route opened up to Dar-es-Salaam. 

All the trucks that were used in opening up that route belonged to the Uganda Cooperative Transport Union. More than 80 trucks were used for that emergency purpose and they were all grounded.  We contacted Government for compensation. In the process, Government looked for a loan and bought trucks before giving only 23 of them to UTCU yet we had actually lost more than 80 trucks.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you can now see how bad it is going to be. Let me tell you something for your own consumption. We used to sell coffee under the Coffee Marketing Board – I am saying all this because farmers and the people of Uganda lost money – through Mombasa to German. But what would happen was that between the plant at Bugolobi and Mombasa, coffee would get missing and also while on the Ocean. However, the most interesting thing was that while the coffee would go missing, the trucks would not. The trucks with their drivers would be seen but with no coffee. Even the ship would be seen but with the coffee missing. I am sure the former General Manager of UTCU knows part of this story because he got the trucks – the trucks would be seen but with coffee stolen.

Having said that - I want to believe that more information will be unveiled during that investigation. But, Mr Speaker, I want to request you to set a day, which is not very far – we wanted to discuss the –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable member, you know how matters are brought to this House. I cannot set a date to discuss the PU. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, Mr Speaker –(Interjections)– what? You have moved a motion?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the motion?

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I had proposed, by way of an amendment, that we have an audit on the PU. And two, the specific recommendation in regard to the Attorney-General - may be the wording may not have been very clear but –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but what he is saying is that we should create a date to debate PU. You are proposing an investigation that will possibly lead to a debate in a few months. But he is saying we should debate PU in the nearby future and if we are to debate it in the nearby future, we know how to proceed to get there. It cannot be the Speaker’s directive.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Speaker, why I am crying for investigation, since my sister read for telecommunication, I will also give you another one. You will see dangerous it is.

When we wanted to add money UTL such that we have our shares remaining at 51 percent, we needed only $9 million which we had on account. PU and under the leadership of Keith said, “We do not have money, you dilute our shares.” When they diluted they eventually chased us without a shillings.

Kinyara Sugar Workers, the best investment in Uganda is sugar where you cannot go wrong, not for importing.
They sold the shares which the valuer had put at $14 million; they sold them in instalments at $7 million. That is privatisation that we are talking about and who loses? The people of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, I want to move a motion - I have legal counsel here for free, I am going to organise this motion and I will bring it tomorrow and I am sure I am going to get enough signatures for it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By that, are you seeking leave of the Speaker to do it?

MR NANDALA MAFABI: I am seeking leave of the Speaker of the House to introduce a motion to investigate the privatisation unit. Why I am raising this is because I am so passionate and I am feeling bad.

I can tell you that in 2009, I was invited to attend a meeting of coffee and I went as a chairman of Bugisu Cooperative Union in New York. While I was there, these guys were discussing their planes, one saying his is Gulf Stream 6, the other 5. They asked me Nandala which one is your plane. I said for me I am on KLM. That means that farmers are the richest people in this world but there are few individuals who make them poor. That is the reason that I would be interested to bring a motion to discuss PU but specifically cooperative unions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you are not clear, what are you specifically seeking leave for.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Again my legal advisors never advised me well. I am seeking leave to bring a motion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe you consult and give a formal notice to the Speaker. It might be more helpful.

6.04
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are not closing the debate today because we have to close at 6 p.m. and we will not conclude today. Then I have Kyegegwa, Lira, Rukungiri, Mbale, Leader of the Opposition and Kasanda. Those ones were not here when I was making the list. We will continue with you tomorrow but these ones are the ones that I had already recorded. Finally, I will hear from you.

MS KABAHENDA: I want to thank the chairperson and the committee members for the report and cooling the worries of the people who were suffering under CMB and having not been paid.
On page 74 up to 75, I see a letter that the Rt hon. Nsibambi wrote to his Excellency who had assigned him to host a meeting and discuss the issues of the former employees of CMBL. On page 75, observation C, is where I get worried. That it is likely to create a precedent referable to all former employees of divested government public enterprises some of which have similar claims pending in court. I feel sad about this; that means there are other former employees of the divested government public enterprises who if they have no capacity to go to court are just languishing. Could it be this government that wants to cone people who tirelessly worked for their money? Could it be this government who could come up with this observation and even put it in print? We have sadists in our institutions because these people worked diligently and tirelessly and they needed to be paid because it was contractual.

If these observations can come in black and white like this, then I think Government must answer. Is this what they want to tell us that those who go to court are the ones to get and those who don’t are put under a blanket and we cover up when they offered their services? Some are in their homes; some in their tombs and they could not get this money.

I would like to concur with hon. Alaso’s proposal that while we look at the assets that were disposed of by PU, we would also want a comprehensive report about the divested government public enterprises and the status of the former employees. They must come here and commit for those who they paid and for those who were not paid and we want to know their fate. Now that those cannot go to court, can this Parliament offer them that free service to speak for them so that they are also paid even before they go to court?

I seek clarification from the chairperson on observation C (3); that the Rt hon. Nsibambi directed the parties that these negotiations be conducted and concluded within two weeks. I looked for the letter of 28 September to see whether they got any communication that that shows that on 28 September 2009, there was a report and I did not see it in the annexes. Could it have been made or this did not happen? I want to see a recommendation to this effect. Mr Speaker, I want thank you very much and very much and to add my voice to the recommendation for investigation and also a comprehensive report about the divested public enterprises, the status and the disposal of our assets.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, additional to the names that I read; that was Lira, Rukungiri Municipality, Mbale Municipality, LOP who I think will be speaking towards the end and member for Kasanda. I now have Obongi, Kaberamaido District, Gulu District, Arua District, Oyam and Kigulu – (Interjections)- I have not had any interest being expressed from that part of the country. Hon. Members, this House is adjourned to tomorrow, 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.10 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 23 July 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)











