

Wednesday, 13 July 2016

Parliament met at 2.16 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Order Paper you have received does not have the administration of oaths. It had not been pointed out to the Speaker’s office that some of the ex officio ministers who have not taken oath would be ready to take their oaths this afternoon. However, we have received three of them; therefore, we are going to accordingly alter the Order Paper to accommodate the administration of oaths to those ministers. Let us start with that.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

1. Kirunda Kivejinja

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I welcome you to this Parliament again. This Parliament has been your home for some time. You are welcome again and congratulations. 

I give you our Rules of Procedure, which will enable you process your business in the House, and also a copy of the Constitution to ensure that whatever you do falls within the four corners of our laws. Thank you.

2. Irene Margaret Muloni

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister. I welcome you to this Parliament again where you have been. I also know you are not a stranger to this House and to the Front Bench. What you are going to do is exactly what you have been doing for the last five years. I, therefore, welcome you and congratulations. 

I give you a copy of our Rules of Procedure which you already know, and a copy of the Constitution to enable you to perform all your work within the provision of the Constitution. Congratulations.

3. Peace Mutuuzo 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I welcome you to this Parliament and congratulations. This is where the business of the people of Uganda is conducted and you have been called upon to do just that. 

I give you a copy of our Rules of Procedure so that you know how to process the business that you will bring to the House, and a copy of the Constitution so that whatever you do is within the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. You are welcome and congratulations.

PETITION ON THE WELFARE AND TRANSPORTATION IN ISLAND DISTRICTS AND CONSTITUENCIES

2.31
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Mr Speaker we, Members of the Island districts and constituencies, appreciate the work that this Parliament has been given to study and to provide transport to all Members of Parliament. We appreciate the money that is given to us to get the vehicles, bearing in mind that the cars move – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, where is the petition? Can we defer this matter to tomorrow to enable the Member to present a petition to the House? Let us handle it tomorrow. 

MR OUMA: Okay, thank you.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO STANDING AND SECTORAL COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 148 AND 176 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE RESPECTIVELY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we altered the Order Paper to accommodate the administration of oaths, there should have been a slot for communication from the Chair. However, that was not done. There were Members who had indicated that they had matters to raise immediately after the communication from the Chair. Maybe I could use this time to accommodate them so that they can raise those matters right now and then we proceed with the business of the designation. 

I would like at this time to also facilitate the process of handling designation to committees. It has come to the attention of the Speaker that there needs to be some harmonization of numbers. Some committees are oversubscribed and others are undersubscribed and yet the rules are clear about how many Members can be in each committee. I, therefore, ask the whips responsible for this, particularly from the Opposition and the Government Chief Whip, to stand aside and do this quickly so that when we come back, we are able to quickly harmonize this. 

Of course, that does not include the list from the Speaker’s office, which has to do with the designation of the Members from the independent bench. I need you to consult quickly and come back and we proceed as we are raising these urgent matters of national importance.

2.35
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As we go to consult, we also need your guidance on the rule regarding the membership of the committees. The rule says 15 to 30 Members, but this rule applied when we were 370. Now we are 427; do we still abide by this rule of not going beyond 30 Members? If we have colleagues who are left out, what do we do with them?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is part of it; once you have done the consultations, then I will guide where there are challenges. However, there is a possibility that there might not be any challenges.

MR NIWAGABA: I would like to raise an additional point of procedure. Would it not have been prudent that this House first adopts its own Rules of Procedure where matters of the membership of the committees, in terms of numbers and the like, are considered before we go into actual business? It is my opinion and I am requesting for the Speaker’s guidance on that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was a ruling by the Chief Justice in 2011 that the Rules of Procedure of Parliament are the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and there is no need to adopt any other Rules of Procedure of Parliament because there are always Rules of Procedure of Parliament. We are bound by that. We are just proceeding that way and we do not need to adopt any rules. The rules are as they are now and that is why we are proceeding like this.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. The rules of this House are constitutional under Article 94 of the Constitution. Once you read that together with Article 96, which deals with the dissolution of Parliament, the Constitution envisages that there should be rules for any of this business. 

Now that we are going into details, I am aware that at some particular point we may have to adopt the rules. However, we are doing it in a difficult situation because we seem to be putting the cart before the horse. Ideally, for the proper management of this House, basing on Article 94 that properly stipulates the need for rules of Parliament and going by the precedents in the Seventh, Eighth and Ninth parliaments, each parliament has their rules. 

Even if it is by way of adoption, let this Parliament adopt those rules. If we need to amend or adopt those rules, so be it, but well aware that we are encumbered and aware that in Article 79 of the Constitution, Parliament is entrusted with the role of protecting this Constitution and the democratic governance of this country. This is the highest pillar of democracy in this country. What is started at the local level ends up at the national level. 

It is to that extent, Mr Speaker, that I entreat you to consider that this Parliament cannot proceed on the past rules and yet it is properly given and provided for under this Constitution. I know that when we started, we quickly formed the Appointments Committee for good reasons. Therefore, there is no reason why we should not constitute the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to expedite the rules of the House so that we can proceed formally and legally.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I stated earlier, there is no gap in the law. This was stated by the Chief Justice in 2011. Parliament may have been dissolved but the Rules of Procedure of Parliament remained; they were not dissolved with Parliament.

When the Tenth Parliament started, we used the same rules to carry out some procedures in the House, including the election of the Speaker and that of the Deputy Speaker. They were held under the authority of the rules as they are. The Chief Justice, as I had stated earlier, made this clear; he said that the Rules of Procedure of Parliament will always be the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. A particular Parliament may amend the rules to suit its own circumstances, but they will always be rules. We are proceeding that way.

Should the need arise that the new rules committee should look at the rules again and look at where we need improvements and some changes, that will come and it will be done. However, that will not amount to adopting new Rules of Procedure but adopting amendments to the existing Rules of Procedure of the House.  Can we proceed?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, in case Parliament in its wisdom amends the rules, for instance on the designation of Members to committees, and yet some Members think that Parliament in its right needs to elect its own leaders at the committee and commission level, what would happen? What you seem to be doing is to tie us to past practice and yet we have moved from that.  Shall we be legislating our rules retrospectively? 

Mr Speaker, I can tell you, for instance, that there is contention on how the leadership of this Parliament is designated. Members feel that once we reach this Parliament, Members should be free to have a hand in the governance and leadership of this House. If the chief whip, for example, comes up with a designation list, it has its problems. How does one emerge to lead in this House? –(Interruption) 

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I find it very hard to interrupt my friend, but it is also very hard for me to continue hearing my friend engaging the Speaker on a position that the Speaker has correctly guided. 

In our Rules of Procedure, it is clear that if you want to challenge the ruling or guidance of the Speaker, you have to move a substantive motion. Is it in order for the honourable member to continue engaging you on a position that you have already ruled on?   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member for Lwemiyaga, or any other Member, has every right to engage with the Speaker. However, that notwithstanding, in law we say that laws are implemented as they are and not as they ought to be. That applies to rules. Rules are implemented as they are and not as they ought to be. If they are amended subsequently, the amendments will be taking into consideration the events that could have been changed as a result of changes in the law.
 
Like we say, rules are made before the game and not during or after the game. These rules were made before this game. If there is need to change them, then we will change them. However, as of now, we have rules that are going to guide our proceedings. Let us proceed that way. 

Have the two Members from both sides consulted on these matters? Would you like to do that instead of rising at the same time when I have already directed that you consult? (Laughter) Are you rising on the same issue?

2.45
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I do not know, Mr Speaker. I thank you very much. I would like to request that we further adjust the Order Paper so that we do the designation of Members of the Pan-African Parliament today, so that they can proceed to South Africa and get involved in the business in South Africa. The NRM party is ready but I do not know whether the Opposition is ready. In case they are ready, I am requesting that we designate them today.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, that will be accommodated at the right time. However, the reason as to why I am raising this is because the lists that have been supplied to the Speaker’s office have metamorphosed about five times now. Even as I was sitting here, another list came and I do not know from where. The list reads, “Standing Committee on Budget” and it has names. So, you can see that more lists are still coming in. That is why I am calling for harmonisation, so that we have a position on how we are going to proceed. Otherwise, from the Speaker’s desk, it is almost impossible to know which list is the right one. Therefore, can the two of you please consult briefly on this and then come back and see how to proceed?

2.58
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Mr Speaker, as you said earlier, we are going to begin the consultations. However, I want to draw your attention to the fact that since yesterday you allowed free sitting, I think some colleagues who are eager to join our side permanently took it for granted that every day of the plenary, they can casually walk over to our side. I wanted to draw your attention to our rules so that you can guide us properly, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, for purposes of proper proceedings of this House and for purposes of proper balance and proper identification of Members in terms of processing the debates, the House is arranged in a certain way. Members of the Government sit on my right and Members of the Opposition sit on my left. Also, with an arrangement previously made with the Opposition, a section of my left has been designated to accommodate independent Members of this House. Therefore, on my immediate left, starting here near the Speaker’s Chair, is where the Leader of the Opposition sits with his Members up to about halfway of this bench, and then from there the independent Members sit. 

In the past, in the middle there used to be a category of Members, and it does look as if those former Members are insisting, but that category does not exist in this Parliament as yet. However, we have allowed the overflow from my right hand to fill the space in the middle and also in the back.

If there is a Member from the Government side who is sitting on my left, before you are construed otherwise, please relocate to my right. However, if you voluntarily would like to stay there, there might be issues that will affect your very existence in this House. Therefore, can we reorganise.

2.50
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I rise to put forward a modest proposal under our Rules of Procedure, Rule 9, which gives the discretion to the Speaker to reserve a seat for every Member of Parliament. I am aware that Rule 9(2) and (3) provide for where the Government side ought to sit and where the Opposition ought to sit, however the Speaker has the prerogative to determine where a Member sits.

Given the sitting constraints that we have, until such a time as we get sufficient seats, I would implore the Speaker, as a matter of practice, to give a general reservation that Members may sit where they deem to be comfortable for them because under Rule 9(4) you are obliged to ensure that all Members of Parliament have a comfortable seat. Mr Speaker, considering the situation as it is today, I implore your discretion and your indulgence to provide a comfortable seat for every Member, which may include ordering that some Members may sit where they are not supposed to sit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reason why there is a requirement to separate Members is to enable the Speaker to process and balance debate, and also when it comes to voting, to be able to clearly tell what is going on. In situations where there is no voting required or a matter that is contentious and would require Members to show clearly where they belong on particular issues, usually some accommodation is made. 

Yesterday, for example, there was no issue that would require the House to show its clear distinction of opinions on specific matters. However, the business today is of such nature; if you look at the Order Paper, we have designation of Members to committees and then item No. 5, which is on that motion which is going to be brought by the Minister of Local Government.

If there is a strong feeling that the proceedings of the House would not be properly assisted when Members are seated anywhere in the House, then that would be considered. However, in the opinion of the Speaker, during the debate that we are going to have - I have urgent matters that are going to be raised by the members of Kioga County, Kumi Municipality, Bukonjo West, Kasese Municipality and Adjumani District; I do not think those issues would require us to say NRM, FDC or UPC - such issues may not arise. Also, the issue of the motion that is coming might not require us to be in such divisions and clearly demarcated areas. 

Therefore, if there is no strong objection to this sitting arrangement, given the pressure that we have, let us accommodate Members to sit freely, if people do not feel strongly about it.
 
MR NIWAGABA: Rt hon. Speaker, I respectfully agree with your observation. However, Rule 9, which my learned friend and senior Member of the legal profession has cited, particularly Rule 9(1), is conditional on Rule 9(2) and (3). However, the practice has been that if it is supposed to be free sitting, then the presiding Speaker needs to discuss the matter with the Leader of the Opposition and the Government Chief Whip. Once that is not done, the side that sits comfortably will not be interested in being made uncomfortable. 

Since it is apparently clear that everybody is seated comfortably, I implore you to let the sitting remain as it is now. However, for future purposes, once need arises and consultations are made, we can always give accommodation to our colleagues who are not seated comfortably. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is exactly what the Speaker was doing. He was consulting with the Members who are freely seated and those who are not freely seated, to see if we could have an agreement in this particular sitting in order for us to proceed with the business of today. Is that okay? 

MR MATHIAS MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As we wait for harmonisation from the whips, I had wanted to bring to light some institutional memory; the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, to which I was a Member in the last session of Parliament, had a draft amendment of the rules ready. To avoid this hustle over time and to accommodate the sentiments of hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, we would need to bring this report as fast as possible to the committee that will be constituted, or to the chairperson, to look at the draft and perhaps go through it and consult a little further. 

I think you we had done justice to this draft. We need to do this so that amendment of the rules of the Tenth Parliament comes first to accommodate some of the emerging issues like numbers, committees and related matters. I had wanted to alert the House on the availability of this document. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The problem we have right now is that we do not even have the committees, but I was just seeking your indulgence. 

MS JALIA BINTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. From the way we are proceeding, it seems like in the near future, we are not likely to address the issue of space in the Chamber. I would like to ask the Government to tell us what programmes they have for the Members to sit comfortably in this House. We are creating new districts and constituencies day after day. By the end of 2018, we shall have even more Members in this House. Can we get to know from the Government what plans they have for us to be able to sit in a dignified way, according to the Rules of Procedure? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.01
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, the Parliamentary Commission already has plans in place to ensure that adequate space is created for Members of Parliament to sit comfortably. Thank you-(Interjections) – On the question of when, I think we can ask the Parliamentary Commission to make sure that a report is available tomorrow so that colleagues know that there are concrete plans to have Members of Parliament comfortably accommodated in the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. What the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has said is correct. The Parliamentary Commission is in the process of concluding contracts with the contractors to start the process of constructing the new Chamber. It might take long and it might not be immediate, but the process is ongoing. However, it does not cure the immediate problem of shortage of space that we face. 

Honourable members, in the course of the consultation we have done, for this particular sitting while we await a longer term settlement of this matter, let Members sit freely where they are comfortable. Thereafter, we shall see how to proceed in the future. Please, find a place and sit comfortably. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I understand the Leader of Government Business is part of the Parliamentary Commission -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, those are the emerging issues that happen in spite of the two weeks induction that took place in this Parliament. It is always a learning process and Members shall know that entrance is a preserve of the Speaker and his or her entourage.

Mr Speaker, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is part of the Parliamentary Commission. However, in my opinion, I see the Executive putting you in a difficult situation to constantly negotiate your way out on how to sit Members. It is not only a simple matter, but Parliament of Uganda is part of the Commonwealth Parliamentary System and the sides are clear. We are a product of the Commonwealth, therefore it is not easy to say that we can cross over. I can tell you a serious litigation can ensue and it can result into the loss of a seat here. 

I am surprised that the Deputy Attorney-General was casually saying that it can be handled and yet the other day he was busy in the Supreme Court and the Constitutional Court arguing how such space is not envisaged in the Constitution. He was arguing on how Members who sit here must leave and vacate their seats in Parliament. He made a spirited fight in court. However, when he comes around and makes claims under rule 9, I do not find it honest enough for him to take that stand-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, can we leave the matters of court in court and the matters of the House for the House. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I was only supplementing that this matter needs to be handled as a matter of urgency. Members need to be dignified in the discharge of their duties, which we were elected to do. 

Mr Speaker, you will soon find a problem with quorum because the bigger the Parliament, the bigger the share of the quorum that must be in Parliament and Members will find reason to absent themselves. As we continue moving motions for creation of new districts, Government should know that this is more or less a colonial Parliament. The colonialists had foresight to know that at some point, African leaders would surge their Members in Parliament but they made us this facility here.

However, now that we are in charge of our country, something related to that must be done than hiding under the commission and the Speaker. That would help us to discharge our work. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there have actually been plans drawn for the new Chamber of this House, except that it is supposed to accommodate up to 500 Members of Parliament but that might have to be reviewed because we are already about 427. So, it might have to be looked at again. However, that process is on-going. 

Like I said, it may not immediately solve the problem but at least something is being done about what should happen in future. Let us not dwell on that now, but let us see how best we can handle this situation. Are you seeking clarification from the Speaker, honourable member?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: On the same issue, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clarification from the Speaker?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: From the Prime Minister (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is not holding the Floor. Honourable, I would like you to guide us on what you would like to achieve at this moment because the Prime Minister is not holding the Floor and you cannot seek clarification from the Speaker. On what matter do you rise? Is it procedure?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: It is procedure. (Laughter)  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand on a point of procedure. I feel very uncomfortable when the Leader of Government Business comes and sweet-talks the nation that the issue is going to be solved. You know very well that putting up the new chambers will not take less than five years. These Members are going to be in the House for five years. It is not going to be completed within the period. As he says, the commission is working on the sitting arrangement of this House. Putting up new Chamber for 500 people will not take less than five years. Are we, therefore, going to continue like this?

You can see how Members are seated. Possibly, we could avoid sitting in here and we go to the conference centre - that is where people are going to sit comfortably - or to the other hotel where we were doing induction from. Otherwise, to keep us here and we think that we are going to be comfortable, I do not see this possible.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Parliamentary Commission will find an appropriate solution to this problem.

MR ABDU KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been a Member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs since 2001 and the Parliamentary Commission is one of the institutions which is overseen by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I find it quite uncomfortable to give this information, but where you have a Government which has facts and cannot bring them on the table, I have no option but to stand in for the Government.

In the last two financial years, we have been budgeting for the construction of chambers. We have actually allocated money twice - in the last financial year and also this financial year. I thought that colleagues on the other side would bring these facts out to honourable colleagues. For two financial years, we have budgeted for the money. What we should be asking now is how far this process has gone. 

I also thought, again, that the colleagues on the front bench of the other side would be answering these questions. However, I will stand in for them. You see, this chamber is supposed to take only two years but the process has been stopped because there has been a whistle blower. The matter was referred to the IGG, but the IGG was of the opinion that since no decision has been taken, let the matter be referred to the PPDA. That is what led to the stopping of the process of contracting somebody to construct the new chambers. Is this too much for you people to explain to this House that you need an Opposition Member to come and explain what Government is doing? (Laughter)

Honourable colleagues, now that I take on this responsibility, I would like to assure the House that the process is on –(Laughter)- and the Parliamentary Commission has so far saved money from two financial years to have this process take off. Once it takes off, in a period of 24 months to 36 months, we shall have the new Chamber. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you have just done what is necessary because that responsibility does not rest with Executive; it rests with the Parliamentary Commission. It should have been the Speaker’s office, as leader of the Parliamentary Commission, to communicate this. However, that is the situation where we are. We expect this process to kick off and these matters to be handled. In the meantime, we will be looking for solutions to the immediate problem that we face.

Honourable members, yesterday we had asked if the Prime Minister will be ready for the Prime Minister’s Question Time today and he had said that he would have the time. I have five Members who had urgent matters to raise and we have not been able to accommodate them and it is now time for the Prime Minister’s Question Time. I do not know whether we can handle that. 

We also have pending business on the Order Paper. I do not know whether we want to do the Prime Minister’s Question Time briefly, for about 30 minutes instead of an hour. We will do it in 30 minutes and then revert to the Order Paper and finish the business that is there. 

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

3.12
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to ask the Prime Minister to tell this House whether it is impossible for Government to organise seeds to help farmers. This is because the seeds that our farmers got in the first season have been affected by the dry spell. Now that the rains have started, we still have hope that the second season may do better than the first one. Thank you

3.14
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, the seeds that are supplied by Government are got on the basis of the budgetary provisions available. Therefore, it will depend on whether some money has been saved to be able to effectively respond to this new situation. 

This is a matter that the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and NAADS will follow up to see how best Government can come in to supplement the additional requirements for farmers to get seeds.

3.15
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. While campaigning in Mbale, the President promised the people of Budadiri that he was going to build a road from Nalugugu-Mutufu-Budadiri to Namagumba and another road from Magale to Lwakhakha (Mbale–Bududa-Magale–Lwakhakha). He also promised to work on the municipality roads that pass via his state house in Mbale. To date, nothing has been done.

Taking into consideration that the issue of the roads was raised on this Floor and you answered that the money for Magale and Kanungu was available but as I speak, nothing has been done; can you tell the people of Bugisu when these roads are going to be worked on?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, during his campaigns, President Museveni said that in the five years, under the NRM manifesto, he will cover many things, including some of the roads that my brother has talked about. Government is barely one month in power; give President Museveni and his Government time to implement the campaign and manifesto promises in a scheduled and well considered manner.

3.16
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This Parliament approved a loan to upgrade the Kigumba-Masindi-Bulima Road. It is now six months down the road and there are no signs of contractors. I would like to ask the Prime Minister when Government intends to start constructing this road and what has happened to the money that we approved. This money is generating interest and Ugandans have started paying this interest. Can we get to know where this money is and when you intend to start constructing this road? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as has been earlier stated by one of us, to be specific hon. Katuntu, there have been some issues of delays in projects mainly linked to procurement. Nevertheless, for the specific details of the Kigumba road, one would need to get specific information from the minister responsible for works so that the timetable for that particular road can then be known.

I, therefore, advise my colleague to link up with the Minister of Works and Transport for specific details, which she can in turn share with the people in the area concerned.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you will recognise and appreciate the Speaker’s challenge at the moment, given that this Parliament has just started. I will ask the Member who has been standing to raise your issue and introduce yourself as well.

3.18
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a brief question to the Prime Minister. Last evening, we saw on various television stations people in police and military uniforms waving sticks and beating up people who were standing at the roadsides. This morning, the same people in police and military uniforms were beating people on Entebbe Road. We want to know who these people are. What should Ugandans do when people with sticks in these uniforms beat them?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the point raised by hon. Mwijukye about police or people in police uniform involved in beating people would need to be examined thoroughly so that we know who is responsible; why they are behaving that way and, therefore, what appropriate measures should be taken in case they have gone beyond what the law permits.

Therefore, this is a matter to be investigated by the honourable minister responsible for internal affairs. I propose that after that, the Minister of Internal Affairs can give a statement to the House to explain the point that hon. Mwijukye has just raised.

3.20
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister when Bunanga Primary School will be worked on. The President, during his 2011 campaigns, promised to have four classroom blocks constructed. When he came this time round, because of the chaos we anticipated, we had to transfer him to another place. May I know when this will happen because people are impatiently waiting but because they are NRM, they are still hoping for the best? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, one general comment is that the NRM Government is committed to fulfilling all its pledges. It is true that during implementation, there may be delays or some issues but Government will fulfil its promises.

On the specific school, one would need to get information from the minister responsible for education. This would enable us know what has caused the delay or what the plan is, so that the honourable member can share such useful information with the citizens and then they can be settled knowing that their school is going to be worked on.

3.23
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is about animals. We border the national park but whenever people go to pick firewood from this park, they are punished but when animals come and destroy their crops after toiling for long, they are not considered. When these animals come to the gardens and we eat them, we are put in jail. Are animals better than people? (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we unanimous agree that we should do whatever we can to protect the animals that we look after and those that are in the national parks. It is true that sometimes poaching goes on. However, poaching is prohibited by law and the law should be enforced to protect the animals. 

With regard to animals coming to encroach on people’s crops, I would need to be guided by the Speaker as to whether there is any law that would be invoked in order to protect the crops. However, in a nutshell, I believe the answer is close cooperation between the communities neighbouring the parks and Uganda Wildlife Authority to ensure that when people are harassed by these animals, the necessary measures are taken to prevent the harassment or to deal with dangerous animals, so that people can be at peace and the animals can also live in peace.

3.25
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Towards the end of the last Parliament, there was a motion moved supposedly by a private Member who also happened to be the Chairperson of the Committee on National Resources. Unfortunately, he lost elections. At that time, debate ensued in this House that it should be Government to move that motion to de-gazette forests.

My question is: when is Government bringing the motion? This is because there are forest reserves that people from different places want de-gazetted and also in the interest of constructing the industrial park for which we were told that Turkey gave us almost Shs 1 trillion. We need to de-gazette some forest reserves, including one in Nebbi Town, which is becoming a municipality soon. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, that motion raised quite a lot of heat in the House and it became clear that some of the forest reserves that were supposed to be de-gazetted had issues that needed to be investigated.

It was agreed, as hon. Anywarach said, that Government carries out some investigation to be sure that the forests being de-gazetted were indeed being de-gazetted on correct grounds. The minister responsible for forestry should be coming to this House; in fact, by the end of this month, he should be able to give us a report on the investigation. 

However, we also agreed that major projects like the standard gauge railway, the dry port and others should not be interfered with. Their development and designs should go on in spite of some of the land being used as forest reserves. Within the next couple of weeks, the minister responsible for forestry will give a report to the House on this important matter.

3.28
MR ANTHONY SSEMULI (NRM, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a question for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. The Land Act establishes land tribunals but as a nation, we are experiencing land evictions. This is one of the issues which was discussed yesterday. Land tribunals were established to handle complaints resulting from land disputes; I would like to know when we are operationalising land tribunals.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I agree with the honourable member and as we discussed, land disputes and evictions are rampant and are obstructing our development process and they should be dealt with quickly.

I also share the same view that land dispute resolution mechanisms would be one of the best approaches. Fortunately, the minister responsible for lands is here and with the permission of the Speaker, I can ask her to give more elaborate information –(Interjections)– Since it is my time and there are huge protests, can you whisper to the Prime Minister? 

There are ongoing consultations on the matter between the Attorney-General and the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development which consultations are going to be coordinated by the Prime Minister after this session. The minister responsible will then give a statement in this House, if she is given time tomorrow, so that colleagues can be rest assured about the measures being taken by Government.

3.31
MR GIDEON ONYANGO (Independent, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is on the issue of rural electrification in Samia Bugwe North.

In 2014, we had a by-election for the LCV and during that time, Government was under pressure to deliver electricity to a number of subcounties within the constituency. Efforts were made and the process got underway; electricity poles were put up in various places and wires lined up. However, immediately after the by-election, the NRM candidate won and the process ended there. It is unfortunate –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to ask the question.

MR ONYANGO: Yes, I am giving the background to the question. Last month, the people of Umeme started withdrawing the materials that had already been delivered to various places, including the electricity poles and wires.

My question is: Was it in the programme of Government, or was it just to enable the NRM candidate to go through and immediately after that, the process would be halted? Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the National Resistance Movement does not use trickery to win votes. It uses clear and open methods to tell the population what the facts are. If poles were taken and the project started and it has stalled, we would like the minister responsible for energy to give us the facts as to when the project will resume.

However, it is not the policy or practice that the wanainchi would be hoodwinked in order to get votes using lies that power is coming when in fact power was not planned. This is so significant and the minister will come and explain this matter in the House so that it is clear to everybody as to what the programme is. Thank you.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, regarding the Prime Minister’s Question Time, rule 34 (1) says, “There shall be time designated as Prime Minister’s Question Time commencing at 3.00 p.m. every Wednesday.”

However, I am rising on a point of procedure regarding subrule (2) which states, “During the Prime Minister’s Time- (a) the Prime Minister may make a statement, or (b) Questions may be put to the Prime Minister relating to matters of Government policy or the general performance of Government and Government agencies.” 

Specific questions referring to schools, roads or electricity lines are not of a broad policy nature. Issues relating to performance should also be of a general nature. The Prime Minister has been giving haphazard answers and is on the defensive, which is not as it should be. He is supposed to come to Parliament and give specific answers that are detailed and action oriented. However, the way he is answering is like an academic exercise between Members of Parliament to test his brain alertness. Mr Speaker, my humble opinion –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you on procedure?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Yes. The procedural point I am raising is that if we continue like this, the full import of question and answer – This is copied from the Commonwealth and mostly from Britain. The difference we have with Britain is that the Prime Minister is literally the head of Government and the chief executive. In Uganda, the head of Government and the chief executive is the President and the Prime Minister sometimes has to refer to the President to give specific policy guidelines. 

Therefore, the procedural issue I am raising is whether we are proceeding very well on this issue. I beg for your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable, for raising this. This question has been raised a few times. Prime Minister’s Question Time is not meant to test the Prime Minister’s knowledge. You are supposed to ask the Prime Minister about specific policy issues that should be ordinarily within his knowledge as Leader of Government Business. However, if you go and ask about a broken bridge in Omoro County, that might not be ordinarily expected to be within the Prime Minister’s knowledge. Going by the antics of Rt Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, he will not answer it in a way that – He will make you feel that he has answered when he has actually not answered, and all that he is trying to say is, “I cannot know that”.  

Therefore, in order for this House to benefit from this particular provision of our Rules of Procedure, it would be important if we raised broad policy questions to the Prime Minister - What is the state of rural electrification in this country? What is the way forward, given the gaps that are being revealed in several parts of this country? Questions like that can be answered by the Prime Minister.

In the past, we tried to guide that in the week prior, we could generate the general areas where questions are likely to be directed to the Prime Minister so that we give them advance notice and he comes prepared when those questions are raised. However, this also did not work. We are not benefiting very much from the Prime Minister’s Question Time because we are asking specific factual questions, which may not be within the knowledge of the Prime Minister. We had asked the rules committee to try and see if this could be improved so that we can gain from this particular provision of our Rules of Procedure. 

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a concern whether in this particular case, the Prime Minister’s Question Time is relevant because of the systems we have here. We have a presidential system where the Prime Minister is not the chief executive while in Westminster, the Prime Minister is the chief executive and has details of all policy frameworks. He is elected and voted for that purpose and is also responsible for appointing the Cabinet below him. As such, he would instantly answer issues of a broad policy nature.

However, in Uganda, the chief executive is outside Parliament. The President, who is elected as the chief executive of this country, is outside and yet he would ordinarily be responsible for answering these relevant questions that Members are asking. We are borrowing the Prime Minister’s Question Time from Westminster where the Prime Minister in Britain is equivalent to the President in our country.

Therefore, if Members are going below the belt and asking questions, which should ordinarily be asked to ministers, we should limit ourselves and not disturb the Prime Minister with such issues because this would waste the time of Parliament and disturb the Prime Minister. We should allow him to have strategic thought and reserve his mind for those things. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member, for the concern. The Prime Minister in our case is the Leader of Government Business in Parliament and the Prime Minister, to my knowledge, sometimes even chairs Cabinet. It is supposed to be within the knowledge of the Prime Minister because we do not have the President in the House; we have the Prime Minister in the House and he is the Leader of the Government Business. He is our first point of call as Members of Parliament and he must have this information for us. 

However, the kind of information that we should be seeking should not be those factual ones about bridges, schools, among others. They should be about broad policy issues that can guide us. If I talk about boreholes that are broken, it might be difficult for the Prime Minister to know about them.  However, I think it is a kind of hybrid to find an avenue where Members can immediately deal with some specific policy issues and get some guidance on how to proceed. We may need to improve on how we do it but I think it is still relevant somehow. However, the rules committee needs to look at it again and we see how best it can be made to benefit this House.

On that note, the time allotted for this particular matter is over; the 30 minutes are over. Let us go back to the Order Paper. For the future, honourable members, this is the guidance I give now broadly about how to handle Prime Minister’s Question Time. Let us deal with specific broad policy issues. 

I would also love it if matters are raised strongly by the shadow government and from committees. Those bigger issues can be dealt with during the Prime Minister’s Question Time. There are other avenues for dealing with specific issues like questions for oral answer. All those are still avenues that can be used within the House. Let us try and maximize our one hour with the Prime Minister to the benefit of the House. Thank you.

I will take procedure because I do not know how to handle guidance, honourable member.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, you have guided very well on this issue. However, where I get extremely confused is whether presidential promulgations, which later becomes declarations, fall within what constitutes a foundation of Government policy and programmes and sometimes law and whether they should not be raised here. That is where I get extremely confused. 

We have a Committee on Government Assurances that captures whatever is promulgated by the President and becomes a declaration. Mr Speaker, in my constituency, we have a promulgation by the President in 2010 to upgrade a health centre II to a health centre IV. When I was following it up, I went to the planning department of Ministry of Health and they said whatever is a presidential promulgation is captured and taken to that department for immediate or future action. 

We need to be guided in a situation where there is a presidential promulgation and directive. Shouldn’t that constitute what should be raised during the Prime Minister’s Question Time? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Regarding issues of Government assurances, there is a committee responsible for that and there is a procedure of how this House processes matters of Government assurances. We cannot mix the two because the Committee on Government Assurances makes those compilations, they are raised and tabled in the House and then given to the Prime Minister. Thereafter, we expect a memorandum from the Government on what has been done and if there are gaps, how they can be cured or dealt with.

However, the Prime Minister’s Question Time would be different. There are things that Members may want information about - for instance, what is the direction on this particular issue - and then the Prime Minister would be able to deal with that. We still need to clarify some of these issues so that we can move properly. However, the issue of Government assurances can be captured and brought to this House in the same way that committees normally report and then they are processed that same way. Can we make progress?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are 427 Members representing constituencies and sometimes, it may be difficult for Members to categorise those clear-cut questions to the Prime Minister. Since we come from constituencies, our voters raise issues. What is missing here is for the Prime Minister to take charge and we end up not having clear-cut answers. 
In such circumstances, the Prime Minister should indeed take charge and, for example, direct the Minister of Education and Sports. He might not have the answers at his fingertips but we need answers. He can direct the ministers to inform the House within a given period of time so that Members can have a fall-back position and get answers.

MR KIVEJINJA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way and allowing me to inform you basing on the experiences that we have passed through. 

First of all, we must know that we departed a long time ago from being ruled by decrees and directives; we now have procedures. The procedure of Government is that there is a Government headed by the Executive and it is the one that executes, and the President is at the top. 

In running the day to day activities of Government, the Prime Minister is the one in charge. However, he too does not run the activities alone nor does he come and give directives anywhere he meets his ministers. The ministers are there and they are responsible for the different departments. They are ones from whom Parliament should be able to seek written or oral information in order to understand why things are not moving. 

Therefore, the procedure is, and I think the Speaker has guided us very well- If you would like to see the Prime Minister’s face regularly, it is good. However, questions, which always relate to activities of Government, are executed by ministers and, therefore, I would encourage Members to follow that up. I am offering that information because as a deputy to my boss –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, what is the procedural matter you are raising? He has raised his point of procedure and dealt with it immediately. Therefore, I do not have anything to say about that. However, it is a good comment from the Deputy Prime Minister.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. At the close of business in the last Parliament, we had unfinished businesses. I congratulate the Prime Minister; we are blessed with institutional memory since he was there. 

Looking at our aspirations and the President’s quest to transform this country, it is only fitting that this pending business is brought forward in line with what you requested yesterday. This is because what is being raised by the President requires some policy reviews and reversals as well as constitutional changes. Continuously talking about the budget and its implementation without first dealing with matters of constitutional amendments, policy reviews and delivery mechanism reviews may cause problems. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence and ask if the Prime Minister could find an appropriate time to bring to Parliament some of those issues as the first business so that we can move in a more organised manner. If you are talking about cooperatives, you may have to bring something in that line. If you are talking about the role of the state when you are liberalised, you may have to bring something in that line. 

I find it a big challenge to continue without dealing with the business we left. In the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, for example, we had only four months during elections and it was decided here that all that business would be dealt with in the next Parliament. Could we have that business brought in first, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in my communication yesterday I indicated this: As of now, we do not have any legislative programme because the Prime Minister has not moved this House formally on what the priorities of Government are in certain areas, so that we can be guided on how we can proceed. I am sure that they are busy compiling this and soon we will have this list and we will move.

Of course, it would be important if those issues that were already before this House were brought forward earlier so that we see how to move with them quickly. This is the time to deal with these issues because these days the life of Parliament is very short. We have 60 months and three of them have gone already. By the time it drops down to 30 months, other activities will have started and you might lose track of some of these things. This is my experience. Therefore, we might have to frontload these things and deal with them while the House is still very alive to these issues.

Honourable members, can we now move back to the Order Paper and deal with the matters there.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT UNDER ARTICLE 179 CLAUSE (1) PARAGRAPH (A) OF THE CONSTITUTION PROVIDING FOR ALTERATION OF BOUNDARIES OF GULU AND OMORO DISTRICTS

3.53
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Tom Butime): Mr Speaker, 

“WHEREAS Article 179 of the Constitution empowers Parliament to alter boundaries of districts;

AND WHEREAS Gulu District Council’s 27th meeting held on the 10 and 11 May 2011, under minute 13/2011, resolved that a new district called Omoro comprising of Omoro County be created out of Gulu District;

AWARE that on the 3 September 2015, Parliament resolved to create Omoro District out of Gulu District consisting of Omoro County;

FURTHER AWARE that at the time of the 27th meeting of Gulu District Council, Tochi was part of Omoro County;

NOTING, THEREFORE, that Parliament, in its resolution of 4 August 2015, resolved to create Tochi County out of Omoro County in Gulu District;

FURTHER NOTING that the resolution of 3 September 2015 that created Omoro District in accordance with the Gulu District Council’s resolution of its 27th meeting held on 10-11 May 2011 omitted the fact that the newly created Tochi County was part of Omoro County;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that:

1. 	The boundaries of the newly created Omoro District be corrected to include Tochi County in accordance with the Gulu District Council’s resolution of the 27th meeting held on 10-11 May 2011.

2. 	This correction takes effect on 1 July 2016 to enable the people of Tochi County participate in the elections of the new Omoro District leadership.”
 
Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? The motion is seconded by the Government Chief Whip, the honourable member for Kitgum Municipality, honourable member for Terego, the Minister of State for Local Government, Member for Adjumani, Member for Tochi County and Member for Kilak North. Would you like to speak to your motion or we should handle it as a House?

3.57
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa East County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I will be moving a motion that debate closes on this motion so that the question be put. However, before I move the move under rule 72, I intend to move a motion that this particular motion be amended by deleting the word “corrected” in paragraph one – “The boundaries of the newly created Omoro District…” Instead of using the word “corrected”, we should use the word “altered” to comply with the constitutional mandate. 

I also move to delete the words, “In accordance with the Gulu District Council resolution of the 27th meeting held on 10-11 May 2011” and substitute it with the words, “In accordance with the resolution of Parliament dated, 3 September 2015, creating Omoro District and the resolution of Parliament dated, 4 August 2015, creating Tochi County.”

The justification for that is that under Article 179 of the Constitution, it is only Parliament that creates and alters boundaries of counties and districts. Therefore, we do not have to refer to the resolution of the district council because these particular entities were created by Parliament. If my amendment is seconded, Mr Speaker, you could put the question and then I move the second motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the amendment seconded? Can I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the Member for Ndorwa East? I put the question to that amendment?

(Question put and agreed to.)

3.58
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa East County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I also move a motion under rule 72 that debate on this matter closes and the question be put.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, once such a motion is put, I am required not to entertain any debate but to put the question to that question that the question be put. I now put the question to the motion that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question to the motion as proposed by the minister and amended by the Member for Ndorwa East. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO THE STANDING AND SECTORAL COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 148 AND 176 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE RESPECTIVELY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I have the brief from the whips if we are ready to proceed with this matter? Government Chief Whip and Chief Opposition Whip, I need concurrence on this, and my team from the Speaker’s desk. We need to see if we can proceed with this quickly. Of course, we will also be considering the Pan-African Parliament, if the Opposition is ready and we conclude this business today.

4.00
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that I sat with the Chief Opposition Whip and we realised that we were faced with one challenge of having many numbers of Members of Parliament on the committees because the Tenth Parliament obviously has more numbers than the Ninth Parliament.

However, having realised that we can only increase the numbers after amending the rules, we have agreed that we respect rule 146 which establishes standing committees with specific representation and we designate the appropriate numbers. Of course, that leaves both of us with Members of Parliament; in my case, I have five and hon. Ssemujju also has a number of Members of Parliament who will be floating temporarily. However, when we amend our Rules of Procedure, everybody will be catered for. Therefore, for the purposes of steady progress, I beg to say that we are ready to designate the Members of Parliament as per your guidance.

4.02
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): I agree with the content of the report by the Government Chief Whip. The only matter for which we should seek guidance from the Speaker is on whether you can leave some Members of Parliament without committees. We have 15 sessional committees and 13 standing committees. When we tried to fit the numbers, they were not all accommodated. This is a matter on which we need the Speaker to guide the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is certainly enough room in the committees for all the Members of the House. However, there are procedures we need to comply with so that we are not violating our own rules. There will be no floating Members. All Members will be allocated to committees except that those who are beyond the numbers will not be pronounced. They will be belonging to committees except formally, according to the rules, they will not belong to those committees. They will know which committee to go to except that they will not be pronounced on record as committee Members.

Subsequently, when these rules are amended very soon and the numbers are enlarged, then we can bring them in and make pronouncements on them. That is how simple it is going to be. Can we constitute the committees as the rules say now and then we see how to deal with the balance so that we do not spend time on this?

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, we have 12 standing committees and 14 sectoral committees and we are 427. If we constituted standing committees, for example, then we leave out about 27 Members without committees pending amendment of the rules. Also, if we went ahead and constituted the sectoral committees, then we would leave out only seven.

Mr Speaker, I do not want to disagree with your guidance. However, this is exactly why you requested the two whips to meet when my brother, hon. Sekikubo, raised a point that there should have been amendment of the rules. This is not because without the amendment we do not proceed, but so that we harmonise on the number. The court pronouncement is clear. Let us harmonise on the number and then we pronounce ourselves clearly. 

I would like to be directed on a procedural issue. What are we curing with the urgency of constituting these committees that we cannot wait until when we amend the rules? There are even some irregularities about how the head of a committee should come into place. After giving us an enormous orientation and paying money for it, I think we have had a change of mind on a few things; we have seen where we have made some mistakes and we really want to define how to proceed by amending.

Mr Speaker, I beg for your indulgence to prevail on this matter. If there is no urgency in constituting the committees, we should not leave anyone out and let us amend. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, let us not have a protracted debate on this matter. Parliament has its committees; there is no way this Parliament can function without committees. Issues will arise. There is a petition coming up tomorrow, although it would have come up today; where are we going to send it? Even on the rules, who is going to bring the amendments? 

Let us have the committees that can be formulated to kick off the processes and then we finalise the process as we go along. There is no harm and problem at all. 

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, I was requesting you to invoke the provisions of rule 8 that give you wide discretion because this is a situation that has not been foreseen in our rules.

After all, membership to committees and particularly, the rules regarding membership to committees, are subjected to the entire rules themselves. If you invoked rule 8, you would ensure that each Member belongs to a committee regardless of the numbers and then those other matters can be handled subsequently; other than reading out names of some Members and leaving out others. Of course, politics is still ongoing; the opponents of those who will not have been read out will say that they are not Members of Parliament and that is why they have not been allocated to committees. 

Mr Speaker, in light of this prevailing circumstance, I implore you to use rule 8 and your discretion and allocate committees to those Members whose names would not have been read.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is exactly what I was intending to do. I said that nobody will be left out because there are processes of accommodating all the Members.

MR KATUNTU: I thank you, Mr Speaker. My appreciation of rule 8 is quite different from what the learned other Attorney-General is saying. You can only invoke your discretion if there is no specific rule providing otherwise; then there is a grey area where you can invoke your discretion. 

I think the intention of the learned Attorney-General is to be fair to all Members of Parliament. How do cure this? In my view, we can make a specific directive to the rules committee to bring the amendments next week for purposes of only amending that particular rule, which is being offended, and this can only be on Tuesday, and we sort this problem out. Between now and Tuesday, there are only three working days and we can cater for others, other than – (Interjections)- I thought the rules provide that we should listen to each other.

The point that I was trying to make is that having Members designated to a particular committee and they are comfortable that they are Members of the committee and yet they do not have some rights like other members of that committee creates two categories of Members of the same committee. I think that is not correct. 

Mr Speaker, my own counsel is that you can direct the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to sit and cure this problem in the next couple of days –(Interjections)- Okay, let me make my point clear. My prayer is that we should go ahead and constitute the committees and once the committees are in place, the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline is charged with the responsibility, within the next three to four days, to bring a report. That would have cured the problem and you would not have to send Members to a committee and yet they are not full Members of that committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue that you are raising about full Members or two categories of Members of a committee is basically administrative. It would be within the authority of the people who manage this Parliament to deal with. It is not a big problem. However, what we are talking about is that there should be committees and that is the process that we are going into. Can we do that now?

Can we then start with the standing committees. Can we begin with the Committee on Budget. I am following from this list. I will have the Government Chief Whip, the Chief Opposition Whip and then the list from the Speaker’s office for the independents.

4.12
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. Rule 148(2) of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament enjoins the party whips, the authority to designate Members –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed with the names, honourable. We have passed that stage. 

MS NANKABIRWA: I thank you very much. I was just reading the rule that I am using. I beg to designate the following members to the Committee on Budget:

1. 	Hon. Amos Lugoloobi, Ntenjeru County North – Chairperson.
2. 	Hon. Mudimi Wamukuyu, Elgon County – Vice Chairperson. 
3. 	Hon. Peter Ogwang, Usuk County.  
4. 	Hon. Ann Maria Nankabirwa, Kyankwanzi District. 
5. 	Hon. George Kumama, Bbaale County.
6. 	Hon. Terence Achia, Bokora County.
7. 	Hon. Alex Ruhunda, Fort Portal Municipality.
8. 	Hon. Justine Khainza, Bududa District.
9. 	Hon. Margaret Komuhangi, Nakasongola District
10. 	Hon. Patrick Nsamba, Kassanda County North
11. 	Col (Rtd) Fred Mwesigye, Nyabushozi County
12. 	Hon. Patrick Opolot, Kacumbala County
13. 	Hon. Remegio Achia, Pian County
14. 	Hon. Charles Ilukor, Kumi County
15. 	Hon. James Niringiyimana, Kinkinzi County West
16. 	Hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire, Buyaga West County
17. 	Hon. Richard Othieno, West Budama County North
18. 	Hon. Genensio Tumuramye, Kashongi County
19. 	Hon. Apollo Masika, Bubulo County East
20. 	Hon. Stephen Kangwagye, Bukanga County
I beg to submit.

4.15
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda): From our side, I present the following honourable members:

1. 	Hon. Samuel Odonga Otto, Aruu County
2. 	Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, Dokolo District
3. 	Hon. Muhammad Muwanga Kivumbi, Butambala County
4. 	Hon. Joy Ongom, Lira District

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you. Clerk, read out the independents.

THE CLERK: Independents:
1. 	Hon. Kenneth Soyekwo, Tingey County
2. 	Hon. Julius Opondo, Bujumba County
3. 	Hon. Samuel Okwir, Moroto County
4. 	Hon. John Bagoole, Luuka North County  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. UPDF -

4.16
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): I would like to present hon. Felix Kulaigye to the Committee on Budget.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the whip of the UPDF. (Laughter) Honourable members, you have listened to the list of the Members constituting the Committee on Budget. I put the question that this House confirms the names of those Members to be members of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Science and Technology

4.17
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to present the following:

1. 	Hon. Robert Kafeero, Nakifuma County – Chairperson. 
2. 	Hon. Fred Bwino, Kigulu County North – Vice Chairperson.
3. 	Hon. Rose Mutonyi, Bubulo County West
4. 	Hon. Geoffrey Macho, Busia Municipality
5. 	Hon. Lillian Nakate Segujja, Luwero District
6. 	Hon. Denis Obua Hamson, Ajuri County
7. 	Hon. Innocent Kamusiime Pentagon, Butemba County
8. 	Hon. James Waluswaka, Bunyole West County 
9. 	Hon. Doreen Amule, Amolatar District
10. 	Hon. Charles Ngabirano, Rwampara County
11. 	Hon. Hellen Kahunde, Kiryandongo District
12. 	Hon. Peter Sematimba, Busiro County South
13. 	Hon. Anthony Ssemuli, Mubende Municipality
14. 	Hon. Mwine Mpaka, Youth Representative, Western
15. 	Hon. Cissy Namujju, Lwengo District
16. 	Hon. Alex Burundo, Bulambuli County
17. 	Hon. Florence Wamala Nambozo, Sironko District
18. 	Hon. Betty Awor Engola, Apac District
19. 	Hon. Michael Timuzigu, Kajara County
20. 	Hon. David Ronnie Mutebi, Buikwe County South
I beg to present.

4.19
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ssemujju Nganda): Mr Speaker, I present the following Members of Parliament from our side:

1. 	Hon. Angiro Gutomoi, Erute County North
2. 	Hon. Godfrey Atkins Katusabe, Bukonjo County West
3. 	Hon. Mary Kabanda, Masaka District
4. 	Hon. Denis Oguzu, Maracha County

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, please present the independents.

THE CLERK: Independents:

1. 	Hon. Waira Kiwalabye Majegere, Bunya County East
2. 	Hon. Joshua Anywarach, Padyere County
3. 	Hon. Annet Nyakecho, Tororo North County
4. 	Hon. Ishma Mafabi, Youth Representative, Eastern

4.21
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Mr Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity but because we are very few in the House, we cannot fill all the positions in all the committees. Therefore, we do not have a Member for the Committee on Science and Technology.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the lists have been presented for the Members to constitute this committee and we have heard them. I put the question that the Members constituting this committee be approved by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters

4.22
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to present the following:

1. 	Hon. Judith Alyek, Kole District – Chairperson
2. 	Hon. Evelyn Chemutai, Bukwo District – Vice Chairperson 
3. 	Hon. Juliet Suubi Kyinyamatama, Rakai District 
4. 	Hon. Winfred Masiko, Rukungiri District
5. 	Hon. Alero Tom Aza, West Moyo County
6. 	Hon. Peace Kusasira Mubiru, Mukono District
7. 	Hon. Bonny Okello, Kole North County
8. 	Hon. Jovrine Kaliisa Kyomukama, Ibanda District
9. 	Hon. Grace Kesande, Rubirizi District
10. 	Hon. Violet Akurut Adome, Katakwi District
11. 	Hon. Annie Logiel, Moroto District
12. 	Hon. Joel Yoweri Ssebikaali, Ntwetwe County
13. 	Hon. Josephine Bebona Babungi, Bundibugyo District 
14. 	Hon. Sylvia Nayebale, Gomba District
15. 	Hon. Pamela Kamugo, Budaka District
16. 	Hon. Lawrence Akugizibwe, Mwenge County North
17. 	Hon. Connie Nakayenze Galiwango, Mbale District
18. 	Hon. Sylvia Rwabogo, Kabarole District
19. 	Hon. Sarah Babirye, Youth Representative, Central 
20. 	Hon. Sam Lyomoki, Workers Representative

4.24
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda): Mr Speaker, I present the following:

1. 	Hon. Lucy Akello, Amuru District
2. 	Hon. Francis Gonahasa, Kabweri County
3. 	Hon. Veronica Nanyondo, Bukomansimbi District 
4. 	Hon. Wakayima Musoke, Nansana Municipality

THE CLERK TO PARLIAMENT: Independents:

1. 	Hon. Robert Ntende, Bunya County South
2. 	Hon. Jane Nabulindo, Busia District
3. 	Hon. Andrew Kaluya, Kigulu County South
4. 	Hon. Godfrey Watenga, Lutseshe County
5. 	Hon. Lydia Mirembe, Butambala District

4.25
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Mr Speaker, I beg to present Capt. Evelyn Asiimwe to the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters. 

I would like to request for your indulgence, Mr Speaker, that when I do not have a Member to present, I do not rise up so that time is saved. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have listened to the list of Members who should constitute this Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters. I put the question to those names.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Equal Opportunities 

4.26
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rule 148(6) enjoins a party in Government to designate chairpersons and vice-chairpersons of each standing committee. For that matter, I beg to designate the following:

1. 	Hon. Muhammad Nsereko, Kampala Central Division – Chairperson
2. 	Hon. Hellen Asamo, PWDs Representative Eastern – Vice Chairperson
3. 	Hon. Ruth Katushabe, Bukomansimbi North County
4. 	Hon. Anifa Bangirana Kawooya, Ssembabule District
5. 	Hon. Aboud Kitatta, Bukoto County West 
6. 	Hon. Alex Ndeezi, PWDs Representative, Central
7. 	Hon. Hillary Lokwang, Ik County
8. 	Hon. Albert Lokoru, Tepeth County
9. 	Hon. Reuben Chelimo, Kongasis County
10. 	Hon. Paul Amoru, Dokolo North County
11. 	Hon. Rosemary Tumusiime, Entebbe Municipality
12. 	Hon. Jacqueline Aol Rama, Nebbi District
13. 	Hon. Isaac Mulindwa Ssozi, Lugazi Municipality
14. 	Hon. Tabani Idi Amin, Kibanda North County
15. 	Hon. Norah Bigirwa, Buliisa District 
16. 	Hon. Kezekia Mbogo, Budaka County
17. 	Hon. James Baba, Koboko County
18. 	Hon. Wilberforce Yaguma, Kashari North County
19. 	Hon. Margaret Aachilla Aleper, Kotido District
20. 	Hon. Milly Mugeni, Butaleja District

4.30
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda): Mr Speaker, from our side, I present the following: 

1. 	Hon. Mubarak Munyagwa, Kawempe Division South
2. 	Hon. Peter Okot, Tochi County
3. 	Hon. Allan Ssewanyana, Makindye Division West
4. 	Hon. Sizomu Wambedde, Bungokho County North

THE CLERK TO PARLIAMENT: Independents:
1. 	Hon. Kenneth Eitunganane, Soroti County 
2. 	Hon. Wilson Nokrach, PWDs Representative, Northern
3. 	Hon. Christopher Kipterit, Upe County 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you have listened to the names - 

MS MARGARET ALEPER: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was designated by the Government Chief Whip to the Committee on Equal Opportunities. However, we are four from Karamoja and I did not even apply for this committee. Therefore, I decline to be a member of this committee. We need to be spread out in other committees. Thank you. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I beg to replace hon. Margaret Aleper with hon. Tophace Kaahwa, Hoima District.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. All persons with disabilities have been placed in this committee and yet we have a cross-section of problems; we need to be in other standing committees. Why should you put all persons with disabilities in one committee? Thank you very much. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I beg to find out which particular Member representing PWDs who did not apply to serve on this committee has been designated on this committee? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I suppose the Member from Koboko did not apply to be on this committee because if she had, she would not have raised the matter. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: She does not represent PWDs. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, if it is by the wish of the Members, then we would not have a problem. Are we okay now? Honourable members, you have listened to the lists that have been presented for Members to constitute the Committee on Equal Opportunities. We are required to approve this membership. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Human Rights

4.31
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Rosemary Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to designate the following: 
1.	Hon. Jovah Kamateeka, Mitooma District – Chairperson
2. 	Hon. Safia Nalule, PWDs, National – Vice Chairperson
3. 	Hon. Mourine Osoru, Arua Municipality
4. 	Hon. Monicah Amoding, Kumi District 
5. 	Hon. Ibrahim Abiriga, Arua Municipality
6. 	Hon. Simeo Nsubuga, Kassanda County South
7. 	Hon. Veronica Isala Eragu, Kaberamaido County
8. 	Hon. Molly Lanyero, Lamwo District
9. 	Hon. Jackson Kafuuzi, Kyaka South County 
10. 	Hon. Caroline Birungi, Kyamuswa County
11. 	Hon. Joseph Kasozi Muyomba, Bukoto County Mid-West
12. 	Hon. Paul Asaba Nsabimana, Kyaka North County
13. 	Hon. Rose Ayaka Atima, Maracha District
14. 	Hon. Raphael Magyezi, Igara County West
15. 	Hon. Kenneth Lubogo, Bulamogi County
16. 	Hon. Nelson Lufafa, Butembe County
17. 	Hon. Michael Ayepa, Labwor County
18. 	Hon. Pauline Kemirembe, Lyantonde District
19. 	Hon. Mariam Naigaga, Namutumba District
20. 	Hon. Denis Sabiiti, Rubanda County West

I beg to present. 

MR IBRAHIM ABIRIGA: Mr Speaker, I did not apply for that committee, so I do not want it. We are two Members of Parliament from Arua District and both of us are on that committee. Who is connecting me to this group?  (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to put another member? 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I would like to replace hon. Ibrahim Abiriga’s name with hon. Samson Lokeris, Dodoth East County, NRM. 

4.34
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Mr Speaker, I present;

    1. Hon. Gilbert Olanya, Kilak County South 
    2. Hon. Harold Tonny Muhindo, Bukonzo County East
    3. Hon. Lyandro Komakech, Gulu Municipality
    4. Hon. Anthony Akol, Kilak County North 

THE CLERK TO PARLIAMENT: Independents:

    1. Hon. Cyrus Amodoi, Toroma County
    2. Hon. Lily Adong, Nwoya District
    3. Hon. Lucy Achiro, Aruu County North
    4. Hon. Lydia Chekwel, Kween District 
    5. Hon. Fred Mudukoi, Butebo County

4.35
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): I designate hon. Brig. Innocent Oula.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the names of the Members who have been designated to constitute the Committee on Human Rights. We are required to approve these names. I put the question for approval.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on National Economy

4.36
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, allow me make this clarification before I move on with the proposal. When it came to designation, I requested Members to apply for three choices. This is because sometimes, some committees are over-subscribed. When we are faced with that, we take the second choice or the third choice. I just would like to beg the indulgence of the Members of Parliament that we have tried to balance Members because there are limited number of slots on every committee. Thank you very much.

    1. Hon. Syda Bbumba Namirembe, Nakaseke County North – Chairperson
    2. Hon. Lawrence Bategeka, Hoima Municipality – Vice Chairperson
    3. Hon. Thomas Tayebwa, Ruhinda County North
    4. Hon. Johnson Ssenyonga Muyanja, Mukono County South
    5. Hon. John Kamara Nizeyimana, Bufumbira County North
    6. Hon. Emmanuel Kalule Sengo, Gomba County East 
    7. Hon Nathan Igeme Nabeta, Jinja Municipality East
    8. Hon. Robert Migadde, Buvuma Island County
    9. Hon. Anthony Okello, Kioga County
    10. Hon. Paul Musoke, Buikwe County North
    11. Hon Henry Kibalya, Bugabula County South
    12. Hon. David Guma Gumisiriza, Ibanda County North
    13. Hon. John Baptist Nambeshe, Manjiya County
    14. Hon. John Bosco Ikojo, Bukedea County
    15. Hon. Fredrick Angura, Tororo County South 
    16. Hon. Hatwib Katoto, Katerera County
    17. Hon. Susan Amero, Amuria District 
    18. Hon. Amos Mandera, Buyamba County
    19. Hon. Judith Babirye, Buikwe District 
    20. Hon. John Bosco Lubyayi, Mawokota County South 

I beg to designate.

4.37
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Semujju Nganda): I present;

    1. Hon. Jack Wamanga-Wamai, Mbale Municipality
    2. Hon. William Nzoghu, Busongora North
    3. Hon. Herbert Edmund Ariko, Soroti Municipality
    4. Hon. Jimmy Akena, Lira Municipality

THE CLERK: Independents:

    1. Hon. Anne Mary Tumwiine, Ntoroko District 
    2. Hon. Oliver Katwesigye Koyekyenga, Buhweju District
    3. Hon. Paul Akamba, Busiki County
    4. Hon. Anna Adeke Ebaju, Youth, Eastern 
    5. Hon. Rosemary Nuwat, Amudat District 
    6. Hon. Bernad Atiku, Ayivu County

4.38
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): I beg to designate Hon. Capt. Susan Lakot. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the names that have been designated to constitute the Committee on National Economy. We are required to approve. I put the question for approval.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline

4.39
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I designate;

    1. Hon. Clement Ongalo Obote, Kalaki County – Chairperson
    2. Hon. Abasi Agaba, Kitagwenda County – Vice Chairperson
    3. Hon. George Abott Auma, Bukooli Island County
    4. Hon. Richard Oseku, Kibale County
    5. Hon. Robinah Nabbanja, Kibaale District 
    6. Hon. James Acidiri, Maracha County East 
    7. Hon. Gaster Mugoya, Bukoli County North
    8. Hon. Grace Kaudha, Iganga Municipality
    9. Hon. Rwemulikya Ibanda, Ntoroko County
    10. Hon. John Baptist Lokii, Matheniko County
    11. Hon. Muhumuza Gafabusa, Bwamba County
    12. Hon. Margret Lamwaka, Kitgum District
    13. Hon. Christopher Kalemba, Kakuuto County
    14. Hon. Lawrence Biyika,   Ora County
    15. Hon. Stella Nyomera, Napak District
    16. Hon. Patrick Okabe, Serere County
    17. Hon. Sam Bitangaro Kwizera, Bufumbira County South
    18. Hon. James Nsaba Buturo, Bufumbira County East
    19. Hon. Aston Kajara, Mwenge County South
    20. Hon. Andrew Martial, Igara County East

4.42
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Semujju Nganda): I present;

    1. Hon. Prof Ogenga Latigo, Agago County North 
    2. Hon. Michael Kabaziguruka, Nakawa Division 
    3. Hon. Kigozi Ssempala, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality
    4. Hon. Elijah Okupa, Kasilo County 

THE CLERK: Independents:-
    1. Hon. Edward Makmot, Agago County
    2. Hon. Jacob Marksons Oboth, West Budama County South 
    3. Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, Ndorwa County East
    4. Hon. Anita Among, Bukedea District 
    5. Hon. Richard Apolot, Pallisa County

4.44
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): I designate hon. Maj. Gen. Pecos Kutesa.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the names of the Members who have been designated to constitute the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, you are calling us to take a decision on that but I remember very well that seasoned lawyers on that committee, who ordinarily really, hon. Sam Bitangaro is a seasoned lawyer, there are very strong Members of strong standing. However, the Chair has been designated, why is she really denying having the likes of Bitangaro on the committee? He ordinarily should be chairing.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I designated hon. Ongalo Obote Clement who holds a PhD in law and he has been here in the Ninth Parliament. Is the honourable member for Lwemiyaga in order to lose his memory so quickly to insinuate that the Member of Parliament I have designated lacks competence to chair a committee where the seasoned lawyers he mentioned will be Members of Parliament? Is he in order to forget so quickly that hon. Obote holds a PhD in law? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member of Lwemiyaga has no right to forget anything- (Laughter)- even if he had that right, that right has been revoked. (Laughter) Please, let us proceed.

Honourable members, have I already put the question to this? Let me now put the question; you have listened to the names of the Members who have been read to constitute this committee and its leadership, we are required to approve. I put the question for approval.

(Question put and agreed to.)
             
Committee on Public Accounts 

4.46
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate the following Members;

    1. Hon. Loy Katali, Jinja District
    2. Hon. Henry Musasizi, Rubanda County East
    3. Hon. Dononzio Kahonda Mugabe, Ruhinda County
    4. Hon. Geofrey Dhamuzungu, Budiope County East 
    5. Hon. Alex Byarugaba, Insingiro County South
    6. Hon. Catherine Ndamira, Kabale District 
    7. Hon. Jesca Ababiku, Adjumani District
    8. Hon. Dorothy Azairwe, Kamwenge District
    9. Hon. Solomon Silwany, Bukooli County Central
    10. Hon. John Twesigye, Bunyaruguru County
    11. Hon. Keefa Kiwanuka, Kiboga County East 
    12. Hon. Esther Anyakun, Nakapiripiriti District
    13. Hon. Felix Okot Ogong, Dokolo County South
    14. Hon. William Beijukye, Ruhaama County
    15. Hon. Elly Elias Asiku, Koboko County North 
    16. Hon. Jalia Bintu Lukumu, Masindi District 
    17. Hon. Pius Wakabi, Bugahya County
    18. Hon. Tonny Ayoo, Kwania County
    19. Hon. Jacqueline Amongin, Ngora District 
    20. Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, Lwemiyaga County.

4.48
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ssemujju Nganda): I present;

    1. Hon. Angeline Osegge,  Soroti District – Chairperson 
    2. Hon. Gerald Karuhanga, Ntungamu Municipality – Vice-Chairperson
    3. Hon. Franca Akello, Agago District
    4. Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda, Kira Municipality
    5. Hon. Patrick Akora Ebong, Maruzi County
    6. Hon. Mathias Mpuuga, Masaka Municipality

THE CLERK TO PARLIAMENT: Independents:
Hon. Fred Baseke, Ntenjeru County South
Hon. Gideon Onyango, Samia Bugwe County North
Hon. Onesmas Twinamatsiko, Bugangaizi County East
Hon. Alioni Yorke, Aringa County South 
Hon. Stephen Biraahwa Mukitale, Buliisa County

4.49
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Mr Speaker, I designate Hon. Lt Gen. Koreta Ivan.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House do approve the above names.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Local Government Accounts

4.50
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate the following members:-

    1. Hon. Christine Achen Ayo, Alebtong District
    2. Hon. Sarah Najjuma, Nakaseke District
    3. Hon. Joseph Ssekabito, Mawogola County
    4. Hon. Spellanza Baguma, Kyenjojo District
    5. Hon. Gordon Bafaki, Kazo County
    6. Hon. Daniel Muheirwe, Buhaguzi County
    7. Hon. Silvia Akello, Otuke District
    8. Hon. Isaac Etuka, Upper Madi County
    9. Hon. Maria Goretti Ajilo, Kaberamaido District
    10. Hon. Janepher Egunyu, Buvuma District 
    11. Hon. Rosette Kajungu, Mbarara District
    12. Hon. Edward Ssembatya, Katikamu County South
    13. Hon. Julius Acon, Otuke County
    14. Hon. Robert Kasolo, Iki-Iki County
    15. Hon. Rehema Watongola, Kamuli Municipality
    16. Hon. Sam Byibesho, Kisoro Municipality
    17. Hon. Noah Mutebi, Nakasongola County
    18. Hon. Hope Mukisa, Namayingo District
    19. Hon. Fred Angella, Moroto Municipality
    20. Hon. Gordon Arinda, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality

4.52
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Semujju Nganda): Mr Speaker, I present:

    1. Hon. Reagan Okumu, Aswa County – Chairperson
    2. Hon. Ojara Okin, Chua County West – Vice-Chairperson
    3. Hon. Jackson Mbaju, Busongora County South
    4. Hon. Ibrahim Kasozi, Makindye Division East
    5. Hon. Roland Mugume, Rukungiri Municipality
    6. Hon. Jonathan Odur, Erute County South
    7. Hon. Betty Nambooze Bakireke, Mukono Municipality

THE CLERK: Independents: 
    1. Hon. Julius Ocen, Kapelebyong County
    2. Hon. Francis Mukula, Agule County
    3. Hon. Peter Ocen, Kole County South
    4. Hon. Sarah Wekomba, Bulambuli District 
    5. Hon. David Lukyamuzi, Busunju County

4.53
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): I beg to designate hon. Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House do approve the above names.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Entreprises

4.54
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate the following as Members of the standing Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises: 

    1. Hon. Agnes Kunihira, Workers Representative
    2. Hon. Judith Nalule Nabakooba, Mityana District
    3. Hon. Peter Mugema, Iganga Municipality 
    4. Hon. Justine Ayebazibwe, Isingiro District
    5. Hon. Nathan Twesigye, Kashari County North
    6. Hon. Agnes Ameede, Pallisa District
    7. Hon. Baba Diri, Koboko District
    8. Hon. Michael Tusiime, Mbarara Municipality  
    9. Hon. Jack Odur  Lutanywa, Kibanda County South
    10. Hon Moses Angundru, Terego West County  
    11. Hon. Mary Paula Turyahikayo, Rubabo County
    12. Hon. Margaret Muhanga, Burahya County
    13. Hon. Moses Nagwomu, Bunyole County East
    14. Hon. Vicent Woboya, Budadiri County East
    15. Hon. Mbabaali Muyanja, Bukoto County South
    16. Hon. Cuthbert Abigaba, Kibale County
    17. Hon. Rose Kabagyenyi, Kisoro District
    18. Hon. Abraham Byandala, Katikamu County North
    19. Hon. Sarah Nakawunde, Mpigi District
    20. Hon. Sheila Kabaije, Kiruhura District.

I beg to move.

4.55
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Mr Speaker, I designate the following are Members: 

    1. Hon. Abdu Katuntu from Bugweri County – Chairperson 
    2. Hon. Annita Among from Bukedea District – Vice-Chairperson
    3. Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, Budadiri County West
    4. Hon. Fred Tumuheirwe, Rujumbura County
    5. Hon. Medard Sseggona, Busiro County East.

THE CLERK: Independents: 

    1. Hon. Hood Katuramu, PWDs, Western;
    2. Hon. Tubo Christine, Kaabong District;
    3. Hon. Veronica Babirye, Buyende District;
    4. Hon. James Kakooza, Kabula County;
    5. Hon. Andrew Baryayanga, Kabale Municipality; and 
    6. Hon. Moses Kasibante, Rubaga Division North.

4.56
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate hon. Brig. Francis Takirwa to serve on the Committee of Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the names you have heard are for the Members who will constitute the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises. We are required to approve these names. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Government Assurances

4.57
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate the following to be members to the standing Committee on Government Assurance:

    1. Hon. Eric Musana, Buyaga County East
    2. Hon. Margaret Mbeiza, Kaliro District
    3. Hon. Agnes Taaka, Bugiri District
    4. Hon. Boaz Ninsiima, Kooki County
    5. Hon. Moses Adome, Jie County
    6. Hon. Patrick Kasumba,  Bujenje County
    7. Hon. Michael Yiga, Bukuya County
    8. Hon. Joseph Kakooza, Buwekula County
    9. Hon. Robert Musoke, Budiope County West
    10. Hon. Ali Ogama, Lower Madi County
    11. Hon. Idah Nabayiga, Kalangala District
    12. Hon. Lawrence Mangusho,  Kween County
    13. Hon. Zerubabel Nyiira,  Buruli County
    14. Hon. Aisha Sekindi, Kalungu District
    15. Hon. Elizabeth Karungi, Kanungu District
    16. Hon. Godfrey Onzima, Aringa County North
    17. Hon. Angel Mark Dulu, Adjumani County East
    18. Hon. Stephen Kisa, Luuka County South
    19. Hon. Muwanika Moses, Kagoma County
    20. Hon. Mbwatekamwa Gaffa, Kasambya County.

I beg to move.

MR MBWATEKAMWA GAFFA: Mr Speaker, I never applied to be a Member of that committee and three of us from Mubende are on the same committee. I saw my name appearing on the list of the Public Accounts Committee where I had applied. I don’t know if there are various papers.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I am sorry, are you the honourable member for Kasambya County? As I explained earlier on, some committees were oversubscribed. I had to make sure that I look for a home for my Members of Parliament to serve. 

However, if you are not comfortable serving on this committee, I beg that we go ahead and approve the other Members minus one member whom I can designate later so that we move steadily. He is hon. Mbwatekamwa from Kasambya County.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: With the exception of that name from the Government side. 

4.58
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Semujju Nganda): Mr Speaker, I designate on this committee hon. Fungaroo Hassan Caps, Obongi County, as the Chairperson of the committee and he will be deputised by the hon. Latif Sebaggala from Kawempe Division North. 

The following are Members to that committee: 

    1. Hon. Simon Oyet, Nwoya County
    2. Hon. Apollo Kantinti, Kyadondo County East
    3. Hon. Luttamaguzi Semakula, Nakaseke County South.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I beg to replace hon. Mbwatekamwa, from Kasambya County, with hon. Stephen Dede Mayende on this Committee of Government Assurance so that we do not leave a gap.

THE CLERK: The following independent Members have been designated to the Committee on Government Assurance: 

    1. Hon. Silas Aogon, Kumi Municipality
    2. Hon. Beatrice Anywar, Kitgum Municipality
    3. Hon. Zaitun Driwaru, Yumbe District, and
    4. Hon Francis Zaake, Mityana Municipality.

5.00
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate Col. Flavia Byekwaso to serve on the Committee of Government Assurances.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members –

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We were advised to make choices among three committees. This committee is not one of those I applied for. I beg to be withdrawn. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, with the exception of hon. Beatrice Anywar, Member of Parliament for Kitgum Municipality, the names of the Members you have heard will constitute the Committee on Government Assurances and we are required to approve them. I put the question that Members whose names have been read do constitute the Committee on Government Assurances be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next is the Committee on Appointments. This one was done? We are done with the standing committees, yes, honourable member for Bukoto East.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, I have not heard my name anywhere. I am wondering whether I have been forgotten or something is going wrong. I applied to serve on the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises, Chief Opposition Whip, would like to resolve this matter at a later stage or you would like to say something on it?

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, as we said earlier, this matter will be resolved later.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will deal with this subsequently. Do not worry. This House cannot forget its own Member. That marks the end of the designation of Members to the standing committees of this House for now. Can we now move to the sectoral committees of the House? We will start with the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development

5.08
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate:

Hon. Henry Musasizi, from Rubanda East as Chairperson 
Hon. Loy Katali, the Member of Parliament for Jinja as the deputy Chairperson. 

The following Members have been designated to serve on this committee -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They have been designated by who?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: By myself. I beg to designate the following as Members to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development:

    1. Hon. James Acidri, Maracha County East
    2. Hon. Amos Lugoloobi, Ntenjeru County North
    3. Hon. Elias Asiku, Koboko County North
    4. Hon. Lawrence Bategeka, Hoima Municipality
    5. Hon. Emmanuel Kalule, Gomba County East
    6. Hon. Jovah Kamateeka, Mitooma District
    7. Hon. Hatwib Katoto, Katerera County
    8. Hon. John Baptist Lokii, Matheniko County
    9. Hon. Moses Nagwomu, Bonyole County East
    10. Hon. James Niringiyimana, Kinkizi County West
    11. Hon. Patrick Opolot Isiagi, Kachumbala County
    12. Hon. Genensio Tumuramye, Kashongi County
    13. Hon Mariam Naigaga, Namutumba District
    14. Hon. Charles Ilukor, Kumi County
    15. Hon. Anthony Okello, Kioga County
    16. Hon. Michael Ayepa, Labwor County
    17. Hon. Moses Walwomu Muwanika, Kagoma County, and
    18. Hon. Isaac Mulindwa, Lugazi Municipality. 

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, for the purpose of the record, the name in number 16 is Ilukor.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Speaker, just for clarification, did I hear “Akello” Anthony, Kioga County? If by implication it means me, then I am called “Okello” Anthony, Kioga County not “Akello”. Can we have that corrected for purposes of the record? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Government Chief Whip might know that there is gender connotation in changing “O” to “A” –(Laughter)– because “A” would refer to a woman other than a man and hon. Okello is actually a man. (Laughter) Hon. Ilukor, we have corrected yours already, do not worry. Government Chief Whip, I do not know how your name would be pronounced in English.

5.11
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Mr Speaker, I designate the following Members to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development:

    1. Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, Budadiri County West
    2. Hon. Anthony Akol, Kilak County North
    3. Hon. Samuel Odonga Otto, Aruu County, and
    4. Hon. Luttamaguzi Semakula, Nakaseke County South.

THE CLERK TO PARLIAMENT: The following independents have been designated to serve on the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development:

    1. Hon. Lilly Adong, Nwoya District
    2. Hon. Anita Among, Bukedea District
    3. Hon. Francis Mukula, Agule County
    4. Hon. James Kakooza, Kabula County, and 
    5. Hon. John Bagoole Ngobi, Luuka County North.

5.12
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate the hon. Maj. Gen. Pecos Kuteesa, to serve on the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the Members whose names you have heard have been designated to constitute the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We are required to approve. I now put the question for your approval.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Health

5.13
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate: 

    1. Hon. Dr Michael Bukenya, from Bukuya County as Chairperson
    2. Hon. Annie Logiel, from Moroto District as the vice-chairperson. 

The other Members designate include: 

    3. Hon. Helen Adoa, Serere District
    4. Hon.  Moses Adome, Jie County
    5. Hon. Judith Alyek, Kole District
    6. Hon. Justine Ayebazibwe, Isingiro District
    7. Hon. Sarah Kityo Babirye, Youth Central
    8. Hon. Josephine Babungi, Bundibugyo District
    9. Hon. Pauline Kemirembe, Lyantonde District
    10. Hon. Sam Loyomki, Workers
    11. Hon. Yoweri Ssebikaali, Ntwetwe County
    12. Hon.  Edward Ssembatya, Katikamu County South
    13. Hon. Beatrice Rwakimari, Ntungamo District
    14. Hon. Gaffa Mbwatekamwa, Kasambya County
    15. Hon. Rossette Kajungu Mutambi, Mbarara District
    16. Hon. Innocent Kamusiime Pentagon, Butemba County
    17. Hon. Daniel Muheirwe, Buhaguzi County
    18. Hon. Catherine Ndamira, Kabale District
    19. Hon. Rose Ayaka Atima, Maracha District, and
    20. Hon. Sylvia Nayebale, Gomba District. 

I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Chief Opposition Whip.

5.14
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Mr Speaker, I designate the following Members:

Hon. Betty Aol, Gulu District
Hon. Gershom Sizomu, Bunghokho County North
Hon. Joy Atim Ongom, Lira District, and
Hon. Judith Franca Akello, Agago District.

THE CLERK: The following independents have been designated to serve on the committee on Health:

    1. Hon. Lydia Mirembe – Butambala District;
    2. Hon. Herbert Kwobere Tom –  Kibuku County, and
    3. Hon. Fred Baseke – Ntenjeru County South.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member for Agago has an issue.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did not apply to serve on the Committee of Health; I was not consulted either. I beg to request that we first sort it out with my chief whip before it is done.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, you do not want to belong to this committee?

MS AKELLO: No, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR BASEKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I applied to serve on three sectoral committees - agriculture, natural resources and finance. By profession, I am an agricultural economist. I have been in extension and I know there are Bills coming –(Interruption)– I do not want to belong to that committee.  I prefer serving on the committee on agriculture, which I applied for.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The name is Fred Baseke, not so? You are Ntenjeru South? You are an independent, not so?

MR BASEKE: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, that is from the Speaker’s brief. Okay, with the exception of those two names - Member for Ntenjeru South and Member for Agago District - Did UPDF already submit?

Honourable members, the names you have heard, with the exception of those two from Agago District and Ntenjeru County South, are for the Members designated to constitute the Committee on Health. We are required to approve those names with the two exceptions. I put the question for the approval.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Foreign Affairs

5.17
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate the hon. hon Rose Mutonyi Masaba from Bubulo West as Chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the hon. Janet Okori-moe from Abim District, as the vice-chairperson.

The following are members to that committee:
 
    1. Hon. David Abala, Ngora County
    2. Hon. Apollo Masika, Bubulo County East
    3. Hon. Felix Okot-Ogong, Dokolo County South
    4. Hon. Esther Anyakun, Nakapiripirit District
    5. Hon. Nelson Lufafa, Butembe County
    6. Hon. Andrew Martial, Igara County East
    7. Hon. Fred Angelo, Moroto Municipality
    8. Hon. Cissy Namujju, Lwengo District
    9. Hon. Bonny Okello, Kole County North
    10. Hon. Suubi Kyinyamatama, Rakai District, and
    11. Hon. Anifa Kawooya, Sembabule District.

5.18
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Mr Speaker, I wish to designate the following members to the Committee of Foreign Affairs:

    1. Hon. Godfrey Katusabe; Bukonzo County West
    2. Hon. Jack Wamai Wamanga; Mbale Municipality, and
    3. Hon. Komakech Lyandro; Gulu Municipality.

THE CLERK: The following independent members have been designated to serve on the Committee of Foreign Affairs:

    1. Hon. Hood Katuramu, PWD(Western) 
    2. Hon. Fred Mudukoi, Butebo County, and
    3. Hon. Peter Ocen, Kole County South.

5.19
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate Capt. Susan Lakot to serve on the Committee of Foreign Affairs. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the names of the Members you have heard are to constitute the Committee of Foreign Affairs and we are required to approve. I put the question to those names for approval.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Natural Resources

5.20
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate:
Hon. Alex Byarugaba, Isingiro County South, as the Chairperson 
Hon. Dr Keefa Kiwanuka, Kiboga East as Vice-Chairperson

The following are designated to serve on that committee as Members:

    1. Hon. Apollo Yeri, Tororo Municipality
    2. Hon. Norah Bigirwa, Buliisa District
    3. Hon. Lawrence Onegiu, Ora County
    4. Hon. Geofrey Dhamuzungu, Budiope County East
    5. Hon. Samson Lokeris, Dodoth County East
    6. Fredrick Angura, Tororo County South
    7. Hon. Masiko Winfred, Rukungiri District
    8. Hon. Solomon Silwany, Bukooli County Central
    9. Hon. Maria Ann Nankabirwa, Kyankwanzi District
    10. Hon. John Baptist Nambeshe, Manjiya County
    11. Hon. Syda Bbumba, Nakaseke County North 
    12. Hon. Wamakuyu Mudimi, Elgon County
    13. Hon. Patrick Nsamba, Kassanda County North 
    14. Hon. Thomas Tayebwa, Ruhinda County North
    15. Hon. Wilberforce Yaguma, Kashari County North 
    16. Hon. John Bosco Ikojo, Bukedea County
    17. Hon. Charles Ngabirano, Rwampara County, and
    18. Hon. David Mutebi, Buikwe County South.

I beg to move.

5.22
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Mr Speaker, I beg to present the following Members to serve on the Committee on Natural Resources: 

    1. Hon. Simon Oyet, Nwoya County
    2. Hon. Elijah Okupa, Kasilo County 
    3. Hon. Herbert Ariko, Soroti Municipality
    4. Hon. Jimmy Akena, Lira Municipality, and
    5. Hon. Florence Namayanja, Bukoto County East.

THE CLERK TO PARLIAMENT: The following independent members have been designated to serve on the Committee on Natural Resources:

    1. Hon. Reagan Okumu, Aswa County 
    2. Hon. Yorke Odria, Aringa County South
    3. Hon.  Silas Aogon, Kumi Municipality
    4. Hon. Oliver Katwesigye, Buhweju District
    5. Hon. Robert Ntenede, Bunya South, and
    6. Hon. Andrew Baryayanga, Kabale Municipality.

5.22
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate the hon. Brig. Gen. Innocent Oula to serve on the Committee of Natural Resources. I beg to move.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the names you have just heard are for Members designated to constitute the Committee on Natural Resources. We are required to approve them. Therefore, I put the question for your approval. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Presidential Affairs

5.23
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate the hon. Col. Fred Mwesigye, from Nyabushozi County, as the Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs and the hon. Susan Amero from Amuria, as the vice- chairperson.

Further, I wish to designate the following as Members of this committee:

    1. Hon. Tom Alero, West Moyo County;
    2. Hon. William Beijukye, Ruhaama County;
    3. Hon. Rukia Chekamondo, Kapchorwa District;
    4. Hon. Ababiku Jesca, Adjumani District;
    5. Hon. Helen Kahunde, Kiryandongo District; 
    6. Hon. Michael Tusiime, Mbarara Municipality;
    7. Hon. Joseph Kasozi, Bukoto County Mid-west; 
    8. Hon. Patrick Kasumba, Bujenje County;
    9. Hon. Peter Ogwang, Usuk County;
    10. Hon. Noah Olega, Aringa County;
    11. Hon. Rosemary Tumusiime, Entebbe Municipality;
    12. Hon. Stephen Kangwagye, Bukanga County;
    13. Hon. Vicent Woboya, Budadiri County East;
    14. Hon. Jacqueline Amongin, Ngora District;
    15. Hon. Simeo Nsubuga, Kassanda County South; 
    16. Hon. Joseph Ssekabiito, Mawogola County; and
    17. Hon. Kamya Henry, Mityana County South.

I beg to move.

5.24
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda): Mr Speaker, I wish to present the following Members to serve on the Committee of Presidential Affairs: 
Hon. Michael Kabaziguruka from Nakawa Division; 
Hon. Ibrahim Kasozi from Makindye Division East. 

I beg to move.

5.24
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate the hon. Lt Gen. Ivan Koreta, UPDF representative, to serve on the Committee of Presidential Affairs. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, the names you have heard are for Members of Parliament designated to constitute the Committee of Presidential Affairs. I put the question for your approval.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs

5.25
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker and honorable members, I beg to designate the hon. Judith Nabakooba, Woman Member for Mityana District, as Chairperson of the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs. She will be deputised by the hon. Kezekia Mbogo from Budaka County.

The other Members designated to that committee include: 

1. 	Hon. Ibrahim Abiriga, Arua Municipality;
2. 	Hon. Kahonda Mugabe, Ruhinda County; 
3. 	Hon. Pamela Kamugo, Budaka District; 
4. 	Hon. Hillary Lokwang, Ik County;
5. 	Hon. Muyanja Mbabali, Bukoto South;
6. 	Hon. Sarah Nakawunde, Mpigi District; 
7. 	Hon. Rwemulikya Ibanda, Ntoroko County;
8. 	Hon. Richard Oseku Oriebo, Kibale County; and 
9. 	Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, Rwemiyanga County.

I beg to move.

5.26
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda): Mr Speaker, on the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs, I wish to present the following Members designated to serve there:

1. 	Hon. Mubarak Munyagwa, Kawempe South;
2. 	Hon. Gilbert Olanya, Kilak South;
3. 	Hon. Hassan Kaps Fungaroo, Obongi County; and
4. 	Hon. Muwanga Kivimbi, Butambala County.

THE CLERK: The following independent Members have been designated to serve on the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs:

1. 	Hon. Cyrus Amodoi Imalingat, Toroma County;
2. 	Hon. Christine Tubo Nakwang, Kaboong District;
3. 	Hon. Francis Zaake, Mityana Municipality; and
4. 	Hon. Kato Lubwama, Rubaga Division South.

5.27
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate hon. Col. Felix Kulayigye of the UPDF to serve on the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the names you have heard are for the Members designated to constitute the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. I put the question for your approval of these names.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Committee on Physical Infrastructure

5.28
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate:

Hon. Denis Sabiiti of Rubanda County West as Chairperson 
Hon. Lillian Nakate Segujja of Luweero District, as the vice-chairperson.

The following are designated to serve as Members of the committee:

    1. Hon. Moses Angundru, Terego County West 
    2. Hon. Paul N. Asaba, Kyaka County North
    3. Hon. Abraham James Byandala, Katikamu County North
    4. Hon. Mark Angel Dulu, Adjumani County East
    5. Hon. Kafeero Ssekitoleko, Nakifuma County
    6. Hon. Henry Moris Kibalya, Bugabula County South
    7. Hon. George Nsamba Kumama, Bbaale County
    8. Hon. Alex Burundo Musingo, Bulambuli County;
    9. Hon. Amos Mandela, Buyamba County
    10. Hon. Margaret Mbeiza, Kaliro District
    11. Hon. Richard Otieno Okoth, West Budama County North
    12. Hon. Paul Musoke Sebulime, Buikwe County North
    13. Hon. Robinah Nabbanja, Kakumiro District
    14. Hon. Boaz Ninsiima Kasirabo, Kooki County
    15. Hon. James Waluswaka, Bunyole County West
    16. Hon. Florence Wamala Nambozo, Sironko District
    17. Hon. Lawrence Mangusho, Kween County and
    18. Hon. Robert Kasolo, Iki-Iki County.

I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

5.30
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Ms Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda): Mr Speaker, I designate the following Members to serve on the Committee on Physical Infrastructure: 

    1. Hon. William Nzoghu, Busongora County North
    2. Hon. Jonathan Odur , Erute County South 
    3. Hon. Ssempala Kigozi, Makindye Ssabagabo,  and
    4. Hon. Francis Mwijukye, Buhweju County.

THE CLERK TO PARLIAMENT: Independents:

    1. Hon. Julius Ochen, Kapelebyong County
    2. Hon. Anne Mary Tumwine, Ntoroko District
    3. Hon. Onesimus Twinamasiko, Bugangaizi County East 
    4. Hon. Kenneth Soyekwo Cheborion, Tingey County, and
    5. Hon. Samuel Okwir, Moroto County.

5.31
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate the hon. Brig. Gen Francis Takirwa of the UPDF to serve on the Committee of Physical Infrastructure. I beg to move.

MR WAIRA MAJEGERE: Mr Speaker, you requested us to give out our priority areas and I gave my priority area of the Committee of Physical Infrastructure. I have not heard my name.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, there are issues that will be resolved when we finish this. It could be one of them. Honourable members, the names you have heard are for Members designated to constitute the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. I put the question for the approval of those names.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Public Service and Local Government

5.32
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate:
Hon. Raphael Magyezi of Igara West as Chairperson of the Committee of Public Service and Local Governments and 
Hon. Onzima Godfrey from Aringa North, as the vice-chairperson.

Further, I wish to designate the following as Members of that committee:

    1. Hon. Doreen Ruth Amule, Amolatar District
    2. Hon. Spellanza Baguma Muhenda, Kyenjojo District 
    3. Hon. Sam Byibesho, Kisoro Municipality 
    4. Hon. Jovrine Kaliisa, Ibanda District
    5. Hon Johnson Muyanja Ssenyonga, Mukono County South
    6. Hon. Sylvia Akello, Otuke District
    7. Hon. Rehema Watongola, Kamuli Municipality
    8. Hon. Noah Mutebi Wanzala, Nakasongola County  and
    9. Hon. Ismail Ogama, Lower Madi County.

5.33
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda): Mr Speaker, I wish to present the following Members designated to serve on the Committee of Public Service and Local Governments:

    1. Hon. Robert Centenary, Kasese Municipality
    2. Hon. Nabilah Nagayi Sempala, Kampala District
    3. Hon. Deogratius Kiyingi, Bukomansimbi County South, and 
    4. Hon. Fred Turyamuhweza, Rujumbura.

THE CLERK:  The following independent Members have been designated to serve on the Committee of Public Service and Local Governments:

    1. Hon. Julie Mukoda Zabwe, Mayuge District;
    2. Hon. Moses Kasibante, Rubaga North; and 
    3. Hon. Annet Nyakecho, Tororo North.

5.34
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate the hon. Col. Flavia Byekwaso of UPDF to serve on the Committee of Public Service and Local Governments. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the names of the members you have heard have been designated to constitute the Committee on Public Service and Local Governments. I now put the question for your approval.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEMUJJU: I have read names of Members supposed to be on the Committee on Trade and Tourism. I beg your pardon, Mr Speaker; I need to be helped.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you would you like to ask us to go back to review the list? Would you like to formally remove them?

MR SSEMUJU: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that you reconsider the names for Members on the Committee on Public Service and Local Governments because I had presented names of Members designated to serve on the Committee on Trade and Tourism.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, you are allowed to do that but can you first withdraw the names you have read on the record?

MR SSEMUJU: Mr Speaker, I withdraw the names of the following members: Hon. Robert Centenary, Kasese Municipality; Hon. Nabilah Nagayi Sempala, Kampala District; Hon. Deogratius Kiyingi, Bukomansimbi County South; and Hon. Turyamuhweza Fred, Rujumbura and replace them with the following members: 

    1. Hon. Peter Okot, Tochi County 
    2. Hon. Betty Nambooze Bakireke, Mukono Municipality
    3. Hon. Roland Mugume, Rukungiri Municipality.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, some of the names that we had approved have been withdrawn and there is a proposal to replace them with the new names that have just been read. I now put the question for the approval of the new names to be included in the Committee on Public Service and Local Governments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Education and Sports

5.36
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I beg to designate the hon. Connie Nakayenze, from Mbale District, as Chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports. She will be deputised by the hon. Jacob Opolot, from Pallisa County. 

Further, I wish to designate the following as Members to the same committee: 

    1. Hon. Julius Acom, Otuke County
    2. Hon. Maria Goretti Ajilo, Kaberamaido District
    3. Hon. Paul Amoru , Dokolo County North
    4. Hon. Gordon Arinda, Bushenyi Ishaka Municipality
    5. Hon. Margaret Baba Diri, Koboko District
    6. Hon. Stephen Kisa, Luuka County South
    7. Hon. Isaac Etuka, Upper Madi County
    8. Maj. (Rtd) David Guma Gumisiriza, Ibanda County North
    9. Hon. Sheila Kabaije, Kiruhura District
    10. Hon. Molly Lanyero, Lamwo District
    11. Hon. Jenepher Nantume, Buvuma District
    12. Hon. John Twesigye, Bunyaruguru County
    13. Hon. Pius Wakabi, Bugahya County
    14. Hon. Idah Nabayiga, Kalangala District 
    15. Hon. Robert Musoke, Budiope County West
    16. Hon. Margaret Lamwaka, Kitgum District
    17. Hon. Violet Adome, Katakwi District
    18. Hon. Nathan Twesigye, Kashari South County. 

I beg to move.

5.39
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): I designate the following Members to serve on the Committee on Education and Sports:

    1. Hon. Emmanuel Ongiertho, Jonam County
    2. Hon. Allan Ssewanyana, Makindye Division West
    3. Hon. Joseph Ssewungu, Kalungu County West, and
    4. Hon. Mary Kabanda, Masaka District.

THE CLERK: The following independent Members have been designated to serve on the Committee on Education and Sports:

    1. Hon. Zaitun Driwaru, Yumbe District
    2. Hon. Margaret Rwabushaija, Workers
    3. Hon. Lydia Chekwel, Kween District, and
    4. Hon. David Lukyamuzi, Busujju County.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you. Honourable members, the names you have heard are for Members designated to constitute the Committee on Education and Sports. I now put the question for your approval.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

5.40
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I beg to designate the hon. Oketayot Lowila, from Pader District as Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, and the hon. Robert Miggade, from Buvuma Islands, as the vice-chairperson.

The following have been designated as Members to this committee:

    1. Hon. Lawrence Akugizibwe, Mwenge County North
    2. Hon. Rose Kabagyenyi, Kisoro District
    3. Hon. Jalia Bintu, Masindi District
    4. Hon. Carolyn Birungi, Kyamuswa County
    5. Hon. Everlyn Chemutai, Bukwo District
    6. Hon. Ruth Katushabe, Bukomansimbi County North
    7. Hon. Tophus Kaahwa, Hoima District
    8. Hon. Joseph Kakooza, Buwekula County
    9. Hon. Justine Khainza, Bududa District
    10. Hon. Peace Kusasira, Mukono District
    11. Hon. Albert Lokoru, Tepeth County
    12. Hon. Zerubabel Nyiira, Buruli County
    13. Hon. Cosmas Elotu, Dakabela County
    14. Hon. Sylvia Rwabongo, Kabarole District
    15. Hon. Agnes Taaka, Bugiri District
    16. Hon. Jacqueline Aol, Nebbi District, and
    17. Hon. Aisha Sekindi, Kalungu District.

I beg to move.

5.41
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): I designate the following Members to serve on the Committee on Agriculture:

    1. Hon. Alum Santa, Oyam District
    2. Hon. Veronica Nanyondo, Bukomansimbi District
    3. Hon. Francis Gonahasa, Kabweri County
    4. Hon. Tony Muhindo, Bukonzo County East, and 
    5. Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo, Agago County North.
 
I beg to move.

THE CLERK: The following independent Members have been designated to serve on the Committee on Agriculture:

    1. Hon. Julius Opondo, Bujumba County
    2. Hon. Kenneth Eitunganane, Soroti County
    3. Hon. Andrew Kiiza, Kigulu County South
    4. Hon. Geoffrey Watenga, Lutseshe County, and
    5. Hon. Ojara Okin, Chua County West.

5.42
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to designate the hon. Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala to serve on the Committee of Agriculture.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the names you have heard are for Members designated to constitute the Committee on Agriculture. I now put the question for your approval.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development

5.43
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I beg to designate the hon. Margret Komuhangi from Nakasongola District as Chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and the hon. Beatrice Anywar, from Kitgum Municipality, as the vice-chairperson.

Further, I beg to designate the following as Members of the committee:

    1. Hon. Terence Achia, Bokora County
    2. Hon. Hellen Asamo, PWD Eastern
    3. Hon. Grace Kesande, Rubirizi District
    4. Hon. Judith Babirye, Buikwe District
    5. Hon. Aboud Kitata, Bukoto County West
    6. Hon. Milly Mugeni, Butaleja District
    7. Hon. Mpaka Mwine, Youth, Western
    8. Hon. Patrick Okabe, Serere County
    9. Hon. Maurine Osoru, Arua District
    10. Hon. Christine Achen, Alebtong District
    11. Hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara, Workers
    12. Hon. Grace Kaudha, Iganda District
    13. Hon. Alex Ndeezi, PWD, and
    14. Hon. Sarah Najjuma, Nakaseke District.

I beg to move. 

5.45
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): I beg designate the following Members to serve on the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development: hon. Lucy Akello from Amuru District and hon. Jackson Mbaju from Busongora South.

THE CLERK: The following independent Members have been designated to serve on the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development:

    1. Hon. Joshua Anywarach  – Padyere County
    2. Hon. Lucy Achiro – Aruu County North, and 
    3. Hon. Sarah Wekomba – Bulambuli District.

5.45
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): I thank you. Mr Speaker, I beg to designate the hon. Capt. Everlyne Asiimwe of the UPDF to serve on the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the names you have heard are for Members designated to constitute the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. I now put the question for your approval.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

The Committee on East African Community Affairs

5.46
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate the hon. Ayoo Tonny, from Kwania County, as Chairperson of the Committee on East African Community Affairs and the hon. Owuma George Abott, from Bukooli Islands, as the vice-chairperson to that committee.

Further, I wish to designate the following as Members of the same committee:

    1. Hon. Nalule Safia Juuko, PWD
    2. Hon. Christopher Kalemba, Kakuuto County
    3. Hon. James Baba, Koboko County
    4. Hon. Agnes Kunihira, Workers
    5. Hon. Agnes Ameede, Pallisa District, and
    6. Hon. Elizabeth Karungi, Kanungu District.

5.46
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr IBrahim Ssemuju Nganda): Mr Speaker, I beg to present the hon. Angelline Osegge from Soroti District to serve on the Committee on East African Community Affairs.

THE CLERK TO PARLIAMENT: The following independent Members have been designated to serve on the Committee on East African Community Affairs: hon. Babirye Veronica Kadogo from Buyende District and the hon. Karuhanga Kafureeka Gerald from Ntungamo Municipality.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the names of the Members designated to constitute the committee on East African Community Affairs. I put the question for your approval.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON TRADE, TOURISM AND INDUSTRY

5.48
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I beg to designate:

    1. Hon. Lubogo Kenneth from Bulamogi County as the Chairperson and 
    2. Hon. Ruhunda Alex from Fort Portal Municipality as Vice Chairperson of the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry.

The following have been designated to serve on the same committee as Members: 

    3. Hon. Balyeku Moses Grace, Jinja Municipality West
    4. Hon. Awor Engola, Apac District
    5. Hon. Aleper Acira Margaret, Kotido District
    6. Hon. Mugisha Muhanga, Burahya County
    7. Hon. Stephen Mayende, Bukooli County South
    8. Hon. Peter Mugema, Iganga Municipality
    9. Hon. Robina Hope Mukisa, Namayingo District
    10. Hon. James Nsaba Buturo, Bufumbira County East
    11. Hon. Timuzigu Michael, Kajara County
    12. Hon. Omony Oscar, Youth Northern
    13. Hon. John Bosco Sseguya Lubyayi, Mawokota County South
    14. Hon. John Kamara, Bufumbira North
    15. Hon. Odur Jack Lutanywa, Kibanda County South
    16. Hon. Geoffrey Macho, Busia Municipality
    17. Hon. Gordon Bafaki, Kazo County, and
    18. Hon. Reuben Paul Chelimo, Kongasis County.

5.49
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ssemujju Nganda): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate the following members to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry:

    1. Hon. Centenary Robert, Kasese Municipality;
    2. Hon. Nagayi Nabila, Kampala District;
    3. Hon. Deogratious Kiyingi, Bukomansimbi County South, and
    4. Hon. Turyamuhweza Tumuhairwe, Rujumbura County.

THE CLERK TO PARLIAMENT: The following independent Members have been designated to serve on the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry: 

    1. Hon. Jane Kwoba, Busia District
    2. Hon. Christopher Kipterit Akorikimoi, Amudat County
    3. Hon. Rosemary Nauwat, Amudat District.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the names you have heard are for Members designated to constitute the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry. I put the question for your approval.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs

5.50
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I would like to designate hon. Oboth Jacob, from West Budama South, Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, and the hon.  Robina Gureme Rwakoojo, from Gomba West, as vice-chairperson.

The following have been designated as Members of that committee:

    1. Hon. Amoding Monica, Kumi District;
    2. Hon. Gafabusa Richard Muhumuza, Bwamba County; 
    3. Hon. Isala Eregu Veronica, Kaberamaido District;
    4. Hon. Kafuuzi Jackson, Kyaka South;
    5. Hon. Obua Denis Hamson, Ajuri County;
    6. Hon. Acia Remegio, Pian County;
    7. Hon. Bitangaro Sam Kwizera, Bufumbira South;
    8. Hon. Kajara Aston, Mwenge South; 
    9. Hon. Clement Ongalo Obote, Kalaki County;
    10. Hon. Agaba Abbas Mugisha, Kitagwenda County;
    11. Hon. Azairwe Dorothy, Kamwenge District; and
    12. Hon. Mugoya Kyawa, Bukooli North.

I beg to present, Mr Speaker.

5.52
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ssemujju Nganda): Mr Speaker, I beg to present the following Members to serve on the committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs:

    1. Hon. Abdu Katuntu – Bugweri County;
    2. Hon. Ssemuju Ibrahim - Kira Municipality;
    3. Hon. Medard Ssegona Lubega - Busiro East; and
    4. Hon. Matthias Mpuuga - Masaka Municipality.

THE CLERK TO PARLIAMENT: The following Members have been designated to serve on the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs: 

    1. Hon. Akamba Paul - Busiki County;
    2. Hon. Otto Edward - Agago County;
    3. Hon. Adeke Anna Ebaju - National Female Youth;
    4. Hon. Nsereko Mohamed - Kampala Central Division; and
    5. Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba - Ndorwa East.

5.53
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate the hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine to serve on the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the names you have heard are for the members designated to constitute the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I now put the question for your approval.

(Question put and agreed to)

Committee on ICT

5.53
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate the hon. Paula Turyahikayo from Rubabo County, as Chairperson of the Committee on ICT, and the hon. Maxwell Akora, from Maruzi County, as vice-chairperson. The following have been designated to serve as Members of the committee: hon. Abigaba Cuthbert from Kibale County and the hon. Namoe Stella Nyomera from Napak – (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter on whether the NRM Whip can designate a Member of UPC because I heard my good friend, the hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, designating a Member of the Opposition UPC Party. We want to be guided how it is happening and if it is good practice then we will be advised so that we can designate some NRM Members to committees too.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House has witnessed some of these changes recently. I am aware that the honourable member for Aruu County knows that the former Whip of the UPC is now a Minister in Government. I do not know whether it is following that sequence but I am only guided by Rule 176(6) of our Rules of Procedure, which gives the whip those latitudes, and where the Member has no objections, it is permitted by our rules. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Mr Speaker, on the same issue, as you said, it sounds very unique because hon. Maxwell Akora was also designated by our own Opposition Chief Whip in one of the standing committees. Does it mean that when the Committee on Rules and Privileges sits, we will work on this as one of the amendments because it has to be clear.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As we said, the rules are applied as they are but not as they ought to be. For now, that is what they are. We will use them as they are. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I consulted hon. Maxwell Akora. I was reading the members and I had read hon. Stella Nyomera, Napak
Hon. Nathan Igeme Nabeta, Jinja East Municipality
Hon. Peter Sematimba, Busiro County South
Hon. Anthony Ssemuli, Mubende Municipality
Hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire, Buyaga County West
Hon. Idi Amin Tabani, Kibanda County North
Hon. Fred Bwino Kyakulaga, Kigulu County North
Hon. Eric Musana, Buyaga County East

I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Chief Opposition Whip? 

5.58
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Mr Speaker, on the Committee on Information and Communication Technology, I beg to designate the following members:

    1. Hon. Apollo Kantinti, Kyadondo County East
    2. Hon. Lee Denis Oguzu, Maracha County
    3. Hon. Musoke Wakayima, Nansana Municipality
    4. Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo, Agago County North

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Clerk. 

THE CLERK TO PARLIAMENT:  
    1. Hon. Benard Atiku, Ayivu County
    2. Hon. Gideon Onyango, Samia Bugwe County North
    3. Hon. Waira Kyewalabye Majegere, Bunya County East
    4. Hon. Stephen Biraahwa Mukitale, Buliisa County.
 
5.59
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East): Mr Speaker, I have unfinished business with the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. That is my priority committee that I had indicated. Therefore, I would like to decline it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We said there will be an opportunity to solve these pending matters in the course of next week. Therefore, there is no vitality in this matter. Let us wait and have them resolved next week. 

Honourable members, I think that is the last committee unless the list is not complete or there are matters that we need to review. This would be the appropriate time to do it. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I beg your pardon and the House. I had presented Prof. Ogenga Latigo on the Committee on Agriculture. I am sorry now that we have approved him on the Committee on Information and Communication Technology, I would like to beg you, Mr Speaker and Parliament, to replace him with hon. Angiro Gutumoi on the Committee on Agriculture. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prof. Ogenga Latigo is up and it looks like he has a matter to raise on that. 

6.00
PROF. MORRIS OGENGA LATIGO (FDC, Agago County North, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter of the Committee on Agriculture was resolved and I do not think it is procedurally right to reopen it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: All of them have been resolved actually but we are still at a stage where we can - what is your view? 

PROF OGENGA LATIGO: Mr Speaker, you have not moved to a new committee. Since my name appears for the third time in this committee, let it be eliminated. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which committee? 

PROF OGENGA LATIGO: This last one - Information and Communication Technology.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Should it be removed from this committee? 

PROF OGENGA LATIGO: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, is that what the Chief Opposition Whip has proposed? 

MR SSEMUJJU: My proposal was to remove Prof. Ogenga Latigo from the Committee on Agriculture to accommodate hon. Angiro Gutomoi, who -(Interjections)- I know this Parliament is setting new precedents of the NRM designating Opposition members, but at least the rule still gives me the power to designate.

The reason I am doing so is that hon. Gutomoi is the Shadow Minister for Agriculture. I will consult with Prof. Ogenga Latigo and then we will come and - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Angiro is also standing – hon. Member, you rose to address the House. 

MR SSEMUJJU:  I will come back, Mr Speaker, and move the House to make a few changes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For now, should we take it as we have adopted? Okay for now, Prof. Ogenga Latigo remains in two sessional committees but that will not be according to the rules. 

MR SSEMUJJU: No, I withdrew the proposal I had made so he remains on the Committee on Agriculture. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you have also nominated him on the committee on ICT? I need to be guided on which one is which. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, can I formally move that Prof. Ogenga Latigo be removed from the committee on ICT and he stays on the Committee on Agriculture? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, we had adopted the names that have been put on the designated committee on ICT, but now there is a request from the Chief Opposition Whip to withdraw one name. Therefore, we are going to have to put the question to that same list of committee minus the name of Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo. I put the question to that withdrawal and adoption of the new list. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS EGUNYU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. I was in the last Parliament but my observation is that the whips are in this Parliament to whip members of their side. We have not yet changed the Rules of Procedure; we are still using the Rules of Procedure of the Ninth Parliament. I am disturbed. How come the Government Chief Whip can nominate someone from the Opposition to a committee yet the Opposition Chief Whip should be the one to nominate a member to a committee. 

Mr Speaker, isn’t it right that before we proceed on matters of Parliament, we change the Rules of Procedure that a whip of any side can whip anyone despite the party one belongs to? 

Secondly, as a matter of concern, I feel that the multiparty system is becoming useless to the Government of Uganda. The people who introduced the system had their own intentions, which all of us know. However, if we consider people’s intentions - getting ministers from other parties, nominating people from different parties to come and work on the committees - before we begin any work of Parliament since Parliament has just begun, why don’t we change the Constitution from multiparty system to Movement system and we become one so that we can work for the Government of Uganda minus any controversies. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, on what point do you rise?

MR OLANYA: I would like to give information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to give information on procedure? The member was raising a procedural point and you would like to give information?

MR OLANYA: It is another procedural point.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, if it is a procedural point, please go ahead.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rule 176(4) of our Rules of Procedure states, “Independent Members shall apply to the Clerk to join a committee of their choice and the Speaker shall accordingly ensure that the members join the committee of their choice.”

I am wonder how hon. Beatrice Anywar, who is an Independent Member of Parliament, has been appointed by the NRM side. This means that we are not following our Rules of Procedure. She would have applied through the Clerk. It is better we stick to our rules in order for our Parliament to be seen as the Parliament of Uganda. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I deal with these two first and then we can handle others later. I had said something earlier about the matter raised by the Member for Buvuma District. Just for the record, again, what is not prohibited is allowed. That is the law; if something is not prohibited, it is allowed.

The issue of designating members of this nature, I quoted earlier Rule 176(6) of our Rules of Procedure. It applies to the whip of this nature designating people in a manner, unless the member being designated objects to it.

On the point raised by the Member for Kilak in regard to hon. Beatrice Anywar, the designation relating to membership is where the Speaker’s mandate stops. As for the leadership of a committee, it does not fall within the authority of the Speaker to appoint leaders of committees. The case of hon. Beatrice Anywar, Kitgum Municipality, is a question of leadership of a committee and not membership of a committee. This distinction has got to be made clearly.

MR OYET: Mr Speaker, still on a procedural matter on Rule 176(5) - I am raising this now because I could have been misunderstood for conflicting with some of my friends. It says, “Parties or organisations shall have powers to withdraw and relocate members from individual committees.”

Administratively, we would have managed all this exercise within manageable time but because there were a lot of objections from individual members, to the extent that those who were mandated by the Rules of Procedure to designate were actually intimidated to the point of pulling some members on their demand.

I think for us to be consistent with the legal framework within Parliament, we should really stick to the Rules of Procedure. I really would like you to guide us on Rule 176(5). How shall we handle those issues? Suppose tomorrow I am designated and I object, yet it is not provided for within the Rules of Procedure, how are we going to handle that? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in these very proceedings, Members have been designated and they have rejected going to those committees. That arrangement is there. The honourable member for Agago refused to belong to a committee; the honourable member for Arua Municipality declined to belong to a committee, which he had been designated. What you are saying is actually not new. It is what is provided for in those rules and we are following those rules.

A member has a right to say that they do not want to belong to that committee. Hon. Prof. Latigo has just done the same and now, he would like to address the House. (Laughter)

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been restraining myself since yesterday because I assume that we have not adopted the Rules of Procedure for the Tenth Parliament and in that murky water, we could apply anything.

Starting from the sitting arrangements, I kept quiet about it. However, hon. Odonga Otto raised this matter and I thank the honourable member who raised this procedural matter much earlier on. We have a fundamental problem related to members of the Uganda Peoples Congress. I do not know the implications as yet; we will probably accept what is going on but I hope that the members concerned do recognise the legal implications of what is happening. 

If UPC that presented names in the election is one party and that same UPC has members who are serving in the Cabinet and that same UPC has members who are serving in the Opposition, then UPC as a party has a legal problem or members who are accepting to be designated have a legal problem. Unfortunately, that problem will fall on us as Parliament. It may be important – (Interruption)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: The information I would like to give Prof. Ogenga Latigo is that UPC has some members that have voluntarily decided to work with the NRM. There are also members of the UPC, myself inclusive, that have decided to remain members of the Opposition. I, therefore, would like to provide that information to you so that you do not generalise members of UPC but to single out those who have accepted to cross the Floor of Parliament and they should be able to cross. Thank you.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, honourable member, for the information. That is exactly why I began my statement the way I did. Seated here, you run into a real dilemma. Does UPC have options as to where they would like to serve or the party decides whether they are in alliance with the ruling party or they are in the Opposition? 

If they decide that they are in alliance, then all the designations that were made by the Chief Opposition Whip are invalid. This is because the Chief Opposition Whip will not have powers to designate those UPC members. This is the dilemma I am in.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, for now, the rules present both situations and recognise both of them. However, they cannot be resolved in one way or the other unless there is a matter contested elsewhere, outside this House but what has been done has been done within the authority of the Rules of Procedures. 

MR WAIRA MAJEGERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to tread on Prof Ogenga’s remarks. When the NRM designates Members from UPC, first, we need to know their Memorandum of Understanding when they were taking over the work of the UPC whip -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it has already been done. If there is something fundamentally wrong with it, I am not in position to decide one way or the other. That matter will be resolved outside this House by another institution of Government. Let us not go into the details of the arguments. It has been done and my ruling is that the rules do not prohibit what has been done. In fact, it permits it.

If there is a problem with it, somebody else has to interpret it for us. Let us not now become the super powers of interpretation of these matters. I have declined to do that for now.

6.17
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think this is a very difficult position for this House; that you have a party which sits on both sides of the House –(Laughter)– and I do not know how you will refer to it, whether it is Opposition or Government. 

However, let me give you my humble counsel, Mr Speaker. It is perfectly okay for parties to decide to work together; the law provides for it. That if our colleagues in the Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) decided to work with the ruling party, they can enter into a pact and form what we call a coalition government and for that, members of UPC can comfortably sit the other side. The law will not have any conflict.

However, that you have Members the other side and this side, first, it is an awkward position even for the Members themselves. Just like my colleague here –(Interjection)– Can you give me one minute? I was trying to give my humble counsel. Then what the UPC can do is to take a decision whether they formally have to work with the NRM and they can cross the other side and we will not have any problem. However, to have them as Opposition and in Government is difficult. 

Having said that, if the party decides that it wants to work with the NRM and then some Members of that party are reluctant to work with the NRM, then that means they have gone against the party decision. They will not qualify to sit this side. They will instead sit on the “rebel” side because it is a party decision that they are going to work with the ruling party. 

However – and I would like to call them renegades, with due respect - those who would not have taken that position, will continue being Members of Parliament because of the precedent that has been set by the Supreme Court but they will not be this side. Instead, they are going to be sitting where hon. Anywar is seated.

I think you would save us the embarrassment by taking a formal decision and even save this country litigation because it is as simple as that. You have to decide either to have your cake or to eat it. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we all witnessed what happened in the elections. This issue of UPC is not just coming to the House now; it came during elections. There are sections of the UPC that opted to work with the NRM and others that declined. That is what is being revealed in the House right now.

Therefore, it is up to them to resolve it. However, as of now, what has been done does not violet any procedure of this House. If there are contestations beyond what has been done, then there are areas of resolving them.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, my understanding of the law is that our Constitution prohibits crossing the Floor. In addition, the mere fact that you were elected this side and tomorrow you find yourself the other side, you have actually crossed the Floor unless you have entered into a formal agreement and it is a coalition government.

However, an individual who is still on an Opposition party ticket and crosses the other side, has crossed the Floor. It has legal ramifications. That is my simple understanding of the law as it is now. Therefore, there is a problem, Mr Speaker, and you being the custodian of the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure, you have to address yourself to it deeply and see how you can guide this House. The answer may not be now but eventually, you will have to address yourself to it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable members, what has been done as far as the rules of this House are concerned, I do not see any violation. If there is need for somebody else to interrogate this matter, there is another organ of this Government that can handle that issue. 

However, as for now the way the House is constituted, the rules for nominating a Member from across the other side, designating a Member has been cited clearly; Rule 176 (6), it is within our Rules of Procedure. Now what do you want the Speaker to do? To say that it is not within the rules or it is against the rules when it is within the rules?

If it offends something fundamental and I do not think it is the mandate of the Speaker to declare that a man has lost a seat. That would be a jurisdiction of another institution.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Just to help, Mr Speaker, I appreciate the contribution of hon. Abdu Katuntu and yours too. We also cannot make any judgment until the rule that provides for sitting arrangement in this House is enforced. If tomorrow we revert to the Opposition sitting on the left side of the Speaker and those in Government sitting on the right side, we would be able to proceed from there. (Laughter)

6.25
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Mr Speaker, as people who are responsible for this side, we are also in a very difficult situation. You did say and rightly so that a section of the UPC campaigned for the NRM but there is also a section that came here when they were UPC but in this one or two months, they have also changed. For example, I had a meeting with the whips of the parties and they gave me a list indicating where their members should serve.

In fact, hon. Patrick Maxwell Akora was on the Committee on Finance the last time we met with the UPC whip, only to be told now that someone else has designated him. The fear I have as one of the people on this side is that I do not know what remains of UPC on my side for me to whip and designate. Suppose all those that I have designated tomorrow are re-assigned by the Government Chief Whip?  

Mr Speaker, probably this is a matter that can be answered by UPC and their whip is in Parliament. We can ask her to help the House understand how they would like to proceed then the issues of the law can be dealt with in the manner that you have said. Otherwise, the administrative ones are also becoming difficult.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the UPC Whip here?

6.27
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I have been trying hard to catch your eye. The issue before the House now cannot be resolved minus some institutions outside Parliament. 

It is true that hon. Maxwell Akora has been designated by the Government Chief Whip and the issue is a very complex one. I do not want to go into details now but at the same time we have members this side who are really –(Laughter)– I need your protection, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let the honourable member speaker freely.

MS ALUM: Much as hon. Maxwell Akora has been designated by the Government Chief Whip, he has not yet crossed, which is the major concern being raised by members. Mr Speaker, now that we are faced with a very difficult issue which needs other institutions or other party organs and us who are affected as members of Parliament to sit and resolve, I don’t think this is the right forum. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you look at the list and I made a distinction; I said designation for membership then there is the issue of leadership. The question on the committee on ICT is a leadership question.
No.2 on the list which was presented by the Government Chief Whip is hon. Maxwell Akora, Maruzi County, UPC, Vice Chairperson of the Committee. I do not know whether she was only dealing with the issue of - because the responsibility of assigning leadership rests with the Chief Whip for the particular section.

For example, if the accountability committee leadership is supposed to be designed by somebody from this side. I do not know whether it is a question of leadership or membership. However, as the Whip of the Uganda Peoples Congress has stated, some of the aspects of what is going on is beyond what we can discuss at the moment. Let her clean up and come and advise us on how to proceed at the next level. This is not a matter we can exhaustively discuss and conclude.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Mr Speaker, I agree with you and you have extensively guided the House on the same. However, this circumstance which my Chief Whip, hon. Ssemujju Nganda, is presenting where he designates hon. Maxwell Akora as a member of the Finance committee which is a sessional committee; at the same time, the Government Chief Whip designates hon. Maxwell Akora as a vice chairperson of another sessional committee - our Rules of Procedure provide that a Member of Parliament does not serve on more than one sessional committee. You can now imagine we are trying to accept the situation as it is but it is messing the institution of Parliament and the Rules of Procedure of the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just for the record, hon. Ssemujju, did you designate hon. Maxwell Akora to another sessional committee?

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I did not designate him. I wrote to you and also gave a copy to the Government Chief Whip designating him. However, I did not read his name here because his name had been read by the Government Chief Whip.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There has been no name of hon. Maxwell Akora read twice for sessional committees. Please, let the records show that because I was listening. I would have been the first to object.

Honourable members, these matters of committees are not concluded. When the Speaker is speaking, honourable members will listen in silence; and some people get offended when I say this but that is what the rules say and that is how I am protected by the rules. Otherwise, I would have an upsurge of members. That is the only authority I have in this House. (Laughter)

Honourable members, this matter of committees and the designation and constitution of committees has not been concluded. Let us wait for the balance and the rules that have got to be improved to accommodate. When it is being concluded properly, then we can have clarification from the UPC Whip and all the other issues and then we can resolve this matter in a more comprehensive way because right now it is still very tentative.

Honourable members, we have handled the matters on the Order Paper. Just for the record, at the time of taking a decision on the motion in No.5, the number that had been supplied to the Speaker was 249 Members of Parliament who were present to take that decision.

The pending matter that is still here is the issue of membership of the Pan-African Parliament and the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. Can we finish with those and then there after I have members who had raised issues, which we could not finish. I now request that they be allowed to finish with them tomorrow, because by the rules, tomorrow is private member’s time for the first hours of the debate.

The members will be the members for Kioga County, Kumi Municipality, Bukonjo West, Kasese Municipality and Adjumani District. If there are other urgent matters that need to be raised, Members can come to the Speaker’s Office tomorrow and we make a compilation so that when we meet in the afternoon, we can finish with them.

We also expect a statement on South Sudan from the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, hon. Okello Oryem, tomorrow in the afternoon. Can we finish with the designation there are other issues that relates to the committees?

MR KATUNTU: It is about the committees. Mr Speaker, as you realise, there are many members whose position has not been cleared and I would like to speak on their behalf though I do not belong to that category.

I thought you would use the authority you possess, by virtue of the rules, to have this matter directed so that next week we do not have any members -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I was going to conclude with so that we have clear guidance on how we are going to resolve the issue of committees next week. Can we deal with the designation on the Pan-African Parliament and the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association?

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO THE PAN-AFRICAN PARLIAMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 13 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

6.36
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I would like to designate hon. Felix Okot Ogong, Dokolo County; hon. Anifa Kawooya, Ssembabule District; and hon. Jacqueline Amongin of Ngora District as members of the Pan-African Parliament. 
I beg to designate.

6.37
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Mr Speaker, I would like to present Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo, as our representative to the Pan-African Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the names have been designated from the different sides of the House; hon. Felix Okot Ogong, hon. Anifa Kawooya, hon. Jacqueline Amongin and hon. Morris Ogenga Latigo. Those names have been designated to constitute our Members, who will go to the Pan-African Parliament. We are required to approve these names. I will put the question for the approval of these names.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have not heard the position of the Independents. In the previous Parliament, we had one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How many are they supposed to be?

MR KAKOOZA: They are supposed to be five members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, then there should be a gap. Who is fifth Member of Parliament to go to the Pan-African Parliament?

MR KAKOOZA: The discretion is with the Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it at the discretion of the Speaker to designate? Clerk, do we have a name for this? Okay that name will be brought after the Speaker has submitted the name, Thank you.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO THE COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY ASSOCIATION

6.38
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I would like to present hon. Jalia Bintu Lukumu, Woman Member of Parliament, Masindi; and hon. Patrick Oshabe Nsamba, Member of Parliament, Kassanda County North, as Members of Parliament to represent us in the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Chief Opposition Whip.

6.39
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Mr Speaker, I would like to designate hon. Judith Franca Akello as our representative to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the three names have been designated to constitute our membership to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. We are required to approve. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There being no further business for this House to transact at this moment, this House is adjourned to tomorrow, 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.40 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 14 July 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 

