PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTTHIRD SESSION - FIRST MEETINGTHURSDAY , 13 JULY 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA9595Thursday, 13 July 2023“Resolutions of the meeting on road safety held on 13 July 2023.On 13 July 2023, the Speaker convened a meeting with the Minister of Works and Transport, the Executive Director of the Uganda National Roads Authority, the Government Chief Whip, the Leader of the Opposition, the Uganda Police Force, the Minister of Health, Chairman of the Road Safety in Parliament, Chairperson Committee on Infrastructure in Parliament and the Shadow Minister of Transport in Parliament.Immediate interventions1. Enforcement of relevant laws and regulations. Whereas the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998 has attendant regulations that have aided its operationalisation, the Road Act of 2019, which addresses the various aspects of road safety, does not have regulations. There is need for the regulations to operationalise sections 57, 58 and 59 on the towing and auctioning of abandoned or broken-down automobiles on the carriageways. UNRA has immediately offered at least eight tow vehicles to tow the abandoned vehicles on the roads. That is an immediate action. The Ministry of Works and Transport must expedite the development of regulations to operationalise the Road Act, 2019. The Ministry of Works and Transport undertook to table the regulations operationalising the Road Act, 2019 within one month and that will IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - 12TH SITTING - FIRST MEETINGParliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among,  in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. As I undertook yesterday that we would convene a meeting on issues of road safety, we had a meeting this morning and in attendance was the Minister of Works and Transport, the Government Chief Whip, the Executive Director of the Uganda National Roads Authority, the Leader of the Opposition, representatives from the Police, including the Undersecretary for Police, that is Ministry of Internal Affairs and myself. We also had the chairman of infrastructure and the chairman of road safety.If you do not love yourself, who will love you? (Applause)  We deliberated on a number of issues regarding road safety and we adopted resolutions, which I am going to read to you, detailing what should be done in the immediate, medium and long term, as Parliament, the public, and the Executive. These resolutions are from all the people who attended the meeting. It reads: 9596PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [The Speaker] COMMUNICATION  FROM THE CHAIRbe by 13 August 2023; we should be having regulations on the Floor. 2. Streamlining the motor vehicle registration function under the Ministry of Works and Transport, which requires an additional Shs 40 billion? The Ministry of Works and Transport needs Shs 40 billion to streamline registrations. 3. The Minister of ICT and National Guidance, together with the Uganda Communications Commission, should ensure immediate dissemination of pop-up messages on road safety to all mobile phone users. All the service providers: MTN and Airtel Telecom, among others, must be able to send messages to people warning them against accidents. This should be done through Uganda Communications Commission (UCC). The minister should communicate to UCC and UCC should inform all the service providers. As of today, all television stations have agreed to give us airtime for us to be able to create awareness on accidents for free. (Applause) It is a fight for the whole country; it is no longer an issue of Parliament.4.  Replacing missing road infrastructure such as the road signs, reflectors, fences etc. and exploring the use of appropriate alternative materials to minimise the vandalised ones, and safety. We have road furniture that has been stolen together with the signage. So, we are saying they must be replaced immediately and they use another material, which cannot easily be stolen. 5.  Conclusion of a Memorandum of Understanding between the public agencies responsible for transport and road safety, and the private sector on the towing of abandoned vehicles. We are saying that the law says the vehicles will be towed at the cost of the owner. Now, the fact that we do not have money as Government - and the law is very clear - we are saying, let us have private institutions that should be able to do that so that we do not start saying, we do not have money all the time. Let it be done by a private person who will ensure that he monitors and ensures that there are no vehicles on the roads and if there is a vehicle, it is towed aside. 6.  Sensitisation and enforcement of motor third party insurance. Whereas the motor third-party insurance introduced by the Motor Vehicle Insurance, that is, the Third Party Risk Act, 1989, provides for compulsory insurance against third-party bodily risk in respect to use of motor vehicles, often times victims of accidents are not indemnified. There is need for more sensitisation on the third party insurers. You find most of the people who get accidents end up in hospitals and it is again government looking after these people. They are not compensated and end up like that, whereas they are supposed to be indemnified by the third party. The third party insurance should be able to cover that. 7.  Increase public education and awareness on road safety in order to shape road user behaviour.There is need for constant and consistent sensitisation of the general public on road safety using all available media; social media, TVs, radios and others. The meeting was notified that out of the required budget of Shs 20 billion for road safety, only Shs 5 billion was provided for. There is, therefore, need for adequate resourcing of the road safety function across the whole country and because we are talking about increased education, we are saying we need a team from the Ministry of Works, UNRA, Police, even volunteers from Parliament, if you can, to move from radio to radio, TV to TV , to talk to Ugandans about issues of road safety. It is a very serious matter. 9597THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 JULY 2023Whereas we have other diseases, those can be handled, but for accidents - these people need to be tested and checked. A person like Komakech will tell you that you need to check somebody’s head all the time. We were told of some people who have diabetes and maybe get an attack during the process and fail to drive and that is how one can cause an accident. 8. The Uganda Police Force should scale up monitoring and enforce compliance with the right of way and use of lead cars. Not everybody has the right of way. Honourable members, it is not just a matter of saying that not everybody has a right of way. Not everybody is supposed to have a siren on his or her car. Not everybody is supposed to have those LED lights on the cars and what we agreed is, this must be immediate. Remove them. The persons who will be got with that are culpable because they will have breached the law. It is very clear who has a right of way. These people who come with sirens and lead cars push you off the road. I know I have it but I have a right. The honourable minister told us how he was pushed off the road. We need to work on what can reduce accidents on the roads and it starts with this House.Hon. Isingoma, kindly first go and dress well then come back –(Laughter)  9.  We have responsible use of government cars. Are we together? Government vehicles continue to be the highest perpetrators of traffic offenses, including road accidents. In 2022 - I am reporting what was reported in the meeting - over 500 government vehicles were involved in causing accidents. Therefore, there is need for us to be more responsible when using government vehicles backed up by sanctions for misuse of the cars that have been given, and we must follow the available standing orders. This was a report from police. 10.  Compliance with the speed limit There is need for stringent enforcement and increased sensitisation of road users on compliance with the speed limit. There is urgent need to reintroduce the installation of speed governors in all vehicles to regulate speed. 11.  UNRA is directed to immediately remove roadside markets and taxi parks that have encroached onto the roads and road reserves. For example, when you go to Busega, will you even pass? When you go to Lukaya, Kalerwe, Kamwokya, Kireka, Kyaliwajjala -in all those areas, there is a main road but there is a market within the main road. What kind of country are we living in? Then we start complaining about accidents. 12.  Local leaders should create awareness on the need to comply with road safety rules and regulations. The mistake we make, as politicians, is we go back and tell our people, “Do it” for the sake of votes yet you know very well that the same voters are going to die from these accidents. Therefore, it starts with us, the leaders. Let us talk to the people and make them understand what is good for them in terms of road safety but if we use this as a way of looking for votes, it will not help us. 13.  The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should increase the recurrent budget allocation for UNRA, Ministry of Works and Transport and the Uganda Police Force for immediate road safety intervention. Immediate road safety intervention is what we have talked about: removing the cars from the roads; ensuring that we replace the signposts that have been removed; ensuring that we create awareness of what is happening with road safety; ensuring that illegal sirens are removed; enforcing the third party issue, and ensuring compliance with the speed limits. We got a very funny example from one of the ministers. He said that one time, he was driving behind some big person. When he realised he was driving at 140 kilometres per hour, he said: “No, I have a family.” If you want to reach early, leave early. 9598PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [The Speaker] COMMUNICATION  FROM THE CHAIRThese drivers who use defensive driving should stop it. They are the ones causing problems. We still need you alive; let us respect the speed limits. They put a speedometer there, but they have not told you to overshoot it. At the end of the day, you will go alone. Imagine: the reckless driver will survive while you are gone. Medium-term interventions The reintroduction of periodic mandatory vehicle inspections by the policeThis requires adequate resourcing and equipping of the Uganda Police Force. In the 10th Parliament, we had the SGS and you saw what happened with the SGS. This Parliament made a resolution that inspection should go back to the police. Now, we are saying the police must activate and make sure that we have the annual inspection of these vehicles.There should be adequate equipping of relevant enforcement agencies with relevant tools, including, but not limited to, numbers, equipment and automobiles to aid effective enforcement of the law. Particularly for driver testing and training, there is need to reduce physical contact between enforcement personnel and drivers to minimise the incidences of corruption.Sometimes you see a driver giving kitu kidogo , whereas he has been over speeding. I asked a question: I have seen these things that look like guns on the roads, are they toys? So, they are saying they want to have a number of them so that we reduce that person-to-person touch. Remember, we passed a law here – how much money is a person who is found over speeding supposed to pay? We need to get that money. The Government should invest in automatic number plate recognition cameras, linked to the ticketing of offenders and speed guns – the speed guns that we are talking about.Strengthening the road monitoring and surveillance for, among others, timely detection and removal of abandoned vehicles on carriageways and reprimanding the drivers and owners of those vehicles UNRA needs adequate resourcing for requisite equipment for communication and towing of abandoned vehicles. Some of these cars get spoilt in the middle of a park, where there is even no network. So, the regional offices should be able to communicate on the vehicles that have got accidents, those that are likely to get accidents or those that have got spoilt in some areas and are likely to cause accidents and they should be removed away from the roadside. The long-term intervention1.  Automation of regulatory and monitoring processes to minimise human contact and reduce incidences of corruption and influence peddling.2.  Enhancement of budgetary provisions for the relevant agencies in the road safety value chain, especially capital budgets. 3.  General strengthening of road safety monitoring and enforcement, that is, enforcement of speed limits around the blind and black spots, notably the market areas, schools and other public facilities. 4.  Road designs should match the growing population of the people and vehicles and strategic development plans of the country. 5.  The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should increase the development budget allocation to UNRA, Ministry of Works and Transport and the Uganda Police Force to ensure that safety measures are put in place.Finally, we agreed to have a monthly meeting to evaluate what we agreed on for immediate intervention. Honourable members, as leaders, we should prioritise the lives and living conditions of our masses. It should be a precondition for sustainable development. All this that we are labouring to do - we started that meeting as early as 8.00 a.m. – we are doing it for the good 9599THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 JULY 2023of our people. As a House, we will require to have a quarterly update on actions taken to stem the road and water carnage. The minister will have to give us a report, always. Honourable members, I will also vary the Order Paper to accommodate the laying of the Integrated Annual Report on National Water and Sewerage Corporation for the Financial Year 2021/2022 by the Minister of State for Environment, Hon. Beatrice Anywar. She will also respond to the issue of Aswa Ranch. Honourable minister?2.28THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I wish to lay on the Table the Integrated Annual Report of the National Water and Sewerage Corporation for Financial Year 2021/2022. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. It is referred to the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources.MS ANYWAR:  Thank you once more, Madam Speaker, for this golden opportunity. Yesterday, you tasked me to bring to this House information concerning the Aswa Ranch where a prison officer is dealing in charcoal and no one can access the place. I beg to report to this august House that Aswa Ranch is a Government ranch. In August 2022, about 30,000 acres of land were given to Uganda Prisons Service as an intervention for food security. So far, the Uganda Prisons, under the leadership of Superintendent Gerard Kiwanuka, have cleared about 4,000 hectares, which is under cultivation for maize. Madam Speaker, in the process of clearing such land for cultivation, the trees and bushes, which were there, were equally cleared. Some of the trees and shrubs were taken as firewood to the prisons in the country to help in the cooking for prisoners, and some were used for charcoal. I got in touch with the Commissioner-General, who said that they are not engaged in commercial charcoal burning for sale. Madam Speaker, it should also be noted that this Government intervention, through the Uganda Prisons Service for food security, is not only taking place in Aswa Ranch. We have Odina in Soroti - 900 hectares under cultivation; Bingire in Serere - 700 acres under cultivation; Kumi, 59 acres, Aweyi in Alebtong, 1,700 hectares; Aloi, Ogom, Alebtong, 700 hectares and in total with other areas - about 38,709 hectares are under cultivation for food security of this country by the Uganda Prisons. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, there is a procedural matter.MS OPENDI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister has informed us that in the interest of food security, the cultivation has been authorised. However, His Excellency the President has directed people cultivating rice in the swamps to vacate. In Bukedi, we have had Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) enforcing the President’s directive. I find this a contradiction. Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for the minister to tell us this when she clearly knows that there is a directive for Ugandans to vacate swamps and stop cultivating in the swamps? Madam Speaker, allow me to utilise this opportunity to also raise the issue, since she is the Minister of State for Water and Environment-THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Sarah Opendi, can we first have the first matter responded to? MS OPENDI:  Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is about rice growing in swamps, but also, the issue - okay, let me leave the forests, but Katabi Town Council is what I wanted to raise.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Anywar, the Members are raising a very pertinent issue. Why are you acting in a segregative manner? (Applause)  Can you advise this country; if it is for food security, should we go ahead and also plant our rice because we are all looking at food? So, if Government is giving a directive, it should 9600PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [The Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRbe uniform and not discriminative. [Member rose]  Wait; let me hear from Hon. Nsamba.MR OSHABE:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. If I heard you right, you advised the minister to talk about Aswa Ranch. When we talk about a ranch, it is not about charcoal burning. Yes, the issue could have been charcoal burning, but whereas you inform us about the 4,000 hectares under cultivation, you should have updated us on what befell the initial purpose of the ranch. How many cows are we talking about in Aswa Ranch as we speak? Has the entire ranch now been preserved for purposes of -?Then on the matter of charcoal burning, are you sure 100 per cent because what we needed to be sure about is that this man who does not allow even you to go and see, how sure are you that this charcoal burning is only specific for areas under cultivation? Madam Speaker, are we proceeding well when the minister is only talking about the 4,000 hectares yet there is a very pertinent issue of failure to supervise - because the information is that this man, who is in charge, does not allow others to supervise. Are we proceeding well, Madam Speaker?THE SPEAKER:  Let me first hear from - Hon. Santa, you are going to speak because it came from you. Let me first hear from Hon. Solomon.2.37MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri):  Madam Speaker, I want to thank the minister for her communication, but the clarification I wanted to raise is, if the minister comes and tells Parliament that they were authorised to cut trees, she has to tell us how they are going to do it, and who shares what, because people have abused it. Once you say that go ahead and use the ranch to cultivate, in the process of cutting trees, burning charcoal, there is gross abuse of the environment. That is one. Secondly, these are resources of the Government; who is taking what? People are benefiting from things that they are not supposed to benefit from; there is gross abuse. Therefore, I want the honourable minister to tell us, if it is a ranch as it is, and they have authorised them to use it for growing food for prisons, who is supposed to do what, and take what, and in what quantities? You do not just say that we used this for burning charcoal and then the trees were cut down. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, what the minister is saying is that the Government gave Uganda Prisons land and out of the land that was given to them, in the process of planting maize, they have to cut the trees, meaning it is an approved process; that go ahead and cut the trees to plant. Then the question Hon. Silwany is asking - just that he is not an accountant - he is asking where the NTR goes. Because as you are planting, you are burning charcoal; the trees, in my imagination, are many and you are selling off  this charcoal. Out of my imagination, the trees are many. You are selling off this charcoal. You said the charcoal was not for commercial purposes but what will you use it for if you are not selling? If you sell it, how much do you get and how much do you declare to the Government as NTR? 2.39MS SANTA OKOT  (PPP, Aruu North County, Pader):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to ask the minister some questions. Members of Parliament would recall that it was this very state minister, who sometime back, wrote a letter, which was a directive banning all charcoal sellers and charcoal burners in Northern Uganda. The activity has been going on slowly and it is already dying out.As a result of her directives, the President also came in and issued another strong directive banning tree cutting and charcoal burning in northern Uganda for now. That is what we know. 9601THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 JULY 2023If the same minister states that the prisons people are allowed to cut these trees, burn them into charcoal and ferry them when the people of Northern Uganda are watching, what kind of example will these people show the people in Northern Uganda? Why should the law favour the prisons and not the people of Northern Uganda and the business community who sell charcoal? If the minister says that they have allowed the prisons people to clear the trees and burn them into charcoal when they are not even paying taxes in the subcounty where they are cutting the trees, will she be right to show the country that the prisons people can cut trees and sell charcoal, but others cannot? This is a very bad example to our people and against the directive of the President. For now, we feel and think that nobody should be allowed to cut trees for charcoal. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER : My presumption is that in the 4,000 acres, there should be some swamps too. Are they allowed to plant rice also in the swamp? Let us first get a response. 2.41MR NABBOTH NAMANYA  (FDC, Rubabo County, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I needed to get clarification . The honourable minister should clarify to this House why she preferred that the bushes and trees that were cleared, be turned into charcoal other than fertilisers, which later the prisons would buy to enhance agriculture in the areas she has stated. The bushes and logs should have been buried to make the soils more fertile for agriculture other than for charcoal. Thank you. 2.43MS BETTY NALUYIMA  (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I laid here papers concerning the subdivision of the local forest in Wakiso District, that is Gunda Forest in Katabi Town Council. Given that Government has not yet made the response it promised to bring to the Floor, can the minister clarify whether it is not playing double standards when they now talk about swamps, yet they are busy subdividing forests for the benefit of a few people, when we are talking about conservation of the environment in this country. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Can we first get a response to that? Let us first get a response about the Gulu University Forest. 2.44MR OJARA MAPENDUZI  (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am happy you have talked about the Gulu University Forest issue. Hopefully, the minister should be able to also clarify. However, I am sure the honourable minister is reporting what she could have been told by the Uganda Prisons Forces but there is much more going on in Aswa Ranch. Very many different groups are operating there and the local leadership of Pader and the region can never access the ranch. When you try, you are beaten. There are security people who are busy on the ranch and we do not know who is in charge. There is massive tree-cutting and charcoal burning going on. Maybe the issue of Uganda Prisons is different. I was part of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and I know Government is providing support to Uganda Prisons and UPDF to do farming on Aswa Ranch. Madam Speaker, you also need to interest yourself - this Parliament should have a special team to investigate matters of Aswa Ranch because the question of land ownership is key. We know the ranch exists but there is contention on the size of the land and the population of Pader. The people are always brutalised. A lot of destruction has taken place. Finally, there are very many people who are now taking possession of the ranch. We need to know who they are. We are told there are others who have been given titles already and we are concerned. 9602PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [Mr Mapenduzi] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTherefore, maybe, the honourable minister is just responding to the question of Uganda Prisons but there is much more. I would plead with you to intervene in this matter so we can have it resolved. Thank you.MS ANYWAR:  Thank you, Madam Speaker and friends for raising pertinent issues. This is a people’s Parliament where we discuss matters concerning us all – (Interruption)DR BUKENYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker –THE SPEAKER : In the House here, we have honourable members of Parliament.DR BUKENYA: We are discussing a matter of environmental protection and the Sustainable Development Goals that emphasise sustainable use of the environment. Recently, the President talked about banning charcoal burning. However, it is the prison services that are engaged charcoal burning. Procedurally, when the minister is requested to come and respond to an issue, she brings a presentation and even lays a copy on the Table. I am wondering whether we are proceeding well when the minister is responding to a very important issue casually, without laying a copy of her presentation on the Table. I request that you ask her to lay that presentation on the Table so that we discuss it. It has now taken us 30 minutes of debate for something that is not very clear. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I am the one that raised this issue of charcoal burning. We need an explanation. After we have heard from what she is saying, we will request the minister to go to the locus and come back with documentary evidence. We want the certificate that they gave to Uganda Prisons to own the 4,000 acres. Who are those people – on what Hon. Ojara raised, who are the people that own Aswa Ranch?Honourable minister, after your brief response, we want documentary evidence. We want to know which other activities are taking place there. If it is a hard-to-reach-area, how do we know what is happening there? MS ANYWAR:  Madam Speaker, I had risen up and I was already going to allude to that. Indeed, I appreciate the response by Hon. Ojara but I was quickly responding to what you had tasked me to respond to yesterday. Following what has already arisen and of course the surrounding issues, I think it is only proper that I stand here and say that I will go to the locus, like you directed, and come back with a written report. I will also implore the area Members of Parliament to be available when I go there. However, I must put this on record. THE SPEAKER:  Will you allow them there? Will they be safe?MS ANYWAR:  Madam Speaker, I will liaise with them and see what happens. As I sit down, I want to be on record that what I presented was a bit broad in perspective but Members have looked at charcoal burning, like it has been alluded to. However, the main activity - as I was given the information - was not charcoal burning. Secondly, the Executive directive and what I wrote in my letter - as we are all aware, we cannot totally ban charcoal for domestic use until we have an alternative for our people. The intervention which is entailed in the presidential directive is commercial charcoal burning, which is now being used for export - Friends, this is a very serious thing. People were – THE SPEAKER:  Stand up. There is a point of order. MS NAMUGGA:  Madam Speaker, the Minister in charge of Environment has just told us that we cannot totally do away with charcoal burning because we do not have an alternative. There is already a directive from the President. Doing away with charcoal burning has been – 9603THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 JULY 2023THE SPEAKER:  The directive is on commercial – MS NAMUGGA:  Madam Speaker, in some of the areas we come from, charcoal burning has been totally disregarded; it is a crime. I think we need to understand - Is the minister in order to come to the Floor of Parliament and act against the directive of the President, who is the Commander-in-Chief and Head of State? (Laughter)  THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, why don’t you applaud? (Applause)  Honourable minister, Hon. Gorreth is saying that in her constituency, they have told them to totally ban charcoal burning. They cannot differentiate between commercial and subsistence use. That is where her issue is. If you do not differentiate that, then you need to give us an alternative. You may find that the people burning charcoal are not doing it for commercial purposes; they want to use it. That is what she is asking. Are we going to spend two hours on this? 2.54MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Central Division, Fort Portal City):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you, first of all, for raising this matter of the ranch; having its bearings on charcoal burning is just a small matter. Why did government introduce ranches in the first instance? Has government decided to do away with ranches? What studies have they done to make sure that there is a change of policy on having ranches in the country? By the time government makes a decision to give away the land for ranch farming, it is a drastic change of policy. We need to know on what basis the government moved. Which scientific study did they conduct? Was this emotionally done? Was this politically driven? Why is it that you had to choose to do such an activity on a precious ranch? We have a shortage of animals and we are looking at improving the beef industry in the country. We also need to export beef and now you are just turning to peasantry farming. What are you doing? We need the minister to come up with a holistic picture of the ranch. Madam Speaker, as I conclude this point, it is extremely important for the country to have alternative energy policies. We have generated enough electricity. We even have dimmed energy, we cannot take power. Why can’t we have a macro master plan of having cheaper energy so that we save our forests and these rudimentary practices? How can we, in this 21st Century; the dot-com era, talk about charcoal burning in the country? Madam Speaker, I appreciate you. We need to go modern; we are using modern facilities. We need to support our Ugandans to improve their methods of energy so that they can be able to live in the modern world. That is what it means to move the country to middle income economy.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we are sending Mama Mabira  to come with a written report that we shall debate. When she comes with that report, she should be able to give us the alternative to charcoal. We need to go modern, as he said. 2.57MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we should not lose the question on charcoal burning in Aswa Ranch. The presentation by the minister is one thing because, first of all, if you give prisons a piece of land to cultivate, they will definitely cut trees. Once those trees are cut, they can use them for burning charcoal or something else since they would need the space of the land for cultivation. The problem is that the moment the door was opened for prisons to cut trees for cultivation, other teams entered and started doing their own activities of charcoal burning, disregarding the Executive orders by the President. I think this is where we want the minister to come out 9604PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [Mr Ayoo] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRclearly; who are the people operating in the ranch and cutting trees? Why are they doing so and yet there is an order for no commercial charcoal burning? Honourable minister, I think you need to differentiate between the prisons and other illegal activities in the ranch. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Acuti, Hon. Fred and Hon. Bosco, I will give all of you time to speak when the minister brings the document. Hon. Daudi, you will speak when she brings the document.MR MPUUGA:  Madam Speaker, the interest in this matter is very obvious and you can see that the House is disappointed in both the statement and the demeanour of the minister because they betray –THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, can you listen to the Leader of the Opposition. MR MPUUGA:  They betray her well-known intentions over generations and we do not know why she is migrating. Madam Speaker, with your indulgence, I ask for two things that she must report on. Last week, on Tuesday, Hon. Naluyima raised the issue of Gunda Forest Reserve, the single remaining enclave of the depleted central forest reserve, which has been parcelled and titles given. I saw a statement from the Chairperson, Board Uganda Land Commission, saying that they gave titles because of pressure for urbanisation.Will you, together with your friend in the lands, report to the House on who actually degazetted Gunda Forest Reserve because the power to degazette is the preserve of Parliament. The minister should report on Gunda Forest Reserve, Madam Speaker. Secondly, in Namyoya Forest Reserve in Mukono, titles have been obtained by powerful politicians and military officers in this land. The minister should report on who gave authority to degazette Namyoya Forest Reserve. She should also report on the bearers of the parcelled land because the titles are there. Without fear of contradiction and without going back on your known commitment on the environment, report on the bearers of the land titles in Gunda and Namyoya forest reserves. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  The status of Gulu University land – yes, Mama Mabira , we want you to come with a report to that effect and we need documentary evidence. MS ANYWAR:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the Leader of the Opposition’s submission. The locus you have sent me to is under two ministries. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is basically involved in most of the things being raised by the Members of Parliament here. So, wouldn’t it be –THE SPEAKER:  It is a multi-sectoral approach. The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the Minister of Water and Environment – you – and the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development that gave out the titles all must report. (Applause)  We also need to know your status on the protected species – and that is what Hon. Acuti wanted to raise. How much time do you want? MS ANYWAR:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Being a multi-sectoral issue, we need to convene, probably, under the guidance of the Prime Minister and then we come up with a joint report. Maybe the Prime Minister can tell us the time that we may need because it is the Office of the Prime Minister which will coordinate us. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Prime Minister?3.03THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Madam Speaker, I request for three weeks so that all the ministries 9605THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 JULY 2023can convene and come up with one report. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are we saying that within the three weeks they will not be cutting down the trees and cultivating the land, which does not belong to them? Do we maintain the status quo? We need to understand. MS NAKADAMA:  Madam Speaker, we need to reach that place because I do not know exactly what is going on. So, it will be difficult to make a decision now without reaching that place. I request that you allow us –THE SPEAKER:  You will get back to the House after you have reached there. Thank you. Honourable members, let us leave that. We will sort it out when they report back.The Chairperson, Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs wanted to ask for extension of time. 3.05THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Wilson Kajwengye):  Madam Speaker, the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Control, Bill is before my committee for processing. It was first read on the Floor of Parliament on 23 May 2023, after which you prorogued Parliament on 25 May 2023. That proroguing, together with the change of leadership and membership of the committee, has affected the 45-day rule. I now move under rule 218 (2) to request for extension of time for us to be able to process the Bill and present the report on the Floor. THE SPEAKER:  How much time do you require? MR KAJWENGYE:  Up to the 19th.THE SPEAKER:  19th of July?MR KAJWENGYE: 19th of July, Madam Speaker . (Laughter)THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the Member knows what he is speaking about. (Laughter)  Honourable members, the Chairperson, Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs – next time, when the Speaker is talking, you sit down. (Laughter)  The chairperson knows what he is saying. He wants up to 19 July 2023. Let us give the chairperson up to 19 July 2023 and the report on Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Control, Bill will come to the House. (Question put and agreed to.)THE SPEAKER:  We want our report on the Floor on 19 July 2023. (Members rose_)  On my communication? Honourable members, do you wish to speak on my communication? [Members: “No.”]  Listen, you sent very able and clear-headed Members to represent you in the meeting. Do you want to amend what we brought? (Laughter) Hon. Robert, what do you want to add?3.08MR DA VID SSERUKENYA (NUP, Mak -indye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to appreci -ate you for that initiative because we have lost many lives. Madam Speaker, and this august House, I want to bring it to your attention that the number of people who are getting permits is many compared to the number of people who go to driving schools. So, there is a big challenge; people on the road and they do not know what they are doing. Secondly- THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we discussed all of that. I even gave an example yesterday that I know somebody who got a driving permit in one minute! The next item is on road safety. Let us listen to the report on road safety, and make amendments to their recommendations.   9606PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [The Speaker] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTHonourable members, we must finish early because we have Mass at 5.00 p.m. Let me first introduce my visitors who are in the VIP gallery this afternoon; we have a delegation from Kasana, Luweero Diocese. They include:1. Monsignor Francis Xavier Mpanga who is a diocesan administrator.2. Fr Joseph Kakooza Nyanzi; the Chairman Organising Committee of Bishops Consecration.3. Fr Pontiano Sonko; the Treasurer General of Kasana Luwero Diocese. 4. Mr Musisi Erasmus Mugerwa; the Chairman, Finance Committee Kasana Luwero Diocese. You are all most welcome.They are here represented by Hon. Robert Ssekitoleeko. Hon. Robert is a very good mukatuliki  and a very good leader; and Hon. Nabukenya Brenda. That one is “Miss Parliament” -(Laughter)  - she is a very nice girl. So, Father, make sure that our Members come back. Kindly join me in welcoming our visitors -(Applause)-  I have Haji Kirumira Hassan. He is the Imam of Parliament and a very good, brilliant leader.  Where is Sekabira Denes? Rev. Father, Sekabira, is also there; a very good leader. You see when we are in this House we do not mind about parties; we mind about our Members; it is about Members of Parliament and not where you belong. Thank you for coming. MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE STATUS OF ROAD SAFETY IN UGANDATHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is timely and I am happy that you have all agreed to respond to that report. Chairperson, can you present? 3.13THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Dan Kimosho):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the Status of Road Safety in Uganda. First of all, allow me to thank the team that compiled this report, and in a special way, thank the former chairman and the former vice chairperson for their leadership in coming up with this report, and the entire team. Madam Speaker, on 21 July 2022, the Minister of State for Works, Hon. Musa Ecweru, presented to Parliament a statement on the status of road safety interventions in Uganda. The statement was consequently referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for consideration, and to report to the House. Rule 187(f) and 189 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, provide for the jurisdiction and mandate of the committee respectively to cover the sectors of lands, housing, urban development, physical planning, works and transport, and other departments. The area of scope was:1. To examine and comment on policy matters affecting the ministries covered by it.2. Initiate or evaluate action programmes of ministries and sectors and make appropriate recommendations on them.3. Monitor the performance of ministries, departments and agencies. 4. Monitor Government compliance with approved plans and programs; and,5. Monitor the progress on implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals made by sectors that fall within its jurisdiction. 9607THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 JULY 2023The committee scrutinised the statement and now begs to report as follows;Methodology 1. The committee scrutinised the ministerial statement on the status of road safety interventions in Uganda.2. We held meetings with the following stakeholders;a) Ministries, departments, and agencies responsible for road safety, including the Ministry of Internal Affairs, specifically the Directorate of Traffic, Ministry of Health, Uganda National Roads Authority, Uganda Railways Corporation, Kampala Capital City Authority, with representatives from Kampala metropolitan area. The committee also had meetings with the Minister of Works and Transport, Hon. Gen. Katumba Edward Wamala. The main purpose of the meetings was for the committee to get additional clarifications and substantiations concerning the subject matter.b) The civil society organisations under the following umbrellas also met the committee; i) The Road Safety Advocacy Coalition.ii)  Civil Safety Coalition on Transport. 2.0 Current road safety situation in Uganda.2.1 Statistics on road safety in Uganda. The committee established that:  i) The Uganda Police Force statistics indicate that over the last five years, approximately 10 or more Ugandans’ lives have been lost on our roads daily, with the highest number being 12 deaths per day as recorded in 2021; an indicator that there has been a 13.5 per cent increase from 3,663 fatalities in 2020 to 4,150 fatalities in 2021. In 2021 alone, 17,443 people were involved in road crashes.ii) Sixty per cent to 70 per cent of those affected in road crashes are young and economically active Ugandans. In 2018, the World Health Organisation reported that Uganda was losing 3 to 4 per cent of its GDP annually, accruing from road crashes that have caused disability, adjusted lives, ill-health, or added deaths of economically active Ugandans.This number is bound to have risen considering that the number of Ugandan lives lost in road crashes has increased from 10 per day in 2018 to 12 per day in 2021. 2.2. The impact of road crashes on Uganda. The committee established that road crashes negatively impact the country as follows:i)  Economic and revenue lossAccording to the Uganda Police Annual Crime Report of 2020, Uganda loses at least 10 people per day due to road crashes. This is more pronounced among pedestrians and motorcyclists as the most vulnerable category of road users. In 2021, the number of road crashes increased by 42 per cent and people killed increased by nearly 1,000 from 3,663 in 2020 to 4,159 according to the Uganda Police Traffic Report of 2021. Globally, it was agreed to pursue an ambitious target of reducing road deaths and serious injuries by 50 per cent by the year 2030. This is in line with SDG 3.11 and Uganda is finalising the National Road Safety Action Plan in line with the global target for decades of road safety.Further, the Police Annual Traffic Report also states that these crashes are avoidable on account of causal factors such as reckless driving, speeding, overloading, dangerous loading, driving under the influence of alcohol, careless pedestrians, careless driving, passenger falls from vehicles, obstacles on the carriageway, and dangerous mechanical condition vehicles, among others. Similarly, the first United Nations Road Safety Performance Review, which was conducted by the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe and Africa and was launched in 9608PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEKampala on 28th February 2018, the number of road traffic fatalities reported in Uganda, has increased sevenfold over the past 25 years, and 10 people die every day due to road traffic injuries. The review established that the magnitude of the road safety challenge is serious but has unfortunately in the past failed to attract the necessary attention for appropriate intervention.According to the report, unless effective interventions are implemented, road crashes are likely to increase and even double within the next 10 years. In the last decade alone, recorded road crash fatalities rose from 2,597 to 3,503 in 2016, representing a growth of 25.9 per cent. The accident, severity index of 24 people killed per 100 road clashes, the overall annual cost of road clashes is currently estimated at approximately 4.4 trillion, representing 5 per cent of Uganda’s gross domestic product. There is ample evidence that road safety has not benefited from increased spending on the road sector of Uganda while the sector has received about 18.7 per cent of the national budget in recent years. Road safety allocations have remained at less than one per cent of the transport budget.While Uganda’s investment in its roads is worthy as road transport accounts for over 90 per cent of cargo freight and passenger movement and is a principal driver of the country’s transport sector contribution to Uganda’s GDP was estimated at 2.8 per cent in the Financial Year 2014/2015. Rt Hon. Speaker and Members, it is alarming. However, that Uganda loses almost twice its transport sector’s contribution to the GDP through road crashes, estimated to cost 5 per cent of the country’s GDP compared to her neighbours in the East African community. Uganda continues to report the highest number of fatalities annually. ii)  Effects on the Youth.The 2018 Global Status Report on Road Safety identifies road traffic injuries as the leading killer of children and young adults worldwide. According to the Uganda Police Annual Crime Report of 2020, more fatalities were recorded for persons below 35 years of age. And these accounted for 57 per cent of all fatalities. This could partly be attributed to the fact that the highest proportion of Uganda’s population is young. This bracket also includes school-going children. It also includes the youth who are actively engaged in various productive activities to earn a living. With the increased use of motorcycles, projections show that road traffic injuries will be the third leading cause of disability-adjusted life years attributed to ill health, disability, or early death. iii)  Pressure on the health sectorIn the ongoing second decade of action for road safety, road traffic crashes pose a considerable threat, especially in low-income countries. Uganda shows a vast burden of non-fatal injuries and resides at the top range of countries with the highest death rates due to unsafe roads.The public health system in Uganda is, on the other hand, overwhelmed with victims of road traffic crashes. They are listed among the top 10 leading causes of hospital death. In the country in 2017, World Health Organisation reported road injuries as the fourth leading cause of hospital death. Given the highest road crash rate in Uganda, the country requires a robust emergency care system to address the high road injury burden. Unfortunately, post-crash care in Uganda is poor and underdeveloped. Although efforts are being made by the government to set up a national ambulance service, the service has not yet been enrolled on the main road corridors. As a result –MR SILWANYI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The report that the Honourable Chairperson is reading has been with us. We have been reading it; we slept over it, reading. The procedure matter I am raising; would it not be procedural right – [Mr Kimosho] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT9609THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 JULY 2023THE SPEAKER:  Did you say you slept with the report? MR SILWANYI:  Madam Speaker, I repeat, I slept over it; I read the report overnight, Madam Speaker. The procedural matter I am therefore raising would not be procedurally right for the Chairperson’s maiden report to be summarised. We go to the recommendations summarily because I know the capacity of the new Chairperson, he can do summaries very well so that we can and discuss the report when he has summarised. That is the procedure matter I wanted to raise.THE SPEAKER:  Is that seconded?MR OKIROR: I want to thank you, Madam Speaker. Since this is a bit of a sticky issue, I appeal that the chairperson goes through the report so that we can comprehend it and have a good debate on this report. Maybe he should be given a timeline so that he manages this within that time. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  My chairperson - Hon. Jesca was my Chairperson in the Committee on Presidential Affairs.MS ABABIKU:  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am of the view that we go to the findings, observations and recommendations because we have the copy of the report shared. Thank you so much. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, when you hear the whole report, it reduces on the kind of questions that you will be asking. With due respect, this is a very sticky issue. We would rather handle only this one and that is what we - I will tell you that this has kept us in Parliament from 8.00 a.m. The issue of accidents is about life. Hon. Solomon may be hurrying to go to Bugiri but you can go tomorrow. MR KIMOSHO:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the guidance and ruling. I was on (iii); the pressure on the health sector, and on the last paragraph of page 5. Given the high road crash rate in Uganda, the country requires a robust emergency care system to address the highest road injury burden. Unfortunately, post-crash care in Uganda is poor and under developed. Although efforts are being made by the government to set up a national ambulance service, the service has not yet been rolled out on the main road corridors. As a result, management of crash scenes is poor as transport of victims is commonly provided by police personnel using trucks designed for other police duties. The victims are then delivered to health centres which lack emergency facilities and personnel. Madam Speaker, in addition, within the health sector, road injury prevention does not receive the appropriate attention it deserves considering the huge number of road crashes that happen. According to Hon. Dr Charles Ayume on the magnitude of road traffic injuries reporting to public hospitals in Uganda and the cost of treatment, while Uganda has a comprehensive and expensive essential package of health services, government financing is lagging. The primary health care package is still funded mainly through donors at 42 per cent and out-of-pocket payments at 41 per cent, creating issues for both sustainability and equity. In addition, the total health expenditure as a percentage of GDP is only 1.3 per cent, against the target of four per cent. In the Financial Years 2020/2021 and 2021/2022, the total health expenditure was at 1.9 per cent and 2.1 per cent of GDP respectively. Based on the GDP for Financial Years 2020/2021 and 2021/2022, the allocation for the health sector for Financial Year 2022/2023 should have been Shs 6.4 trillion. On the contrary, the budget was Shs 3.5 trillion, leaving an allocation gap of Shs 2.9 trillion. These statistics reveal that Uganda still lags behind in realising the universal health coverage financing targets, thus causing for 9610PRIME MINISTER’S TIMERECONSIDERATION OF THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023health financing reforms while considering the limited fiscal space.2.4. Challenges in addressing road safety The committee established a number of areas where the government is not adequately supporting and promoting road safety interventions in Uganda and highlighted them hereunder. i) Inadequate budget over the past three to five years, the Ministry of Works and Transport has been one of the highest funded ministries. However, the budget allocation has concentrated on infrastructure development and very little allocation has been made towards road safety. Road safety budget has continued to be classified as a consumptive budget and often been reallocated to cover any other gaps in the budget. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development argued that over the last five years, the government has released Shs 488.936 billion, but the Ministry of Works and Transport has only allocated Shs 3.6 billion to directly fund road safety interventions. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development also pointed out that the Ministry of Works and Transport is a beneficiary of US$ 265,082 (Shs 1,033,899,800) for the road safety trust fund. It further highlighted the fact that over the last five years, government has released Shs 44.496 billion to UNRA for road safety interventions. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development further emphasised that it had released Shs 48,127,014,255 towards road safety interventions and urged the ministry to focus on a more pragmatic approach in utilising the available funds. The Ministry of Works and Transport, however, clarified that the road safety budget sent to UNRA is meant to cover road safety interventions within the UNRA mandate. These include road safety audits and assessment on UNRA projects, installation of road furniture, including road signs and signals, among others. In regard to the road safety grant, the Ministry of Works and Transport won a grant of US$ 250,000 from the Global Road Safety Facility in 2020 for capacity building in road safety research, monitoring and evaluation. However, only US$ 82,000 was released through the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa. Recommendations The committee, therefore, recommends that the government prioritises allocation of sufficient resources towards the support of road safety initiatives. i) Lack of independent road safety auditsThe Ministry of Works and Transport, UNRA and KCCA are the leading agencies in relation to conducting road safety audits. However, this model is inadequate as it is bound to be construed as biased. Further, there is need for government to take action to address road safety in a holistic manner. This requires involvement from multiple sectors such as transport, police, health sector, education, and actions that address the safety of roads, vehicles, and road users. The committee, therefore, recommends that the government commits to conducting regular and periodic road safety audits and road infrastructure assessment by an independent multi-disciplinary team. This will go a long way in addressing various road safety challenges. ii) Inadequate skills and manpower within the Uganda police to handle crash investigations. The Directorate of Traffic and Road Safety of the Uganda Police is responsible for road safety investigations yet very few technical personnel have been adequately skilled to execute the task. Many of the police personnel assigned to handle matters related to road crashes are biased towards criminal actions at the expense of other areas that contribute to the road crashes. [Mr Kimosho] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT9611THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 JULY 2023The inadequacy of Uganda Police Force personnel to effectively identify and handle traffic-related offences has not been abetted by the practice of frequent transfers within the force, where the police personnel are periodically transferred despite the fact that they had benefited from a specialised training area of work. It was reported that the World Bank, through Bloomberg Philanthropies, had conducted some training on road safety to a section of police officers who were later transferred to other areas of work within the police force. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government addresses the capacity constraints of the relevant institutions engaged in road safety management so that they can address the severe road crash challenges. In addition, the Government’s prioritisation of road safety efforts should focus on the provision of technical assistance and financial and political commitment to optimise the benefits of the investment made in the development of the road transportation infrastructure.Madam Speaker, the other challenge is unregulated training schools/institutions. There is a limited number of professionally trained drivers and riders on the Ugandan roads. The committee recognises that facilities for training drivers and riders are readily available on the market, but they remain inadequately supervised by relevant authorities, thereby offering different training methods and content. The matter is made worse by the high cost of driving/riding classes that remain prohibitive for many drivers and riders, who then opt to learn on the job. A 2020 baseline study revealed that out of the estimated 120,000 heavy commercial vehicle drivers in Uganda, 97.6 per cent had trained through peers informally, 1.3 per cent were trained in-house, 0.85 per cent went through sales safety training and only 0.25 per cent underwent formal training. Out of those who had received specialised training, 68 per cent got the training from Kenya, 22 per cent from Tanzania and only 10 per cent from Uganda. The committee, therefore, recommends that in order to improve driving standards in the country, there is need for the inspectorate of vehicles to streamline the activities and operations of the driving schools by monitoring content being taught, facilities used and other effectiveness. Further, everyone acquiring driving permits or licence should be trained by a driving school because driving schools are the ones with the curriculum of driving from the Government. Driver training and testing systems should also be improved. The other issue is infective Road Crash Data Management System The Road Crash Data Management System in Uganda is poor and below generally acceptable international standards. The road crash data system (collecting, analysing and usage) are not well aligned. The road crash data system project, which cost Shs 7 billion ($2 million) had reached a 75 per cent completion but stalled as a result of cancellation of the Transport Sector Development Programme (TSDP). However, efforts by the Government to complete the project are yet to materialise.The committee recommends that the Government prioritises completion of the road crash data management system project. Road safety actorsRoad safety is a cross-cutting issue with a number of key government bodies and agencies being responsible for different aspects of the same. The main ministries that have a role to play in the road safety are ministries for works and transport, internal affairs, local government, education and sports and health. The private sector and civil society are also key stakeholders that participate in the road safety. The Ministry of Works and Transport is the leading ministry responsible for road safety, which is operationalised through the National Road Safety Council, a statutory body under the Department of Transport Regulation and Safety.RECONSIDERATION OF THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 20239612PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEOther agencies of the ministry responsible for road safety are the Transport Licensing Board, the Uganda National Roads Authority and the Uganda Road Fund. Unfortunately, these MDAs do not coordinate and co-operate, as they should. This negatively impacts on the isolated efforts made by each of the concerned entities to improve the road safety situation in the country.Considering the cross-cutting issues and mandate of various MDAs impacting road safety, it is imperative that the MDAs form a coalition to deal with the matter pertaining to road safety. This will go a long way to address issues of duplicity and streamline the specific roles and responsibilities of each mandate.The committee, therefore, recommends and urges the Government to regularise inter-ministerial working committees as a way of dealing with the cross-cutting issues.Observations and recommendationsi) Traffic and road safety regulations. The committee observed that whereas a total of 14 regulations have either been amended or formulated to operationalise the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998, the draft regulations were approved by the top management team on 11 August 2022 and will be submitted to the First Parliamentary Council, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, for redrafting. The draft amendment regulations include:a) The Traffic and Road Safety (Express Penalty Scheme for Road Traffic Offenders [Amendment] Regulations 2004,b) The Traffic and Road Safety - as you can read them from (a) to (h).The draft regulations that have been formulated include:(a)  The Traffic and Road Safety (Demerit Point System) Regulations;(b)  The Traffic and Road Safety (Post-Crash Emergency Care) Regulations – it goes from (a) to (e).The committee recommends that the Government expedites the processes of amending the existing Traffic and Road Safety Regulations and formulating regulations in order to ensure effective operationalisation of the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998.National road designs The committee noted that according to Road Safety Performance Review, Uganda of February 2018, many fatalities and serious injuries along the national roads network are registered by the police as head-on collision crashes. The road corridors are risky with several crash hot spots recognised by fleet operators that require remedial measures to improve road safety. Most of the national roads network comprise two-way single carriageways, with no median to separate opposing traffic flows, many with steep shoulders and few opportunities for overtaking, resulting in many head-on collisions. Most roads also lack facilities for non-motorised users.There is inadequate land use planning, with numerous examples of unsafe access to the highway. Road safety engineering knowledge within the responsible Government agencies at national, municipal and local level is very limited. There is no deliberate and systemic road safety engineering work and road safety audits are not regularly undertaken. Road safety is often considered to be of secondary importance by those designing new road projects or those maintaining the roads, hence an urgent need for technical assistance in road safety aspects. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government makes deliberate efforts towards regularly undertaking road safety audits in order to make qualitative estimates and reports [Mr Kimosho]9613THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 JULY 2023on potential road safety issues and identify opportunities for improvement in safety for all road users. Explore adoption of multiple model transport systemsThe committee observed that the transport system in Uganda is mainly focused on the road. There is need to develop a bus rapid transport model and to expedite the renovation and revamping the railway sector in Uganda. The aerodromes distributed in different parts of the country should also be renovated and air transport made affordable and encouraged within the country. Within the adoption of the multi-model transport system, there will be a reduced number of vehicles on the road and the majority of the population will use a mass transport which will potentially be safer, cheaper, faster, reliable and economically productive. The committee recommends that the Government constructs development and operationalisation of a bus rapid transport model. Transport of dangerous goods and periodic driver testingThe committee observed that in Uganda, transport of dangerous goods is not given the attention it deserves, and usually dangerous goods are transported just like any other goods. This is a deterrent to other road users. There is no additional training that a driver transporting dangerous goods must undertake, before being allowed to transport or deal and handle hazardous or dangerous goods. Currently, the national laws are silent on the requirements, for example, to transport dangerous goods. The truck driver is not required to have specialised training or license. With the development of the oil and gas industry in Uganda, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) started issuing licenses for transporting hazardous waste products. Drivers of dangerous goods possess the best specialised driving permit. However, stakeholders in international fuel companies enforce international regulations on dangerous goods based on the United Nations Regulations on the Movement of Dangerous Goods. The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should come up with a policy that mandates drivers of large commercial vehicles to undertake comprehensive training that will equip them with knowledge and skills relating to transporting fuel, the risks, dangers, and proper handling of fuel products. Road user behaviorThe committee observed that there is a severe road safety awareness backlog in the country. There is no sustainable evidence-based awareness programme, and generally, there are few awareness programmes for road safety in the country. Road safety awareness is extremely low, with no sustainable public media campaign except during the annual road safety week. In addition, children and youth safety programmes are also limited, despite the development of a National School Road Safety Curriculum in 2004, which is yet to be implemented. The absence of such programmes means that the future monitoring community will miss out on the strong road safety foundation, in addition to currently being unaware of proper use of the road at a young age. Further, road safety education is essential when it comes to avoiding traffic accidents. A large number of traffic accidents occur due to carelessness of road users or the unawareness of the law. For that reason, it is important to educate children in that area. Research has shown that children who receive road safety education are less likely to suffer some types of accidents, but will also become responsible and knowledgeable adults. They are bound to become good and careful drivers, pedestrians, cyclists, and passengers. 9614PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEThe committee, therefore, recommends that the Government fast-tracks the implementation of the National School Road Safety Curriculum and also popularises road safety awareness programmes in the various media houses. Periodic inspection of motor vehiclesMadam Speaker, the committee noted that some of the vehicles on Ugandan roads are not roadworthy and are more prone to causing road accidents and environmental pollution. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government ensures effective implementation of the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1999 and the Traffic and Road Regulation Motor Vehicle Inspection Regulation, 2016. In conclusion, the committee appreciates the effort made by the various ministries, departments and agencies towards road safety interventions, although they still need a lot to be done, as aforementioned in the report. The committee is cognisant of the inadequate financing towards road safety interventions, hence the need for Government to adequately fund this sector in order for it to effectively carry out its planned outputs. Further, Government is urged to make a concerted effort towards processing the pending regulations that will operationalise the Traffic and Road Safety Amendment Act. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Hon. Kimosho, Chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. You have heard; it is not any different from what I was telling you today. It is more of what we reported to you. Honourable minister, you have heard. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of private sector road safety practitioners led by Mr Kizito Charles Nsubuga. They have come to follow the debate. Join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)  Thank you. We are going to limit the debate. Why? It is because of the Prime Minister’s Time. Secondly, this is what we discussed on your behalf. I do not know whether you - why do not you learn to trust your leaders? (Laughter)  I am just asking. Do you mean that you have also lost trust in your Leader of the Opposition, who ably represented you? I did represent the whole country. The Government Chief Whip also represented the Prime Minister. My arrow boy, the Minister of Works and Transport, was there. Let me give the arrow boy to read again what we agreed, if it is any different from what we agreed. Can you first read to the House?3.36THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru) : Rt Hon. Prime Minister - Madam Speaker, in thanking the committee chairperson – THE SPEAKER:  You know he is in love with the Prime Minister so he will always call, “Prime Minister.” (Laughter)MR ECWERU:  I think we were Resident District Commissioners at one time – THE SPEAKER:  And they were together in Kasese. (Laughter)MR ECWERU:  Madam Speaker, nothing happened, we just continued working for Government. (Laughter)Madam Speaker, let me again, for emphasis, read what you have already presented to this august House. On 13 July 2023, the Speaker convened a meeting with the Minister of Works and Transport, the Executive Director, Uganda National Roads Authority, the Government Chief Whip, the Leader of the Opposition, Uganda Police Force, and the Minister of Health. The meeting resolved as follows: For immediate interventions, enforcement of relevant laws and regulations; whereas the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998 has attendant regulations that have aided its [Mr Kimosho] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT9615THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 JULY 2023operationalisation, the Road Act, 2019 which addresses various aspects of the road safety, does not have regulations. There is need for regulations to operationalise Sections 57, 58 and 59 on the towing of an auctioning of abandoned or broken-down automobiles on carriageways. The UNRA has immediately offered at least eight tow vehicles to tow abandoned vehicles. The Ministry of Works and Transport must expedite the development of regulations to operationalise the Road Act, 2019. The Ministry of Works and Transport undertook to table regulations operationalising the Road Act, 2019 within one month, that is by 13 August 2023. Then streamlining the motor vehicle registration function under the Ministry of Works and Transport, which requires an additional Shs 40 billion. The Ministry of ICT and National Guidance and Uganda Communications Commission should ensure that there is immediate dissemination of pop-up messages on road safety to all mobile phone subscribers. Replacing missing road furniture, such as road signs, reflectors, fences, etc and exploring and use of appropriate alternative materials to minimise vandalism and theft. Conclusion of the Memorandum of Understanding between the public agencies responsible for transport and road safety and the private sector on towing the abandoned vehiclesSensitisation and enforcement of motor third party insurance whereas motor third party insurance introduced by the Motor Vehicle Insurance Third Party Risks Act, 1989 provides for compulsory insurance against third-party bodily risk in respect to the use of vehicles. Oftentimes, victims of accidents are not indemnified. There is a need for more sensitisation on motor third-party insurance. Madam Speaker, increased public education and awareness on road safety in order to shape road user behaviourThere is a need for constant and consistent sensitisation of the general public on road safety, using all available mass media. The meeting was notified that out of the required budget of Shs 20 billion for road safety, only Shs 5 billion was released. There is, therefore, a need for adequate resourcing of the road safety function across the relevant agencies. The Uganda Police Force should scale up monitoring and enforce compliance with the right of way and use of lead cars, sirens and led lights on automobiles, those culpable of breaching the law should be prosecuted. Responsible use of Government vehiclesHonourable colleagues, Government vehicles continue to be the highest perpetrators of traffic offences, including road crashes. In 2022, over 500 Government vehicles were involved in accidents. There is a need for more responsible use of Government vehicles backed by sanctions for misuse as prescribed in the Public Service Standing Orders. Compliance with speed limitsThere is need for stringent enforcement of increased sensitisation of road users. On compliance with speed limits, there is an urgent need to reintroduce the installation of speed governors in all vehicles to regulate speeding. UNRA is directed to immediately remove roadside markets or at least ensure that they are not on the roadside and taxi parks that have encroached into roads and road reserves. For example, in Busega, Lukaya, Kireka and Kyaliwajjala. Local leaders should sensitise the masses on the need to comply with road safety rules and regulations. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should increase the recurrent budget for allocation to UNRA, the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Uganda Police Force for immediate road safety interventions. 9616PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEFor medium-term interventions, we talked about the reintroduction of periodic mandatory vehicle inspection under the police. This requires adequate resourcing and equipping of the Uganda Police Force. We complied with Parliament to remove SGS completely. Adequate equipping of the relevant enforcement agencies with the relevant tools, including but not limited to, numbers, equipment and automobiles to aid effective enforcement of the law, particularly the driver testing and training There is a need to reduce physical contact between enforcement personnel and drivers to minimise incidents of corruption. The Government should invest in automatic number plate recognition cameras linked to ticketing and offenders speed guns, strengthening road monitoring and surveillance for amongst other timely detection and removal of abandoned vehicles and carriageways and reprimanding errant drivers and road users. UNRA needs adequate resourcing for adequate equipment for communication and towing abandoned vehicles. Long-term interventionsAutomation of regulatory and monitoring processes to minimise human contact and reduce incidents of corruption and influence peddling. Enforcement of budgetary provisions to the relevant agencies on the road safety value chain and general strengthening of road safety monitoring and enforcement. Enforcement of the speed limits around blind and black spots notably; markets, schools and other public facilities, including hospitals. Road designs should match the growing population of people and vehicles and strategic development plans of the country. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should increase the development budget allocation to UNRA together with the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Uganda Police Force for road safety-related interventions. Madam Speaker, this is what we agreed on. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. When we talk about removing the trucks on the roadside, it also includes those trucks that have parked for more than 30 minutes. That is as per Section 58 of the Road Act. You have vehicles that are parked on the roadside like in Kumi, Soroti, Bukedea, Lukaya and everywhere vehicles are parked on the roadside. Let us first adopt today’s resolution so that it becomes a parliamentary document. Leader of the Opposition, do you want to amend the resolution?4.05MR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent, Kole North County, Kole):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to propose an amendment to the resolution talking about increasing sensitisation on third-party insurance. The issue is not just about sensitisation. We have an issue with commercial vehicles that move across the border and their third-party is not valid. I had a similar incident over the weekend; three of my constituents were knocked down by a trailer on the Lira-Kamdini Road. When they called that number on that third-party insurance, they said the third-party insurance is only valid in Kenya and not Uganda. Therefore, these commercial vehicles should have international third-party insurance. So, I propose that that amendment be captured on that. THE SPEAKER:  The third-party insurance should be international. MR OPIO: The second amendment I am proposing is that studies show that where the emergency response is quick enough, you can be able to save up to 17 per cent of the debt. In this case, it will be about Shs 3,000. We have talked about increasing funding for road safety intervention in the Ministry of Works and [Mr Ecweru] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT9617THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 JULY 2023Transport, the Uganda Road Fund and other entities. However, we have not talked about the Ministry of Health. We need to increase the budget for ambulances and blood collection because we are just collecting 300,000 units but we need 450,000 units. I, therefore, propose an amendment that budgets catering for emergency response should be increased also. Thank you.4.07MR ALLAN MAYANJA (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I recommend that the Government should fully operationalise and implement the Road Fund Act because -THE SPEAKER: We are first talking about road safety. MR ALLAN MAYANJA: Madam Speaker, let me clarify that this issue also covers road safety because when you rehabilitate and do road maintenance, in actual sense, you are working on road safety. This is why I recommend that the Government should operationalise and implement the Road Fund Act in order to sort out issues of road safety. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, are you okay with that amendment? The first was okay. Is the one on the road fund okay?   The recommendation moved by Hon. Allan is adopted. 4.08MR DA VID SSERUKENYA (NUP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to propose an amendment on sensitisation so that we can include first aid. The people that do not die on the spot have a chance to survive, but the challenge is that Ugandans do not know what to do; they just look on. If we are given airtime, we should also include first aid sensitisation. Secondly, I will propose an amendment that the road design -THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us bring credible amendments. Let us not dilute what is already there. 4.09MR FRED KAYONDO (DP, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to bring an amendment. There is a silent parastatal we are not putting into consideration here and that is the Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS). Madam Speaker, when you check the quality of tires we have on the market, some of them carry expired dates. When –THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, one of the submissions from the Police was that the quality of tires brought into the country is very poor. We should actually check the body that checks those tires, that is, the National Bureau of Standards. I bought a tire and in one day, it burst. So, we need to check the quality of tires and the companies that import these tires. MR KAYONDO: Madam Speaker, thank you. Most of the tires we have in the country cannot withstand the temperatures here. They are supposed to be driven in cold countries. On the quality of the spare parts we have - go to the market; you can find one spare part with different prices. Spare parts come from Taiwan, Tanzania, India, and Japan, all with different prices. Madam Speaker, most of the accidents are happening simply because -THE SPEAKER: The message has been taken; so, we are going to make an amendment in terms of the quality regulating body.MR KAYONDO: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.4.11MR JOEL LEKU (NRM, Terego West County, Terego):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to bring an amendment of licensing the mechanics; the people who work on broken 9618PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEcars, but are not trained. They do not fix cars in a manner that is fit for the roads. I will give you an example of the electricity technicians licensed by ERA. I appeal that we amend the Act to license the garages and mechanics who do the work. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the amendment. Which body will be responsible for the licensing? MR LEKU: Ministry of Works and Transport. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he has a very valid point. You go to a mechanic because you think he or she is cheap and then, they end up fixing something wrong in your car. Before you reach Kamdini, you have already gotten an accident because of the quality of works. These people should be licensed and that would require that we make an amendment in the Road Safety Act.4.13MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the use of television for sensitisation and awareness creation, I would like to amend that we include providing special training on road safety on the television so that it is much clearer than just saying, drive properly. THE SPEAKER: But you see, people who are well versed with this - I am looking for somebody who is from that sector, like Hon. Solomon. They can bring for you cartoons to illustrate what happens when you are driving at 40 kilometres per hour. How about at 60, 100, 120 kilometres per hour? You will get an accident and at the end of the day, there is a corpse in a coffin. Those are things people understand better than talking.MR TONNY AYOO: Madam Speaker, that is true but sometimes we have questions on how people are trained in the driving schools. All those processes must be included in the advertisement and the promotion and awareness creation.In addition, through the Ministry of Education and Sports, we should include this in the curriculum of schools at all levels, whether from primary, secondary, university, and tertiary institutions because the major causes of these crashes are because of human behaviour, bad attitude and inconsiderate use of the road. I think we should include this in the curriculum so that people grow up knowing, respecting and understanding – This is why even most of the efforts by the Government are being ignored because the attitude developed in the mind of people on road safety is already bad. Through the ministry, this must come in as a long-term process of changing the mind, understanding and respecting lives on the roads.THE SPEAKER: Gender, mindset change - That is the same thing. Discipline. 4.15MS FLA VIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to make an observation that will lead me to amend the recommendations and this is about traffic enforcement and discretion on options for handling mentally ill persons. The mentally ill persons on the streets and roads are a traffic challenge. In Kajjansi, two days ago, a mad woman started smashing people’s cars but the traffic police continued to wave their hands for traffic to go. This mad woman was on a rampage all over the place and they did not seem to want to even address that kind of matter, and we have found them a lot. These mad people, whether they are mentally ill or are drug addicts, vandalise cars, fight road users, disrupt and stampede traffic. Can the police, especially the traffic police, understand that mentally ill persons on the roads are a road challenge or a traffic challenge? They should take options like hospitalising or arresting them. Those who may not be very aggressive [Mr Leku] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT9619THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 JULY 2023can be informally handled, but something needs to come to the recommendations on how to manage mentally ill people on the road. Madam Speaker, we equally need psychiatric services at the health facility -THE SPEAKER: I am not sure whether that is the mandate of the traffic police but the Prime Minister is going to come and address it in her responses. It is in one of the questions. We are now looking at the amendment on what was resolved.MS KABAHENDA: Madam Speaker, why wouldn’t they coordinate with the respective entities for this? This is because it ends up with them. When it becomes a traffic challenge, it just requires some address from them. Thank you.4.17MS JULIET AGASHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. My recommendation is that in addition to training, we include theory tests. I possess two driving permits; I got one from California and I know what I went through. You are given 36 questions and the moment you pass 29, not 30, you cannot be allowed to go for practical tests. I suggest that in addition to the training, which is also inadequate, we include theory tests before someone gets a licence. (Applause)  Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  I thought that there are theory tests. Honourable members, the other day I was talking about people who get driving permits through the back door. Anyway, there are theory tests. Is anybody giving anything outside what we have discussed?4.19MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I plead that we add one recommendation that the Ministry of Works and Transport expedites and engages the local governments to gazette areas for the parking of trailers, like you have observed the case of Kumi municipality, where trailers are along the road day and night. THE SPEAKER:  Gazette a place for trailers.4.19MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add the issue of boda bodas. They did not classify the numbers, but I know the biggest number of accidents are caused by boda bodas. Maybe the minister should add that recommendation. My second issue, although the honourable –THE SPEAKER:  What about boda bodas? MS KUNIHIRA:  They should be streamlined and stages should be created for them. THE SPEAKER:  What we found was that police had started the issue of regulating and testing boda bodas and they were moving from one region to another. They have been in Masindi. Now, they are in Gulu and they are moving to other areas. That is why we did not put it there. MS KUNIHIRA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. My second issue is to do with the third party. Although the honourable member mentioned the foreign cars, locally here, we do not know where that money goes. Even when you get into an accident or lose somebody, you can never access that money. The conditions are very complicated that most people just give up. Thank you. 4.20MR MARTIN MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee already observed that the rates are high for driving permits, especially for the boda boda riders: it is Shs 400,000. This is one of the areas that is actually making these people fail to go through formal training and get their driving permits. I, therefore, propose –9620PRIME MINISTER’S TIMETHE SPEAKER:  We are actually going to increase so that we limit the number.4.21MR MOSES OGWAL (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine is an addition to a recommendation which was proposing inter-ministerial coordination. One of the areas to coordinate is to see how we can use the camera system – the investments which were made in the camera system for police – and do any other additions so that it can serve not only security-related issues but support others. This is so that the budget is a little bit cushioned. It can also be used for raising funds. So, let us look at the - THE SPEAKER:  That one is already included in the automatic - Yes, motion? 4.22MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Central Division, Fort Portal City):  Madam Speaker – THE SPEAKER:  You are the ones who made these rules. Once a motion comes in, you cannot do much. Yes, motion? MR RUHUNDA:  Madam Speaker, we appreciate the leadership you have provided to ensure that we get to this point, where the country has to be rescued. I, therefore, move a motion that the House adopts the resolutions, with the amendments, and the report read by the chairperson of the infrastructure committee. I beg to move.THE SPEAKER:  Is it seconded? (Members rose_)  It is seconded by Hon. Muwuma, Hon. Omara, Hon. Solomon, Hon. Silwany, the minister for finance, Hon. Ayo, Hon. James, Imat and Hon. Matovu. Honourable members, you sent us to have this meeting. We simplified things for you – first of all, I am putting a question that we adopt the resolutions of the committee that sat as a parliamentary document, with amendments.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE SPEAKER:  The resolutions that we passed, that we agreed we should be making a referral to after every one month, are now a parliamentary document, with amendments. I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the status of the road safety in Uganda be adopted by this House.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, committee chairperson. Pursuant to Rule 220 of the Rules of Procedure, we will expect an action-taken plan. You need to continue updating this House on what you have done, how far you have gone and, most importantly, for the law to be effective, we need regulations in place. We cannot pass a law in 2018 and to date, there is no regulation.MR ECWERU:  Madam Speaker, I commit to undertake that and I also commit to this House that we will share this resolution with the other sectors that are critical in its implementation so that they also undertake what their responsibilities should be and continue to update this House on how we are progressing. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. This is just a kind reminder that we have Mass at 5.00 p.m. MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO PRIORITISE INTERVENTIONS TO ADDRESS THE CHALLENGES OF MYCOTOXIN CONTAMINATION IN NORTHERN UGANDATHE SPEAKER:  Let us move that to Tuesday. We have Monsignor waiting. The church is ready, so, we go straight to Prime 9621THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 JULY 2023Minister’s Time. She will give us business for the succeeding week and then go to Prime Minister’s Time. STATEMENT BY THE RT HON. PRIME MINISTER ON GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR THE SUCCEEDING WEEK, 18 TO 20 JULY 20234.26THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker –(Interruption)MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I remember very well in your opening remarks for this session at Kololo, you clearly indicated that Government, in the last session, was meant to present 57 Bills and ended up presenting only 17. In the statement which the Rt Hon. Prime Minister made last week, she clearly indicated that this week, she was meant to present a Bill entitled, “The Explosive Bill” and by today she has not presented it. Is she in order to go ahead to present business for the succeeding week, without completing and explaining or apologising to this Parliament as to why she failed to present that Bill? Is she in order? THE SPEAKER:  Honourable Members, I can see we are debating in anticipation. Why don’t we hear from the Prime Minister? (Applause)  The process of making Bills is not a one-day process. You will find, maybe, the Bill is in my office, and I have not brought it to the House. So –(Laughter)4.26THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker and colleagues, in the interest of time, I will not say anything.THE SPEAKER:  I have already responded on your behalf -MS NABBANJA:  Yes. Sometimes, the members look for recognition. (Laughter)  Madam Speaker and colleagues, I move under Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure to submit business for the succeeding week of 18th to 20 July 2023. 1. Laying of Acts and Bills of the East African Legislative Assembly as required by Article 65 of the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community (EAC) and Rule 36 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. i. A statement by the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development on the deemed energy, as guided by the Speaker, that cannot be evacuated from the generation point. ii. A statement by the Minister of Internal Affairs on the status of change of passports and introduction of international East African passports. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER:  Please do.PRIME MINISTER’S TIME4.31THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker, there were many questions asked, but most of them were on road safety, and we have made a resolution here. Should I waste -?THE SPEAKER:  You will be repetitive.MS NABBANJA:  Yes. The first question was from Hon. Zijjan David, and he raised a matter of concern that the Government has failed to deploy sign language interpreters in the courts of law, to assist persons with hearing 9622PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEimpairments. His prayer is that I update the House on the matter. Madam Speaker, Section 15(A) of the Persons with Disabilities Act, 2020, provides for deployment, training and use of sign language, and tactile sign language interpreters in all public institutions, and this includes the courts of law. The revised National Policy on Persons with Disabilities, 2023, under priority area 2(ii), of the strategies and actions, enhancement of communication in different formats is emphasised, and sign language is explicitly mentioned. The Judiciary has got one sign language interpreter deployed at Buganda Road Court, Kampala. The sign language interpreter was recruited purposely to assist persons with hearing impairments. Since the cases involving persons with hearing impairments are very few, the sign language interpreter is facilitated to go to any other court where there are such cases, to assist as required and there are no complaints. Apart from sign language interpreters, the Judiciary employs more than 348 court interpreters who are deployed in various courts across the country, to assist interpretation of court proceedings. For example, the Family Division Court, Buganda Road Court, Mityana Chief Magistrates Court, Mbarara High Court, Koboko Chief Magistrates Court, Moyo Chief Magistrates Court, Kasese Chief Magistrates Court, etcetera. Number two, Hon. Kevin Kaala, the District Woman Representative, Pallisa, raised a concern on the heavy downpour on Thursday, 28 April 2022 in Pallisa District that led to floods that washed away Kaboloi, Ometai and Otuti Bridges that link Pallisa to Ngora District. She asked: “Can the Prime Minister inform the House on interventions instituted by the Government to remedy the situation?” Madam Speaker, the Government, through the Ministry of Works and Transport, on 4 August 2022 provided Pallisa District with 32 meters of length and 2.1 meters of diameter metal culverts wide and 40 pieces of gabion boxes two by one by one (two meters wide, one-meter-deep and one-meter width). The ministry also advised the district to write to the Uganda Road Fund for emergency funding to allow maintenance works on Kaboloi Bridge. The Ministry on 26 April 2023 held a meeting with the honourable Members of Parliament for Gogonyo and Kibaale Counties after the temporary intervention by the district. As a result, on 4 May 2023, the ministry inspected Kaboloi Bridge with a view of carrying out major works to restore connectivity. Madam Speaker and colleagues, the ministry undertook to install the metal culverts to restore connectivity. The provision of Shs 40 million was made in fourth quota of the Financial Year 2022/2023 under project number 1558 for intervention, particularly, installation of culverts as a means of restoring connectivity. These works are expected to commence in July this year.This financial year, Government has prioritised rural bridges under infrastructure development to enable the ministry to reconstruct dilapidated bridges and construct new bridges that are currently timber-made - temporary bridges in the districts, urban and community access roads network across the country that are estimated to be 1,636 bridges.Hon. Musherure Shartsi Nayebare Kutesa, Member of Parliament Mawogola – (Interruption)MS NAMUGGA:  Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for your wise ruling that the Prime Minister may not repeat responses on road safety. However, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Prime Minister just [Ms Nabbanja]9623THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 JULY 2023to mention the names of the Members who raised the matters so that it goes on record?THE SPEAKER:  That is why she is mentioning Hon. Musherure since she is not going to read the response.MS NAMUGGA:  Thank you.MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, Hon. Musherure raised a matter concerning the need for Government to stress its commitment to road safety through implementation of the existing rules and regulations. Her prayer was that she wanted me to update the House on the timelines for approval of Traffic and Road Safety Regulations.I had highlighted a number of regulations and Members have them on Alfresco. The answers are almost similar to what we have just resolved. Therefore, I request that you allow me to go to another question. Hon. Dr Ayume Charles, Member of Parliament for Koboko said that there is a high number of road traffic injuries reporting to public hospitals in Uganda and increasing cost of treatment. His prayer was whether Government can update the House on the intervention to reduce road carnage. It is almost the same; I feel the answers I gave are similar to what we discussed with the Speaker this morning. I, therefore, request that you allow me to go to another question. Honourable members can read on their iPads because we have uploaded this.Hon. Atkins Katusabe, Member of Parliament for Bukonzo County West, Kasese District. He raised a matter of concern about the floods that ravaged parts of Kasese District, submerging houses and sweeping away bridges and the threat of a resultant crack on a massive rock. His prayer was that the Prime Minister gives a status update and interventions made.Madam Speaker, Government is aware of the above concern. Through the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Uganda National Roads Authority, Government undertook short-term, medium and long-term interventions in Kasese. Among the short-term actions, the ministry has to date constructed three cable footbridges. That is Kyabayenze Cable Foot Bridge on Lhubiriha River, of Mihani, Karichadi Cable Foot Bridge and Ruboni-Kyambogho Cable Foot Bridge.Further, the ministry is doing protection of River Nyamugasani eroded banks using force on account. In addition, the ministry rehabilitated Mubuku-Karusandara Prison Road is measuring 12 out of 22.4 kilometres affected by floods.The Ministry of Works and Transport also extended additional support in form of metal culverts and equipment to Kasese District Local Government to enable it to reinstate the damaged infrastructure. Clearing of flood debris on the affected roads, repair of damaged bridges, protection works and desilting of blocked drainage structures, has been done.In terms of medium and long-term actions, the Ministry of Works and Transport designed and is constructing Karujumba Bridge connecting Kyarumba and the Kisinga subcounties. The structures consider the climate effects already experienced in the region.The Government through UNRA is constructing a number of bridges that are climate resilient, including:i) Nyamugasani Bridge (Lower) on Rwentare-Katwe-Katojo Road,ii) Kyanya Bridge on Mobuku-Maliba-Kyanya-Ibanda Road,iii) Isango Bridge on Bwera-Kithoma-Kiraro Road,iv) Rwembyo and Kajwenge Bridges on Kinyamaseke-Kisinga-Kyarumba- Kibirizi Road,v) Kanyampara Bridge on Kinyamaseke-Kisinga-Kyarumba-Kibirizi Road, all of which are ongoing.9624PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEHon. Bwiire Sanon Nadeeba, Member of Parliament for Bulamogi County raised a matter concerning the disruption in the movement of goods and services caused by the flooding of Naigombwa Swamp that connects Kaliro and Namutumba districts. His prayer is that I update the House on the interventions made.The Ministry of Works and Transport on 10 February 2023, inspected the Naigombwa Swamp crossing and prepared a plan for a permanent intervention. At the moment, a temporary intervention has been planned for implementation in this quarter (2023/2024) to restore connectivity and movement of goods and services. The Government is planning for a more permanent intervention.Hon. Zijjan David Livingstone came up with another question. He raised a matter of national concern on the failure to:i) Compensate the Standard Gauge Railway Project Affected Persons (PAPs)in Magamaga, Lwandago, Kakira, Wairaka, Wanyange, Bugembe and the resultant disruption in operations of the health facilities, education institutions and economic activities in the affected areas’; andii) The need for an explanation on what was delaying the implementation of the SGR Project, expeditious compensation of the Project Affected Persons and revisiting the compulsory acquisition policy prior to payment. His prayer is, can the Prime Minister update the House on the matter concerning the status of the Project Affected Persons? Madam Speaker, Government commenced compensation of Project Affected Persons in the year 2016 and the total estimated cost was Shs 584 billion. As at July 2023, after a period of seven years, out of Shs 292.425 billion PAPS approved reports by the Government Chief Valuer, only Shs 109.38 billion has been paid. The project is currently re-assessing the Project Affected Persons from Jinja to Kampala who had been assessed in the year 2016 but could not be paid with the funds available at the time. Hon. Juliet Achayo, Member of Parliament, Ngora County, Ngora District stated that there is a need to operationalise the Maritime Act that was passed in the 10th Parliament. However, government has not presented regulations to Parliament to operationalise this Act. Can the Prime Minister update the House on the measures being taken to improve road and maritime safety, and also inform the House when government is planning to lay the regulations under the Maritime Act? I request that I answer this because it involves water transport. My response is that the Inland Water Transport Act of 2021 is now in force. Draft regulations for improving safety have been prepared and submitted to the Solicitor-General for review and guidance. Government has also undertaken the following measures to improve road and maritime safety: 1. Sensitisation - this has already been taken care of. 2. The Ministry of Works and Transport prepared a search and rescue plan, which is being implemented. This plan highlights the responsibilities of relevant stakeholders on activities they should plan and implement during incidents on the water bodies. 3. Inspection, regulation and licensing are continuous activities conducted to weed out unworthy vessels. 4. Weather forecast systems have been procured and deployed. Currently, modalities of disseminating information are ongoing between the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Water and Environment. 5. Increased enforcement in collaboration with security forces is ongoing, especially after signing Operation Memorandum of Understanding with security bodies with maritime presence on water bodies. STATEMENT ON BUSINESS FOR SUCCEEDING WEEK[Ms Nabbanja]9625THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 JULY 20236. Regular boat patrols by the Uganda Police Force are conducted. 7. The Ministry of Works and Transport is procuring nine rescue boats to strengthen enforcement of safety and to save lives of water users in distress.8. The Ministry of Works and Transport has procured and issued 2,400 life jackets at various landing sites. 9. The Ministry of Works and Transport procured one ambulance boat with ICU facilities to help transport the critical patients to the nearest hospital facilities. Currently, crew recruitment is ongoing and the vessel is expected to start operation by the end of July this year. 10. The Ministry of Works and Transport has established a 24/7 call centre on toll-free code 110 from any telecom services to assist water users in distress to get help. 11. In collaboration with Uganda Communication Commission, vessels are being issued call signs and maritime mobile service identities numbers for international identification during registration. This is for the purpose of search and rescue in case of an incident. 12. Construction of search and rescue centres in Masese, Kaazi, Panyimur, Kaiso, Zengebe Landing Sites are on-going. 13. The construction of Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre at Mwanza is ongoing. MRCC-Entebbe construction works are expected to commence in August this year. (Interruption)  MS NAMUGGA:  Madam Speaker, we appreciate the responses of the Prime Minister but considering the time, I think she can bring those other answers next week. Isn’t it procedurally right for the Prime Minister to bring those answers next week? Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  The Prime Minister says that she only has one question left, if she could finish -MS NABBANJA:  This question comes from Hon. Betty Naluyima, Woman Member of Parliament for Wakiso. Now that you say the Mass is at 5.00 p.m., I do not know whether it was urgent or not - The one on Kiteezi has a number of pages. I seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition can probably answer this because this question is long and the answers are long. They have almost five pages. I will read these answers next week. Maybe, the Member can also go through the answers uploaded on the intranet on her iPad because I have provided – THE SPEAKER:  Please, it is on the intranet. You can go through it, but thank you for answering the questions. (Applause)4.55THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga):  Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I will use fewer minutes since a lot has been dealt with in the previous debates. My concern is on the first question from Hon. Zijjan, related to a single sign language interpreter in the courts of law. I appreciate the Prime Minister for supplying an honest response namely that there is a single person from Zombo to Kisoro. If anywhere in between Zombo and Kisoro, there is a court sitting requiring an interpreter, we will have to make an adjournment until somebody travels to Kaabong, Masaka or Nakasongola and we now know the causes of the huge case backlogs in our courts. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you needed to give the Member hope. As the Prime Minister, take note and inform the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs that there is a problem in the Judiciary. A single person is not acceptable; it only happens in Uganda. When that person is sick – he is indisposed – in one way or another, 9626PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [Ms Nabbanja]the court is at a standstill. I hope you take good note, Rt Hon. Prime Minister – yes, that is what a Prime Minister should tell the country and give people hope. (Interjections)-  A decent Prime Minister should give hope. THE SPEAKER:  The Prime Minister is going to have that corrected and inform the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.MR MPUUGA: Yes, she should admit to the inadequacy and make a commitment to making amends. Otherwise, it is not acceptable.On the question relating to road safety, a lot of responses have been given. I was part of the meeting in the morning and I concur. The only gap in the promises made so far, re-echoed in the statement by the Minister of Works and Transport, is that if you are going to use Uganda Communications Commission to communicate using the telecoms and social media, the Prime Minister should commit to freeing social media platforms blocked by the Government. (Applause) Road safety and democracy walk in the same lane. So, if you are going to invoke telecoms to operate and communicate, the drivers are younger people on social media; they are not the old people at home. So, you need to open up social media and communicate. The other bit that did not come out well, even from our records, is that the hospitals on the highways need to be facilitated. There is a huge problem. (Applause)  This is for them to be able to respond to emergencies. I have been visiting the countryside – the ambulances are really Stone Age and those that are functional are few. So, emergency rescue has a very huge void that the Prime Minister should have made a commitment on. I hope she picks it up and makes good. Making good would mean commitment in the next midterm expenditure framework to commit to financing, selectively choosing these hospitals on the highways. In Luweero, we were informed that they bring emergencies from as far as Nakasongola and they are incapable of dealing with them. The beauty is that the Minister of Health is around. Probably, her network of ambulances, in the pipeline, could come to your able rescue. There was question No.5 by Hon. Atkins Katusabe, relating to the emergencies and other emergencies raised by Members. Madam Speaker, it is both a challenge the Prime Minister should respond to as the Leader of Government Business – activating the provisions of Article 157 of the Constitution: the Contingencies Fund. You cannot find money in the Prime Minister’s office to attend to emergencies all the time. Since local governments have been disempowered, they cannot deal with emergencies. They have to trek to the Prime Minister’s office and make reports. When the Prime Minister is away, nobody can make a decision until Hon. Majegere  comes and makes a decision. You cannot rescue a country with that red tape. So, can we operationalise the Contingencies Fund? After all, in the Public Finance Management Act, it does not expire; it only grows. If you did that for five years, you would have a huge provision for the Contingency Fund. Madam Speaker, I invite Parliament, in the next budget cycle, to insist that this Article is activated. We have the Budget Committee; they should take note and stop begging the Prime Minister to make available kawunga , beans and very basic things, which should be in the hands of the local governments. There was question No.7 by Hon. Zijjan relating to compensation of project affected persons (PAPs). This question streams through many districts and local governments, over many government projects. One of the culprits is UNRA. Honourable Minister of Works and Transport, wherever I have been, I have received community complaints about non-compensation, in violation of Article 26 of the Constitution. It is very clear; prompt, adequate 9627THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 JULY 2023and prior. (Applause)  So, you acquire prior and then start making people beg you to pay. It is a violation of the law and I have encouraged people to take the Government to court for that violation. Wherever I have been, I have told people that I am even willing to offer pro bono services to take you to court for delayed compensation. UNRA is a culprit. So, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, your answer is very good and unconstitutional. You are supposed to compensate first, not to make people beg you to pay them. So, next time, you should inform us on the basis of your answers – whether you have any provision of law or you are very weak at enforcing the law. The Constitution is very clear; prompt, prior and adequate compensation – and “adequate” is not the same as “enough”. In Buvuma, for five years, Madam Speaker, people’s land was taken to grow palm trees, they are not growing food and they have not got any money. They are desperate and destitute. You leave your land, your house is razed down and no money comes. They are all over the place. They have an able Prime Minister. Hon. Majegere, go to the islands and see the trouble you have caused to the people of Uganda for lack of payment. Can you imagine five years and you are not compensated for the only kibanja  you owned! THE SPEAKER:  We are the ones who give the money. Let us give the money for payment. MR MPUUGA:  Madam Speaker, if the money is not available, people should stay in their kibanja . It is as simple as that.THE SPEAKER:  As Parliament, let us give the money and have them paid because I believe the Prime Minister is not going to get money from her pocket. MR MPUUGA:  Madam Speaker, I concur 100 per cent. That is why there is an entity calling itself a government. Where there is an outfit calling itself a government and it has no money, it has no business telling people to leave their land. It is as simple as that. They should continue growing their food and when the Government is ready, people will surrender their land. I have no problem with the Prime Minister. It is a good lesson to pick and that is how governments are run, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  We must work together for the good of the people. Opposition checks what is happening and we must work together. It is this House that approves whatever money. If we do not approve money for payment of compensation for PAPs, it is Parliament that would have failed. MR MPUUGA:  Madam Speaker, I concur 100 per cent. THE SPEAKER:  In the next budget, I want to see that we have money for PAPs and we see how it fails. MR MPUUGA:  Madam Speaker, if any of the ministers concerned present their ministerial policy statements (MPS), they are unfunded priorities. I follow all entities and I know that these are unfunded priorities, meaning that they dozed on the job. So, it is up to them. The Speaker is not going to put money for you in the budget if you do not bring it in the MPS. It is as simple as that. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, make a follow-up to ensure that the money is put in the budget by different entities and this House will do its work. MR MPUUGA:  I concur, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  It is not a personal list. MR MPUUGA:  On the other issues I would have raised, I hold my fire on the Prime Minister. I will be here next week for her. Thank you. (Laughter)9628PRIME MINISTER’S TIMETHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I adjourn the House to 2.00 p.m. on Tuesday, next week.(The House rose at 5.06 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 18 July 2023 at 2.00 p.m.)