Tuesday, 31 July 2012

Parliament met at 2.05 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to welcome you to this sitting. On a sad note, you might have heard of the sudden death of Prisca Thembo, the wife of our colleague, hon. Nyombi Thembo, the Minister of State for Information and Communication Technology. It occurred in a tragic accident last Saturday on Entebbe Road. On behalf of Parliament, I wish to extend our deep and heartfelt condolences to hon. Nyombi and his family upon the loss of a dear one. No words can soothe the pain arising from the loss, but we are comforted by the Scriptures that say, “It is God who gives and it is Him who takes away.” I wish to report that a delegation of some Members of Parliament is representing us at the burial of Mrs Thembo. The burial is scheduled to take place this afternoon in Kasanda and it is my prayer and wish that it goes on well. 

Honourable members, the incidents of accidents are increasing on our roads and this should be a matter of concern to all of us. Over the weekend, it was reported that 13 lives were lost in three accidents. We cannot afford to continue losing people at such a rate. I am aware that the Committee on Physical Infrastructure has been carrying out oversight and in its previous report recommended, among other things, the formulation of a road safety Bill for consideration by Parliament. It further recommended the need for Government to strengthen driving standards and professionalise training for drivers. I am also aware that the East African Legislative Assembly is considering the Physical Infrastructure Bill, which is aimed at standardising physical infrastructure development across East Africa.

Arising from the above, I wish to urge the Minister of Works and Transport to fast-track realisation of the Road Safety Bill and professionalization of training of drivers in Uganda. I equally urge the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to strengthen its oversight, specifically to follow up on the Road Safety Bill and ensure that it is brought for consideration as soon as possible by Parliament.

Honourable members, there has been a reported outbreak of Ebola virus in Western Uganda, particularly in Kibaale. I am informed that Mulago Referral Hospital is involved in the management of some cases. I urge the Minister of Health to keep Parliament updated on the status of this issue and the progress being made in containing it. 

With Ebola, you know the drill; all of us know the drill. We should use whatever mechanism we have to pass information to our people that from now on, there should be minimum physical contact between persons. Handshakes and things like that should be avoided because we know that is how this virus spreads, and it spreads quite quickly. Therefore, I urge all of you to heed the President’s call which was made the day before yesterday as well as yesterday. He said that this matter should be strictly observed so as to contain the situation from getting worse.

At this moment, let us stand and observe a minute of silence for Mrs Thembo and all the accident victims as well as for the Ebola virus victims.

(The members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you appreciate that this is a time when sectoral committees are busy considering ministerial policy statements whose reports are scheduled to be presented at least before the 31st of August as per the Budget Act. The 31st of August is supposed to be the day when we pass the final appropriation – the Appropriation Bill - and it should be done by that time. 

Given limited space and time, the standing committees should suspend business to allow sectoral committees to complete Budget related work. I would not like to have a repeat of the delay in completing the consideration of ministerial policy statements like it occurred last year. I had to invoke powers invested in me by the Budget Act to repeatedly extend time to accommodate the Budget process. To this effect, I am directing the Clerk to communicate this directive to all the concerned people.

Furthermore, the operations and activities of all standing committees are suspended. Any exceptions will be communicated in writing by the Speaker to the chairperson of that particular standing committee. All field trips or fieldwork by all committees of Parliament are suspended for the duration of the Budget process. In exceptional circumstances, the Speaker will exempt a particular committee in writing. 

All public hearings of the committees handling the policy statements shall be conducted within the precincts of Parliament. This is to facilitate the participation of members of the public. We do not want a situation where ministerial policy statement debates are handled outside the precincts of Parliament, thereby limiting the public’s accessibility to the committee and yet matters are referred to committees for members of the public to access them. If you take it away from Parliament, members of the public will not be able to access the activities of the committee. It is, therefore, directed that all public hearings conducted by the committees shall be within the precincts of Parliament.

The Clerk to Parliament is directed to receive and publish, in the media, the committee public hearing programmes so that due notice is given to members of the public, and those interested should come and participate. Furthermore, all committees should prepare work plans on all pending business and even anticipated business. The Clerk should also publish all the work plans of the committees so that the House and the public know what is going on. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SEARCH COMMITTEE FOR THE VICE CHANCELLOR OF MAKERERE UNIVERSITY

2.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to request that you give us more time because my colleague with a personal conduct of the matter is out of station and the ministry is not ready. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. You will recall that this matter came as an urgent matter last Tuesday and it was promised that a statement would be made on Thursday. So, it was on the Order Paper last Thursday but I pushed it to today. However, in the circumstances, we are not able to proceed with the statement. Please, urge the responsible minister to come back to the House with the statement tomorrow. Is that okay?

DR MUYINGO: Mr Speaker, I think Thursday would be better. I am not very sure of tomorrow but at least, I am sure of Thursday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let it be Thursday then.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DELAY OF RELEASE OF FUNDS TO GOVERNMENT-AIDED AND PRIVATE SCHOOLS UNDER THE UNIVERSAL SECONDARY EDUCATION (USE) PROGRAMME

2.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Mr Speaker, I stand in for the minister and I am sorry that even with this one, we are not ready. We are asking for more time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will suspend this item for 30 minutes and then we will come back to it. We will not allow it to pass today.

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers of St Janan Luwum Nursery and Primary School in Kitgum, represented by hon. Beatrice Anywar. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. You are welcome. Also in the public gallery this afternoon, we have teachers and pupils of Kisowera Day and Boarding Primary School from Mukono, represented by hon. Ronald Kibuule. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

PETITION BY THE REPRESENTATIVES OF KABALEGA INVESTMENTS LIMITED

2.18
MR KRISPUS AYENA-ODONG (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Mr Speaker, this is a humble petition of members of Kabalega Investments Limited, presented under rule 9 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The humble petition states as follows: 

That the petitioners are local investors with interest in, among others, building warehouses and agro-processing plants; they applied to Uganda Land Commission which gave them a lease offer for land for development comprising Leasehold Register Volume 1525, folio 19, plot 977, block 17 at Nalukolongo land. However, when they went to pay the requisite fees, they were denied on the grounds that a new company in the names of Uganda Properties Holdings Ltd had subleased the land to another company called TIC Plastic. 

In 1987, Uganda Land Commission leased land comprised in plots 675, 676, 977, block 17 Nalukolongo to Produce Marketing Board, the land having been acquired in 1973 by Government under statutory instrument 21 of 1973. As is well known, the land was given for building warehouses as the primary function of Produce Marketing Board.

Produce Marketing Board was privatised under the PERD Act in 1993. However, by the time of its privatisation, PMB had not developed the vast land and had failed to pay ground rent for all the time they had been in occupation. Uganda Land Commission, as the controlling authority, therefore, re-entered the land effective 8 September 2009 and gave a lease offer to the petitioner. 

In the intervening period, a limited liability company wholly owned by Government, called Uganda Properties Holdings Ltd, was established with a limited mandate to handle some Government interests, particularly management of Government properties abroad. This company has now purportedly assumed ownership and management of the properties of Produce Marketing Board apparently without a vesting order from the responsible minister. 

Because of these contradictions, the petitioners have not been allowed access to take stewardship of the lease that was offered. It is feared that this could result into another scenario where Government could be sued in the same manner Basajjabalaba sued Government.

Therefore, the humble petitioners pray that Parliament:
1. 	Carries out an investigation to determine the interests of the petitioners and the legal implications of not honouring the lease offer by Uganda Land Commission.

2. 	Carries out an investigation to find out the true acreage and status of all the land in Nalukolongo which originally belonged to Produce Marketing Board.

3. 	Carries out an investigation to find out whether the requisite ground rents have been paid to Uganda Land Commission and the effect of non-payment if they have not been paid.

4. 	Carries out an investigation to establish the legal basis of transactions on this vast piece of land.	

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray. 

I beg to lay on the Table the petition duly signed by the representatives of the company, Mr Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Ayena. The petition and the documents are received and recorded as presented. The petition stands committed to the appropriate committee to be handled within the timeframe provided in the law. However, as we said, petitions are more focused issues. Committees should take a much shorter time on them than they would ordinarily do on Bills and other motions. It is accordingly referred to the committee. 

MOTION FOR LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBERS BILL IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 111 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OR PARLIAMENT

2.24
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As the mover of the motion, I am ready but I seek your guidance. My seconders, because of the burial of the wife of hon. Nyombi Thembo and because of the function of the Buganda Government, are not here. I need your guidance on whether I can move then some other person seconds from the Floor of the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have a seconder? You are proceeding with a motion and you do not have a seconder. (Members rose_)Okay, you have. You have to be sure that you have a seconder. Proceed.

MR SSIMBWA: They have come. Mr Speaker, I needed that guidance procedurally, to find out if somebody who did not sign on the motion will be allowed to-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is alright. Please, proceed.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Speaker, I am rising under rule 47, rule 110 and rule 111(1) of our Rules of Procedure to move a motion for leave of Parliament to enable me introduce a Private Members’ Bill. 

“WHEREAS corruption hinders economic development, diverts investment in infrastructure, institutions, social services and fosters an anti-democratic environment characterised by uncertainty, unpredictability and declining moral values and disrespect for constitutional institutions and authority which undermine efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals(MDGs);

AND WHEREAS in 2003 the United Nations adopted the United Nations Convention Against Corruption to, among others, promote and strengthen measures to prevent and combat corruption  more efficiently and effectively; to promote and facilitate and also support international cooperation and technical assistance in the prevention of and the fight against corruption, including asset recovery and international cooperation measures on asset recovery, and also ratified the AU Convention on Preventing and Combating Corruption;

FURTHER AWARE that this Parliament has enacted the Anti-Corruption Act 0f 2009, the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act of 2003, the Budget Act of 2002, the Access to Information Act of 2005, the Whistleblowers Act, 2010 and the Penal Code, Cap.120 and established institutions such as the Inspectorate of Government, the Anti-Corruption Court and the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity to lead in the fight against corruption;

REALISING THAT despite the existence of a legislative and institutional framework aimed at curtailing graft, Uganda is still one of the poorest countries that is characterised by rampant corruption due to inadequacies within the provisions that deal with penalties. These inadequacies have not made corruption a risky venture and the corrupt have moved on with impunity. Statistics continue to show that Uganda is rated among the most corrupt countries and it is rated 143 out of 183 countries. It is given a scale of 2.4 out of 10. That means it is on the lower part and that means it is one of the most corrupt countries in the whole world;

WHEREAS corruption stands out as the single greatest barrier to development and that it often leads to a sense of hopelessness in the civil population;

REALISING THAT this Parliament must reflect upon its individual and collective effort towards the elimination of corruption by strengthening, through a legal framework, those provisions that are inadequate;

RECOGNISING THAT there is need for revision of the Anti-Corruption Act and the Leadership Code Act to ensure stringent and deterrent provisions in the laws so as to curb corruption in Uganda and to more specifically, ensure confiscation and forfeiture of the property of the convicted person to recover in real terms the loss occasioned to the public and or recover the benefits derived out of the offence of corruption;

NOW THEREFORE, this motion is moved that this House accepts the introduction of a Bill for an Act of Parliament herein entitled the Anti-Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2012 attached herewith and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by the honourable member for Nakaseke, the honourable member for Mbarara Municipality, and the honourable member for Oyam County North. 

It is a straightforward motion. All members have the right to present Private Members’ Bills but the procedure is that when you bring a Private Members’ Bill, this House must give you the authority to do so first before you do it. Therefore, the member is seeking the leave of this House to allow him to bring a Private Members’ Bill on the subject he has captured very well. Do we need to debate this, honourable members? He is seeking the authority of the House.

MR NDEEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In principle, I have no objection and I would encourage honourable members to move Private Members’ Bills, but I have a problem. If you look at the rule the honourable member is using in order to move a motion of this nature, it says copies of the motion must be given to members. Secondly, copies of the draft Bill must also be given to members. Now, I am wondering what we are voting on.

Mr Speaker, in his pleas, the honourable member asks for permission of this august House to authorise the Clerk to Parliament to cause publication of the said Bill. I did not hear the member asking this House to request the Minister of Finance to provide a certificate of financial implications and yet without a certificate of financial implications, the honourable member cannot proceed to any stage from where we are today. So, Mr Speaker, I beg for your guidance. Otherwise, I have no problem with this motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is not a Bill. The rules require the honourable member to come to this House with a motion to seek leave to allow him bring the Bill as a private member. A motion does not attract a certificate of financial implications but when the Bill is finalised and is going to be read for the first time before the House, certainly it will have to have a certificate of financial implications. 

Right now, what the member is saying is, “Please, colleagues in the House, allow me bring a private members’ Bill on this subject”. I think his exposition has been clear. We should not be the ones putting inhibitions on the way of the member bringing a private members’ Bill. Should we be?

HON. MEMBERS: No!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that leave be granted to the honourable member to bring a Private Member’s Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations. (Applause) That means you now qualify to be given all the assistance from the legal department and even from the department in Government to perfect your Bill ready for presentation for first reading. Even publication is no longer at your cost; it will be at the cost of the government. Congratulations. (Applause)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US$ 30.28 MILLION FROM ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK FOR FINANCING THE CONSTRUCTION OF SPECIALISED MATERNAL AND NEONATAL HEALTH CARE UNIT AT MULAGO NATIONAL REFERRAL HOSPITAL

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this report was received. It is in support of a motion that the report of the committee presented. The minister will speak to the motion and then we see how to proceed from there. Honourable minister, you did not justify your motion. This is now the time to do it. The committee has already reported.

Please, Sergeant-at-Arms, increase on the comfort of the members by turning on the appropriate gadgets and instruments.


2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIVATISATION (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, this is a loan from the Islamic Development Bank for financing the construction of a specialised maternal and neonatal healthcare unit at Mulago National Referral Hospital.

Uganda is making significant progress to reduce poverty and to reach the health Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). However, there is need for a paradigm shift in service delivery to meet the dramatic demands arising from the growing urban population in Kampala metropolitan area. The country requires a lot of investment from development partners to address requirements of modernising and expanding its health services, infrastructure and systems which sustain the MDG gains.

Uganda is expected to achieve some of the MDGs related to health, reduction in HIV, universal primary school enrolment and many others. Uganda will not reach the health related targets set for the child and maternal mortality reduction if we do not get this support. 

Government is implementing reforms in the health sector to build capacity towards attaining the MDGs. The reforms include financing and construction of a specialised maternal and neonatal healthcare unit at Mulago to address the shortfalls. In responding to this, the government has requested the bank to focus interventions in areas which receive considerably less support from other development partners. 

Government has applied and received funds from the African Development Bank Preparation Facility Fund to assist with the requirements and infrastructure in Kampala. Particular attention is being accorded to investments in decongesting and improving the quality of health services in Mulago Hospital. In this Parliament, we approved ADB and Nigerian Trust Fund loans to improve health service delivery at Mulago Hospital but still, at that time, we informed you, Mr Speaker, that Government was to partner with the Islamic Development Bank to construct and equip the women’s unit at Mulago National Referral Hospital. Negotiations have been finalised for this specialised facility to take care particularly of maternal and neonatal health at Mulago.   

This project is well within our National Development Plan, which identifies human resource development as a critical component in accelerating economic growth. It also stems from our PEAP of the 1990s. 

The project will support efforts of multi-national organisations such as World Health Organisation, UNICEF, UNFPA and other global health initiatives such as the Global Fund, GAVI, in health systems strengthening and improve health services delivery.

The project objectives for this loan – it is supposed to be implemented in 48 months and will contribute to the attainment by Uganda of the health related global goal in health sector support. Specifically, this loan is to establish by 2016 a 320-bed specialised maternal and neonatal healthcare unit at Mulago National Referral Hospital and will ease the financing gap in the health sector because the MTEF is not sufficient.

The total cost of the project currently stands at US$ 34 million to be jointly financed by the Islamic Bank with US$ 30.28 million and grants of US$ 0.44 million plus Government of Uganda’s contribution of US$ 3.42 million to cover part of the civil works. Uganda’s contribution includes in-kind provision of the project management premises, vehicles and other logistical expenses.    

The terms and conditions of this loan are favourable. This is an ordinary loan maturing in 25 years with a grace period of seven years and a lump-sum non-compounded service fee of 2.5 per cent per annum of the loan amount for the civil works; and the Islamic Solidarity Fund loan of about US$ 2.2 million maturing in 30 years, including 10 years of grace with a non-compounded service fee of 0.75 per cent per annum for the civil works.

The conditions of the loan are those which usually apply to our loans. It will be implemented using our country systems, with the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Health being the accounting officer for the project. 

The purpose of bringing this loan request, first of all, is to ask the House to note the plans Government is taking to revamp the delivery of quality healthcare and also request that this honourable House agrees with Government on the need for this financing to be acquired. We are requesting that Parliament authorises Government by passing a resolution to authorise us, under Article 159 of the Constitution, to borrow total loans of US$ 30.28 million from the Islamic Development Bank for the purposes for which I have elaborated.

Mr Speaker, honourable members, I beg for your support. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is to authorise Government to borrow US$ 30.28 million from the Islamic Development Bank for financing the construction of a specialised maternal and neonatal healthcare unit at Mulago National Referral Hospital. That is the motion before the House. We have received the report from the committee. The committee has recommended that this motion be approved by this House.

2.46
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion for one very strong reason, that all of us collectively have a responsibility in seeing how to lower maternal deaths which have been a problem for a long time. This request is one way we would address the issue of the high maternal mortalities.

Allow me to make an observation that sometimes Government fails to meet its part of the bargain and this causes us embarrassment. You are aware that this is supposed to have counterpart funding. A number of times, this Parliament collectively resolves to allow Government to borrow and when the issue of counterpart funding is not properly met by Government, then the lifespan of the project gets blown up. We have sometimes had to pay penalties for delayed absorption of funds that we have borrowed. Therefore, I am appealing to Government – Having come here and said that Government will pay US$ 3.42 million as counterpart funding, I hope you will stick to this promise. 

The project is to be implemented within 48 months, so we are told. I hope that Government will honour its commitment. There are certain projects that have been lingering around; a project like NALPIP is an example, where we borrowed US$ 100 million from the African Development Bank. The project was supposed to have wound up and ADB released all the money but Government has failed to meet its part of the bargain, to the extent that some of the contractors have now gone to court. We do not want to start losing money because of delayed releases by Ministry of Finance to meet the counterpart funding. 

Mr Speaker, with those observations, I whole heartedly support the motion on condition that Government also meets its part of the bargain. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will only take those who have an objection to this request. If we are all in for it – if there are issues you are raising which challenge this, I will entertain them. If you are going to support or engage in debate, these are matters we should not delay with. 

2.50
MR YONA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not strongly oppose, but I have some small amendments to this loan request. It is a small observation that may need an amendment.

The only unit that Mulago is very proud of today is that for maternal health. However, to date, the problem is not the infrastructure in Mulago; the problem is congestion of patients. There are many patients in that unit and even if we increase the infrastructure without increasing the doctors, we shall still face the same problem. 

My solution would be, let us get this money and use it on our divisional hospitals like Naguru and Kawempe to decongest Mulago. Let there be enough infrastructure even in the divisional hospitals and then the problem will be solved. (Interruption)

MR MIKITALE: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I would like to give information that this loan request should have come together with the loan request that gave financing to the division hospital at Makindye at Kiruddu and the one of Kawempe Division. The hospitals of Makindye and Kawempe were already financed but are yet to be implemented. 

This loan, in particular, arises out of pressure from Parliament, and I want to salute UWOPA and the maternal health department for pushing this facility to be put in Uganda. So, this is a follow-up and they should have come together. 

We have also issued a list; the committee took trouble to find out the plans for the other regions. So, those who have the spreadsheet will find out that JICA will benefit some regions; you will find that Mbarara will also benefit from another project. I say this because most members were not here when we presented that on the Floor.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, I thought we should provide further guidance. When the chair talks about a spreadsheet, what does he mean? When we talk about the spreadsheet, we are talking about the projects as they are going to be carried out to benefit the different parts of the country. This information is an addendum to the submission of the report which was made by the committee. I thought this was a term that sounded exotic which needed clarification. Thank you.

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think, much as some of us are not accountants, at least we have done project planning and we appreciate the issue of a spreadsheet. 

In this circumstance, you find that due to this loan request, the chairperson shows clearly that this spreadsheet is clarifying other projects which will be worked on. I am also aware that these projects are going to receive money from the World Bank and other financing agencies. However, much as we were given this spreadsheet just ten minutes ago, we have identified that the named hospitals which were supposed to be upgraded and rehabilitated with this money, like Bugiri Hospital and Iganga Hospital, do not appear here. Therefore, should we expect another spreadsheet or should we just support and tell our people: “Do not mind, the health of the patients in those hospitals can remain pending”. That is the clarification which I need. I was clearly informed that Bugiri Hospital, Iganga Hospital and Jinja Hospital would be included. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us clear this issue and then do something else.

2.57
MR FREDRICK MBAGADHI (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. While I appreciate the challenge raised by the honourable colleague from Iganga, I would like to bring it to the attention of this House that the funding which she is talking about was passed in the Eighth Parliament. It was US$ 130 million. It is supposed to be handling rehabilitation of 17 general hospitals and 27 health centre IVs. 

I would actually love to give her assurance that among the benefitting health facilities, we have Mubende, Masindi, Kawolo, Iganga, Bugiri, Anaka, Moyo, Kitgum, Itojo, Entebbe, Kiryandongo, Nebbi, Apac, Pallisa, Nakaseke, Buwenge and Bukwo. There are a good number of other health centres that have to be rehabilitated – they are actually 27. I thank you.

2.58
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I also stand to support the motion but to also seek further clarification from both the Minister of Health and the Minister of Finance. 

On the 16th of this month, we celebrated World Population Day in Hoima District. One of the major concerns highlighted on that day is the question of Government taxing family planning commodities. I would like to seek clarification from the ministry on this, given the fact that we are now passing a loan request to facilitate maternal health programmes in this country. Why did the Ministry of Finance go ahead to charge taxes on family planning commodities, which are being donated to this country, and which limits the animate need of the family planning commodities in this country? I seek clarification about what the Minister for Finance has so far done. On that day, the Prime Minister was the chief guest and he undertook a commitment to assure the gathering that the Ministry of Finance is going to follow it up. 

I would like to see what the Ministry for Health has done today ever since that issue was generated and raised during the World Population Day celebrations. What are the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Health doing to ensure that tax on these family planning commodities, which are medicines to prevent unwanted pregnancies which cause very high maternal mortality rates in this country, is limited? What are you doing to ensure that taxation on these commodities is limited so that the women can access family planning commodities? I seek that clarification. Otherwise, I support the motion to avail this facility to this country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is very clear; it is for the financing of the construction of a specialised maternal and neonatal healthcare unit at Mulago National Referral Hospital. That is the motion. If you are going to contribute, contribute on this motion.

3.01
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion because today Uganda loses 18 women per day [Dr Bitekyerezo: “16.”] - They are now 18 and no longer 16 because I have got the facts. So, it is important that we approve the loan.  

The minister did not clarify to this House the loan conditions. I do not know whether the members have managed to go through the document which he has just presented to us. When you look at the terms and conditions of the loan – an ordinary loan, which is US$ 12.69 million or US$ 19.77 million, which matures in 25 years is being given at an interest rate of 2.5 per cent, which is a very high percentage. 

The other issue that I want to bring to the attention of this House, which the minister did not tell the members about, is that the Islamic Development Bank is giving a very serious condition and warning. On page – they are not numbered - but on page 8, one of the most important conditions is that this bank is warning this Government that they can even cancel the loan. They say, “In case the Islamic Development Bank determines that any person or entity is engaged in corrupt, coercive, collusive, fraudulent and obstructive practices during negotiations, execution, implementation and during procurement without any appropriate action from Government being taken on such individuals or entity, the IDB may cancel the financing. 

So, we sit here in Parliament to approve loans but these people know what takes place in this country. During negotiation and implementation, from the money that we get as loans for the people of this country there is a percentage that is being cut - [Hon. Member: “The Kazindas”] - The Kazindas of this world as he says. The Islamic Development Bank is giving a condition, and this is very clear, because some of the things that happen in this country about corruption tendencies are known all over the whole world. That is why the bank is giving a condition that if they find out that there will be corruption in this financing, they are going to cancel it. When they cancel it, who is going to miss out? It is our people who will miss. So, we stand warned that this loan will be cancelled if officials of Government and the Ministry of Finance are involved in corrupt tendencies.

The chairperson assured us that other issues concerning other hospitals will come up later; therefore, I am not going to raise the issue concerning other hospitals. However, I stood up on that issue of 2.5 per cent and yet we can get this loan from somewhere else at 1.5 per cent with a grace period of seven years. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it looks like members want to debate this particular motion. I am going to open debate and restrict ourselves to two minutes each for every contribution. Two minutes each.

3.05
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have no problem with the motion. I support it although I have some very serious concerns from my constituents and voters.

Many facilities in Mulago Hospital are not accessible for people with disabilities. Many women with disabilities have lamented that when they go to Mulago Hospital, they cannot access the beds.  Some of the lifts ceased functioning many years ago. 

You, Mr Speaker, are one of the few MPs who provide interpretation services when you call your constituency meetings but I want to tell you that in Mulago, many deaf people who go there to access services do not have access to sign language interpretation and therefore, cannot communicate with the personnel there. This means that it will be very hard for my people to benefit from this facility if there is no change at Mulago Hospital. My question is: how will this new project be different from others? I need to know and thank you very much. 

3.07
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am very reluctant in supporting this motion unless I get a response from the minister and the chairperson of the committee. First of all, I want to know the research that they have carried out on how many mothers with complications come from the rural areas to Kampala for birth. I am very interested in giving support to regional referral hospitals. Recently, we were in Lamwo District and mothers were walking very many miles to go and deliver. They only have one health centre, and it is a health centre III. 

Now, you look at all these structures; why do we put them in Mulago? People producing in Mulago are from Kampala. The majority of our people cannot afford Mulago because they do not have money. As we talk about financial implications, it is the same with our people. When they come from Masaka, they have to pay money to buy food among other things. But there is Masaka Regional Referral Hospital, which needs this facility, there is Lira, there is Gulu; name them. But every time it is Kampala, and you say you want to decongest Mulago but you are instead congesting Mulago. So –(Interruption)  

MS ACHENG: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague that first of all, I do agree with him that we need to strengthen referral hospitals. I would even say that we strengthen health centre IIs. My women in Kole, for instance, I do not know if any at all have ever given birth in Mulago. If things get worse at Kole Health Centre II where they deliver, they are taken to Lira Referral hospital. So, I agree with you that instead of building another maternal centre in Mulago, we should talk about building a women’s fertility centre but not a delivery or maternal centre. That is the information.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, as I conclude, let us go to Mulago Referral Hospital and we see the businesses there. The buildings are there – (Member timed out.)

3.09
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am at pains to tow the view that we should have any objection on this matter. Whether the health centre is built in Mulago or in my rural constituency, since the planners of this country live in Kampala, their wives give birth in Kampala. (Laughter) I cannot help but agree with them that one be built in Mulago. 

I was in Mulanda Health Centre IV; like you all have health centre IVs, we need to increase their capacity. It hurts to see a mother giving birth and losing life in the process of giving birth. This loan could help and we need to support it. 

However, on health service delivery, honourable ministers of health and finance, we have big problems. The first contact point of referral is a health centre III and a health centre IV. I went to Mulanda Health Centre and the mini theatre there has not been open for the last two and a half years, and I know of mothers who have died there. So, whereas this is a good idea, and we should approve this loan request without any delay, it is a big challenge to Government, though most of them live here, to also think about our voters who live in the rural areas. 

Mr Speaker, the more we open debate on this, the more sentimental we shall get. So, I wanted to move a motion that this topic – (Member timed out.)

3.12
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand in support of this loan request and want to commend Government for having brought this request. The Members of Parliament, especially the ladies, have been requesting for this, that it was high time we brought a loan request in support of the women in this country. (Applause) I commend Government for that. 

Mr Speaker, I have a concern. As much as I see there is quite a number of equipment presented here, which is going to be supported by this loan, my concern is that this country right now has an increasing trend in especially women and children who are suffering from cancer of the cervix, cancer of the breast and tumours in children. I do not see any provision for such a machine here. We know that in Mulago right now, there is only one junk radiotherapy machine that supports Uganda, Rwanda, Sudan and some neighbouring countries except Kenya. They all come here for that radiotherapy machine. These patients line up from 5.00 a.m. and the doctor comes in at 7.00 a.m. and leaves at around 11.00 a.m. because there is just one machine. 

I really want clarification from the minister whether there is any hope that in this women’s hospital, you are going to provide a radiotherapy machine that will cater for the increasing number of women in this country that are suffering from cancer of the cervix, cancer of the breast and tumours in children, since this is meant to be a women’s hospital. Currently, the facility which is there is for all - children – (Member timed out.)

3.14
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to commend Government for having brought this loan request. I also support it. 

After supporting this loan request, let Government also know that Mulago should not be facilitated at the expense of other health units; for instance, I have not seen anything here connected to the islands. I come from Buvuma Islands and I want to give an example from the islands. If a woman is in labour, she could easily sit in a car but can you imagine a situation where a woman is in labour and she is sitting in a canoe and being peddled to the nearby health unit, which is even non-existent. Why can’t Government think about the islands? 

Mr Speaker, I wish to inform this Parliament and the ministry that the people Buvuma have two options now - they want to bring a petition to Parliament or else go to the ministry and demonstrate there. It is true we are living in poor conditions, but even if it means being naked we shall, as long as we get services. 

I went to the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Health, I went to the ministers and I have shown how we are suffering but I have not got any response. Therefore, I want to put it to Parliament and the honourable Speaker that any time a petition is coming. I do not see any positive response from the ministry and from Government to help the people of Buvuma. I thank you.

3.16
MS ANNE AURU  (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion. I am a woman and a mother and I have gone through challenges. So, there is no way I cannot support this request, even if I know that my rural women of Moyo may not access it at the time of need. This month, I lost two head teachers when they were trying to give birth. Therefore, I support this request. 

My caution to Government is on the counterpart funding. You are aware that Government was supposed to give Shs 7 billion as counterpart funding for immunisation which they have failed to do up to today. So, as we approve this loan, we really pray that they go ahead to do their part of supporting the donors who are ready to support us in this venture. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.17
MRS CECILIA OGWAL ATIM (FDC, District Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to catch your eye. I want to say that I am surprised that this loan request is being subjected to a debate. I am very surprised. This is because this loan request has come after the women and gender-sensitive men in this House requested that much as we had approved the earlier loan, we also wanted Government to source for a loan that would specifically deal with specialised maternal health issues. (Applause)

We did that because we realised certain specialised needs of women could not be catered for in the current status of Mulago National Referral Hospital or in any other hospital. That was the basis of our request. Therefore, I am really surprised that there are people who are probably not catching up with the mood. If we really are to focus on the objectives of the MDGs in regard to improving maternal health by 2015, there is no Member of Parliament who got votes from women that would be questioning this loan. (Applause)

Secondly, let me say that much as I support this motion, my concern is the lack of supervision by the people supposed to implement this project. (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the basis of the submission made by hon. Cecilia Ogwal, I now put the question to the approval of this loan request. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have student teachers of Shimoni Core Primary Teaches’ College, Kampala, represented by hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Before we get to handle the loan request in item 8, there is a matter that is pressing in this country, the issue of the Ebola outbreak. The Minister of Health is ready with a statement to be delivered to Parliament. In the circumstances, I would like to alter the Order Paper to allow her make that statement now. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.21
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Christine Ondoa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. May I request that the statement be circulated to the members. 

The Ministry of Health declared an outbreak of Ebola in Kibaale District on Saturday, 28 July 2012 after receiving confirmatory results from the Uganda Virus Research Institute that the strange disease that had so far killed 14 people in that district was Ebola hemorrhagic fever, the Sudan strain. On a good note, I would like to inform the House that Uganda can now test and confirm Ebola hemorrhagic fever from our Virus Research Institute. We no longer have to fly specimen to USA for testing and confirmation.

The declaration of the outbreak followed a report that the ministry had received from Kibaale District health authorities. The report was about a strange disease that was associated with deaths in Nyamisinga LC I, in Nyamarunda Sub County. According to the report, the patients presented with the common symptoms of diarrhoea, vomiting and fever. 

The initial samples of blood and stool taken from the sick did not yield any positive findings in the laboratories in Kagadi Hospital and in the Central Public Health Laboratory of Ministry of Health in Kampala. Mr Speaker, allow me to emphasise that the initial presentation of these patients was not typical of Ebola hemorrhagic fever. The first cases did not have haemorrhage - they did not have bleeding. That is why the specimens were being managed from Kagadi Hospital and at the Central Public Health Laboratory. However, when the specimens taken from the subsequent patients showed haemorrhage, we were forced to confirm with our laboratories at the Uganda Virus Research Institute. 

This outbreak, I must point out, started at about the same time when Kibaale District was experiencing the Cholera disease outbreak. This could have further confused and complicated the investigations. Thus the district was of the view that the strange disease was due to a bacterial infection.

The district took up a series of actions including treating the patients in the local health facilities, follow-up on contacts and also initiating public educational programmes in an attempt to stop the spread of this disease. However, it was noted that people always delayed to seek treatment partly because they believed that the cause of the illness was evil spirits. This caused civil strife among the community requiring the police intervention to quell the animosity. 

In response to this report, a team from the Ministry of Health did a quick assessment of the outbreak and gave directives for further measures to be taken. The team also carried out an eye-balling exercise and verbal autopsy on the affected families. Details about the investigations were conducted at the Uganda Virus Research Institute in Entebbe on 28th July. Later, it was confirmed that the strange disease was indeed the Ebola hemorrhagic fever. 

Ebola is a highly infectious disease that presents with high fever, bleeding tendencies and kills in a short time, although it can be prevented. As of today, 31 July 2012, there are five cases that have tested positive of Ebola and two of them are still alive and receiving treatment in Kagadi Government Hospital. Again, I would like to emphasise here that the disparity between five confirmed specimens and 14 deaths came about because initially, we were not able to take specimens from the first few cases of deaths in order for us to confirm whether they had died of Ebola or not.

Currently, a total of 36 cases, with 14 deaths, have been recorded. However, since the confirmation of the Ebola hemorrhagic fever on 28th July till today, we have not had any deaths. Ten of those who died were sadly members of one family. One of the dead was a clinical officer who initially attended to patients at Kagadi Hospital before the confirmation was obtained. On falling sick, she was referred to Mulago where she died on 20 July 2012. Her four-months-old baby was admitted on 23rd July at Kagadi where she also died on 28 July 2012. Again, I want to elaborate here that when this clinical officer made a self-referral to Mulago, at that time we had not confirmed that this was Ebola. So, she just came in as a person who was sick and needed attention. 

Among the 36 cases registered so far, 18 are admitted at Kagadi Government Hospital in the isolation facility and are responding well to the treatment being administered to them. A total of 40 contacts – those are the people who got into contact with the suspects and the dead - are being closely monitored for any possible symptoms. The ministry has further collected 21 specimens for investigation at the Uganda Virus Research Institute. Close monitoring of health workers who attended to the dead at Mulago National Referral Hospital is also going on. 

The Ministry of Health is working with stakeholders and partners and has put up all necessary measures possible to manage the situation and contain the spread of the disease. Below are some of the measures being undertaken:

•	A national taskforce coordinated by the Ministry of Health has been reactivated. Kibaale and neighbouring districts have been instructed to reactivate their district taskforces to coordinate and manage the outbreak.

•	There is active and sustained tracing and listing of all possible contacts that were exposed to the suspects and confirmed cases. The contacts that need follow up have been indentified in Kibaale and Kampala districts and will be followed up to 21 days. The 21-day period is because of the incubation period of the virus.

•	Technical response teams to investigate and manage cases have been dispatched to Kibaale and Kampala districts. Standby teams have also been set up to support any other districts that may have reported successive cases. 

	Kibaale District lacks experienced health workers in the management of Ebola. The ministry has however dispatched a team of expert health workers on Ebola management from other districts which we had previously trained to provide the necessary support. In addition, health workers in the district are also being trained in order to equip them with the necessary skills for Ebola management.

•	Isolation facilities at Kagadi and Mulago hospitals; a temporary isolation facility was set up on 27th July at Kagadi and is fully operational. However, Médecins Sans Frontières Holland has today dispatched its team to construct an ideal and appropriate isolation facility at the hospital. Plans are underway to set up an isolation facility at Mulago to cater for cases in and around Kampala.

•	The necessary medicines and logistics or case management have been mobilised. The National Medical Stores has been requested to provide the necessary logistics to Kagadi Government Hospital and nearby facilities. However, additional supplies beyond those routinely supplied by the National Medical Stores may also be required. 

•	Lastly, a district response plan and budget have been developed and costed. The process of developing a costed national response plan is almost complete. 

I request that the Ministry of Health be supported with funds as indicated in the costed plan attached for Kibaale District Local Government to enable the ministry control the outbreak in the next six months. I also request that the different Government organs like the Police, the UPDF, the Office of the Prime Minister and others be ready to provide appropriate support when called upon. 

Once again, the Ministry of Health reiterates its position to save lives of all Ugandans. I call upon the public to stay calm as all possible measures are being undertaken to control the situation. I thank you. 

3.33
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Health for giving us the brief. In this Parliament, I happen to be one of the surviving doctors who touched Ebola patients way back in 2000 when I was in Mbarara, and I buried five people. Therefore, I want to join the people of Kibaale and mostly the Ministry of Health to mourn the loss of that health worker and her precious baby while at work. 

On several occasions, we have heard some people talking about Ebola but for some of you who have never had close contact with patients of Ebola, you may not know what I am going to talk about. I got information on phone that we should not shake hands. Getting an active Ebola patient walking on a street in Kampala is impossible. You cannot see that person. The person will be already down or bedridden. It is a health worker and the relatives of this patient who will actually be in close contact with the patient. 

Today, I asked the Minister of Health whether they are in charge or have enough resources to give to every health worker - at least gloves - so that when touching any patient of any fatal illness even when it is not Ebola, at least the have gloves on. You cannot give everybody protective gear - it is very expensive for this country and we cannot manage - but at least basic protective mechanisms for all health workers in the whole country are very important. That is why right now, the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, the Office of the Prime Minister, the Ministry of Health and everybody must open up their hearts and give to the people who are affected. 

On several occasions, I have said on the Floor that the Ministry of Health needs to be boosted with personnel, but I do not see why people continuously keep abandoning this ministry. If an Ebola patient were brought here, you would take off and all of us would take off because it is a very dangerous disease. Why don’t we, as this Parliament, back the Ministry of Health to be fully functional, with trained health personnel, with things to use and hospitals that are functional so that other ministries can work with people who are healthy? 

Salaries of health workers - Right now, people are leaving this country going to neighbouring Rwanda. I beg the people in this Parliament that we should think about sorting out the budget of the Ministry of Health, and good enough these things are happening when – (Member timed out.)

3.35
MR GRACE ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to sympathise with the families that have lost their loved ones. I am really at pain to see this nurse who has died and that is the state of our hospitals. The former speaker has said that you cannot get even just a glove, which is very cheap, in these health centres. These women wear light kaveeras to try to protect people. I think the Ministry of Health has to think of how to start down there. These people go the hard way to help people. 

One time, I was in a health centre somewhere down in Buyende and one nurse was doing all the work from morning up to night. I asked her, “How do you survive?” She said, “What do I do? I have to help the people.” So, you can imagine. This woman died innocently on the job, her child has died, and I do not know what Government is doing for this woman’s family. We do not even know how many people she has been supporting. I think it is not about asking for funds, but how do we prepare? 

We have many of these; we have Ebola, Measles, Nodding Disease et cetera, but are we going to wait for problems and then research is done in Kampala before we go back to the people. I think we need to facilitate our people down there so that they are fully supported; and that is why the honourable Member of Parliament died. The machines were not there in the health centre.

So, honourable minister, it is more than just asking for money, thank you. 

3.38
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa East Constituency, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to first of all commiserate with the families of the bereaved as a result of this strange and rather serious disease that has struck this country, not for the first time. I want to commend our health workers who, despite the shortcomings, especially in remuneration, try to do their best. However, I would request the minister - and your statement has not come out on this very well - to do more sensitisation on the causes of such diseases like Ebola and the preventive mechanisms.

I would also urge the minister - in your budget you have already told us that you are getting a foreign organisation to construct the isolation facility for you. It is to be constructed by M/S Holland. Why can’t Government construct such facilities in areas where this particular ailment has already struck? It was once in Gulu; it is now in Kibaale, and may be in other areas. You may need as Government to examine the proximity of this area with the refugee camp and possibly the refugees coming from Congo; examine and monitor all the routes they have used to come in.

You may find this disease is already in Kabale, Kisoro and other places without our knowledge. Government needs to put in a lot of effort and ensure that close monitoring of all health centres and the people making complaints of such kinds of ailments are monitored and the public is notified in time. Thank you.

3.38
MS RONAH NINSIIMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you Mr Speaker, I want to thank the honourable minister for this quick information to us. I also want to find out what measures as a ministry they are putting in place in regard to travel, because as you realise, these people from Kibaale will be boarding buses to Kampala, Kabale and Kamwenge. Those are some of their routes. What measures have been put in place to sensitise, especially, bus owners, on how to behave such as disinfecting the buses at certain spots to ensure that the disease does not spread any further.

Mr Speaker, I would also want to know how far they have gone in compensating health workers who die on the job. I think, apart from doctor Lukwiya’s case, we have not had a record of health workers’ families being compensated for workers dying on the battle field. 

We learnt this morning from the minister that there are various types of Ebola in the Sudan, Ivory Coast and the Bundibugyo type. With all these types, we want to know what sustainable measures the ministry has put in place to ensure that all these are contained. That we may not always come to this House during emergency situations, but know that if we are attacked by the Bundibugyo type, these are the kinds of measures that can be put in place; so that we do not continue recording deaths, because at the moment, the issue of healing is a bit hard. There should be treatment of these victims so that they can have the hope of living.

I hope that as the ministry provides gadgets for the health workers, they also remember our Police officers who are always called on board for these emergency cases.

3.43
DR SAM OKUONZI (Independent, Vurra County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This Ebola disease is not new to Uganda; it has been here before and we have learnt a lot of lessons from this disease. The Ministry of Health has actually done what it can under the circumstances to try and contain this disease. Given the fact that the ministry is constrained generally, because the systems are not working well, the staff are not adequate, the resources are not there, I think the ministry has done its best.

However, there are three things that the ministry really needs to address quickly following lessons from the past. I remember in 2001, when I was in the ministry and the disease was new, we had to undergo emergency learning; but now we do need to undergo this learning process because we have these lessons.

The first thing is to control panic, because panic actually worsens the epidemic. Whereby people are not allowed to board buses, and many are stopped from travelling abroad. I hope that issue has not arisen; but it is likely to arise. I heard this morning on BBC that Uganda now has Ebola; this has very severe implications for anybody who is travelling tomorrow and don’t be surprised if they stop you from entering the plane. The management of panic is the key issue. 

The second is that I am not impressed with the ministry’s strategy for public education. Public education is lacking. Even if the money is not sufficient, I think whoever speaks on behalf of the ministry should give the bare facts as quickly as possible and also come up with some preventive measures. I was very happy with what the President said on the radio. I think the best public education that we got was from the President not from the Ministry of Health. So, I think we need to come out as a ministry to speak out and educate people about this disease, where it comes from, how it is spread and what we need to do in practical terms. That is not coming out from the minister’s paper and it is not coming out whenever anybody from the ministry speaks.

The third issue I want to mention is to do with the source of the virus. We have been with this disease since 1976 when it was described, but up to now, nobody seems to know where it comes from. So, I would like to request that in your plan, specific funding be provided to investigate the origin of this disease so that we do not have to panic each time the disease occurs. We need to know where the disease originates from and if possible, prevent it from infecting the animals because it is animals which get the disease first before it goes to the human body. I would like to say that -(Member timed out.)

3.47
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I wish to thank the minister for her statement. After reading through this statement, there is one thing that is evident; the dire need for resources to be put into the Ministry of Health, not only now, but all the time. Unless as a country, we commit resources to our health, we will continue presiding over a sick population; a population that will continue to be more and more desperate, and one that will stop looking up to us as their leaders.
 
The death of the clinical officer from Kibaale Hospital says volumes about the working conditions of our health workers. Why on earth would a health worker examine a patient for whatever disease without using gloves? Why? Doctors and other health workers get in contact with people suffering from all sorts of diseases and need to be protected. In Uganda, it is health workers for themselves and God for us all. Are we a serious country? No, we are not. 

Today we are talking about Ebola, which is not a new disease to this country. People who are authorities in this like Dr Okuonzi, have just revealed to this House that we begun to detect traces of Ebola in the 70s -(Member timed out.)

3.50
MR RICHARD TODWONG (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I convey our condolences as the people of Nwoya to the families and the people of Kibaale and Uganda at large. Coming from an area that has gone through this experience, my concerns are only three. One, every time there are issues in Eastern Congo, there is always an outbreak of Ebola in Uganda. We need to investigate this a little deeper.

Two, we know that where there is an outbreak of Ebola, public gatherings are discouraged; body contact is not encouraged. I know that we are in this Parliament with Members of Parliament from Kibaale and neighbouring areas. How safe are we, because definitely they might have gone there to check on their constituents? And the way we sit in Parliament, definitely, before you sit you have to touch somebody. 

This patriotic Ugandan - the medical worker with a child - came to Mulago on the 20th and the minister told us that the incubation period for Ebola is 21 days. How safe are our staff at Mulago, who could have got in touch with this medical person before knowing that she was suffering from Ebola? 

My last comment is that from our experience, if we mobilised volunteers, trained and equipped them, they could augment the efforts of the Ministry of Health very well basing on what we have gone through in our area. You know professionals at times fear taking risks in such an environment. So, we could have village volunteers who could be trained, equipped and guided on how to help, monitor or follow the other 40 cases of contact that were in that area. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.52
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to associate myself with the previous speakers, to thank you, honourable Minister, for this statement. However, it is high time we started questioning ourselves on our major roles as Members of Parliament. We are meant to legislate, do oversight, represent and most importantly appropriate. How much have we put in place in as far as our responsibilities are concerned to ensure that similar cases do not take us by surprise? For instance, I am certainly aware that there was supposed to be a Bill regarding a standing fund to be put in place so that in case of such a disaster, these funds can be quickly accessed to cater for the initial stages of handling these issues like Nodding Disease. We had to cry allowed, and now here is Ebola. 

I was with the Chinese Ambassador today and he is saying the publicity is very bad. We are likely to be stopped from travelling or very few people will be coming to this country, unless something very urgent is done to check this Ebola, which is a very dangerous disease. So, it is high time we put out feet down and stopped lamenting. We should put in place a strong legislation in as far as disaster risk reduction is concerned. This is in mine and your hands and not Government’s. Do not wait for Government; it is high time we raised these issues. Appropriation is in your hands; legislation is in your hands; and I think it is high time we did this. 

I have heard a number of Members talking about putting in place - and in case it comes -(Member timed out.)

3.55
MS TOPHACE KAAHWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the good statement, which shows that the government has done something and in a very short time. We are very grateful. I sympathise with the grieving families that have lost their dear ones, most especially the family that has lost the health worker. We really sympathise with them. I agree that they are all deaths, but they have lost a very key person in the family. 

I am the immediate neighbour to Kibaale. So, when you hear of Ebola in Kibaale, you should rest assured that it is also in Hoima. Yesterday, we went for burial, and two cases of women who had gone for burial of the 14 people talked about in this report were reported sick. Their eyes were red and they had fever and diarrhoea. So, they were rushed to Kagadi Hospital, which further shows that we are in trouble in Hoima.  

Honourable Minister, Hoima Hospital is congested. After learning of Ebola in Kagadi Hospital, all patients ran to Hoima. They struggled to remove the drips and the rest of the medication that they were given and shifted to Hoima Hospital. So, we need reinforcement in that hospital so that we can also cater for our people. 

The other problem we have in the district is lack of sensitisation. As per yesterday, our people were green about what was happening. People from Kween District and others were worried about the disease, but those of Hoima were moving freely shaking hands. So, we need sensitisation to be intensified in Hoima District in order to save our people. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.   

3.57
MS LYNDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am a neighbour to Kibaale and I don’t know if I should make it in form of a request, that if possible, the honourable minister should at least put a ban on free movement because our people in Kyenjojo have relatives in Kibaale and the Kibaale people have relatives in Kyenjojo. I think this also increases on the rate of transmission. 

Sensitisation is a little bit slow because as we talk, the people in Kyenjojo are on the run. Some of them are running thinking it is already coming either on the tarmac road or it is already in the district. People are running away from the district. The health workers in the district are also timid because they believe that however much it is equipped, there is still something that is lacking that we need to put in place especially regarding the health centres -(Interruption)

DR OKUONZI: Thank you for giving way. Mr Speaker, what she has described is what I described as panic management. People are going to run around this country and they are going to fight off other communities. People are going to be stopped from entering vehicles, while others are even going to refuse people to enter into their houses or into public places like churches if there is no public education or sensitisation. So, my information is that all this is happening because the panic management is not being handled well.

MS TIMBIGAMBA: Thank you so much, honourable, for that information. I have also learnt that Ebola comes through contact with animals, most especially monkeys, and the time I have spent there, I have realised that we have very many animals like monkeys. Can we have the people concerned that can help -(Member timed out.)

4.00
MS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. I thank the Minister of Health for bringing this issue promptly. I am further happy that the honourable minister mentioned the death of the health worker and even the innocent child as a result of job hazards. Many health workers die because of job hazards. When HIV/AIDS came, a number of midwives died because it takes very long before it kills a person, and by the time we realised that these midwives were infected by the mothers who are HIV positive, it was very late. Nobody noticed them.

When Ebola broke out in Lacor, Gulu, it was Dr Matthew Lukwiya who was recognised. This is because the outside world came full swing to recognise him. The rest of the health workers were not noticed, not even recognised.

When Ebola broke out in Bundibugyo, it took a doctor and we have never talked of that, and today, a young clinical officer has died. Nobody has sat down to calculate the productivity of this young girl, how long she would have lived and at what level she would have retired. We should, therefore, begin to think of recognising health workers. What do we do for such people? For instance, in the Army, the orphans are put in school and Government pays for them. What about for these health workers? It is a risky profession and, therefore, do not be surprised one time if the health workers come here to petition.

Before they can do that, let us alleviate their anxiety and soothe their feelings by putting some policies in place to cater for a health worker who dies in the course of his or her work. Thank you very much.

4.03
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. We feel with the families and all Ugandans that have lost their loved ones due to Ebola. I have a few questions. I am thinking that in a situation like this, the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness could have worked hand-in-hand with the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Wildlife, because when there is disturbance in Eastern Congo, multitudes are running away from guns and everything and crossing to Uganda. We are saying that this disease is carried by monkeys. What have we done?

When the minister was giving her statement, she said there is Ebola Congo, Ebola Sudan and something else. I did not hear Ebola Uganda. That means that all the Ebolas are foreign and come into Uganda through some source and by some means. Ugandans are trading with South Sudan. What is Government doing to make sure that its citizens are protected even as they move across the borders to trade?

When the war broke out in the Congo and refugees started crossing, I thought that would have been the time for Government to act and say, there is the possibility of an outbreak of this Ebola because there is Ebola Congo. The Ministry of Disaster Preparedness needs to be prepared.

Before I finish, there are the upcoming elections in Kasese and Kasese is a neighbour to Kibaale District. What are we going to do about it? Aren’t we going to be - I don’t know, but I think there is a risk.

4.05
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am contributing out of experience. When we had Ebola in Gulu, it came from Congo. That was when we sent some of our soldiers to Congo and when they came back, an Ebola outbreak started in Gulu and we lost a good number of people. 

Now we have Ebola in the Western part of Uganda, when we have an influx of refugees into Uganda. I do not know how prepared we are in trying to see that these refugees who come to Uganda are checked. There should be some way of screening them as they enter Uganda. The medical teams have to work on that and I want to thank the Minister of Health, but we should not leave it to the Minister of Health only. Very many sectors have to be involved, including civil society organisations.

Ebola is very contagious and in this respect, people have already said it. Our experience in Gulu was when our people were to go for a meeting in London, UK. The meeting was transferred to Nairobi, but the Kenyans also said, no! As our people moved to Nairobi for Kachoke madit in an attempt to try and help in the war which was in the North, they were chased and some of them were even put in cells.

So, this means that we have to do a little more than what we are doing right now. 

On behalf of the people of Gulu, I would like to convey our heartfelt condolences especially to the staff, the innocent child and the ten members of a family -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me allow the minister to make some responses and then I will see how far we have to go. There have been so many issues raised, so let her first deal with those – they might capture the issue you want to raise.

4.07
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Christine Ondoa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank all the honourable members who have made contributions and given messages of condolences to the families that have lost their dear ones. A number of issues have been raised and I will respond to them accordingly. 

The issue of resources to support health workers like gloves and other basic protective gear for the whole country: The Ministry of health has made remarkable strides to improve the stock-out of essential medicines and other health supplies in all health facilities. To date, the number of facilities that report no stock-outs of essential medicines has risen from about 47 percent to 90 percent. We feel this has been a tremendous improvement, but nevertheless, we are committed to doing more and availing more support to all health workers countrywide.

There was the issue of the need to be supported as a ministry by health personnel. I remember very well a time when I made a statement here to the effect that one of our biggest challenges in the health sector is the health workers. Currently, we have 58 percent of the vacancies filled across the country. This is an average; in some places, the vacancies filled are as low as 25-30 percent. And so, we need to work a little harder to have these vacancies filled. 

As the health sector, we are also working very hard to see that the facilities at the lower levels are also supported because we know that if all our facilities at the lower level are working adequately as intended, then our regional referral hospitals and the national referral hospital will not be that congested. And that is why with effect from this financial year, with the loan that we have secured from the African Development Bank, we are embarking on working on 46 health facilities that we want to rehabilitate adequately and have them adequately serving the people, especially in maternal health and areas of emergency. 

More issues were raised about the need to sensitise the public on the disease outbreaks. Yes, I agree with you that we need to give the public the right information and we need to sensitise them more – not only on Ebola, but all the other diseases. This should be done by all of us. As Members of Parliament, when we go to our constituencies, apart from the other duties we carry out, we should also sensitise our people on the need to keep healthy. 

On the issue of Ebola, we have had at least two national addresses on the media; one was held on Saturday and another one yesterday. And we are updating the nation daily through the media, on the progress of the Ebola outbreak. We have also disseminated information to all our district health officers so that they can use the local media to sensitise the population on this disease outbreak.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Minister, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification because what I see here is a specific request for Kibaale and yet I am also aware that in the supplementary budget, there was a request dealing specifically with the Nodding Disease. The clarification I am, therefore, seeking is that can the Ministry of Health assure me that it is disaster prepared for any kind of outbreak, because Climate Change is bringing strange diseases. I do not want the minister to come back to us and say, “Now, there is a cholera outbreak in Dokolo.” I want the minister to assure me that as a ministry, they are prepared for any crisis that may come up – not only for Nodding Disease and Ebola in Kibaale. My problem is, should something else break out in Dokolo, what am I going to say? Thank you.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I am seeking an additional clarification along with what Mama Cecilia has raised. I seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker, as I seek this clarification. This matter is now inter-ministerial; there are disaster issues, finance issues and areas that require national guidance and yet the Ministry of Health does not have a budget for precise and concise messages, but the Ministry of National Guidance has it. We need the Leader of Government Business – or the Speaker can direct that an inter-ministerial taskforce is put in place such that different interests to do with water and environment, finance, disaster preparedness and local government can address this. I am saying this because this matter borders on paralysing the economy if the messages are not well packaged. And also, as a person from a bereaved kingdom, I know how much this means. I want to hear that there is something being done beyond that of the Ministry of Health. How are we going to handle this problem?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you said that there is a national taskforce coordinated by the Ministry of Health; what is its composition? Maybe you can respond to the issue raised by hon. Mukitale.

DR ONDOA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Already, there is an inter-ministerial taskforce in place that is coordinated by the Office of the Prime Minister. This team was set up for general disasters and other crises. And if Members can recall, even during the Nodding Syndrome, we used the same taskforce. Even today, the Office of the Prime Minister has told us that there is need for us to meet again with that group and see how we can collectively address the Ebola issue. This team comprises the Prime Minister’s Office, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Information and National Guidance, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and also Ministry of Internal Affairs and Ministry of Defence. So, it is a comprehensive team. 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I want a clarification on the role of the Uganda Red Cross in the stakeholders you have mentioned. I am raising this matter because I am aware that Uganda Red Cross Society has played a very significant role in the fight against disasters, be it mudslides, Nodding Disease - even Ebola in Gulu, in Bundibugyo, in Mbarara and now in Kibaale. There was information that, for example, they are sending hundreds of volunteers. 

Mr Speaker, I am raising this matter because Uganda Red Cross is an auxiliary institution to Government. It does not get a direct budget salvation from Parliament. Now, in these emergency measures you are undertaking to fight Ebola, how are you coordinating with Uganda Red Cross? Uganda Red Cross is not a money-making institution; it depends on donations. What support - maybe this is for the Leader of Government Business - what support is Government prepared to give to Red Cross in this very important and risky business of fighting Ebola in Kibaale?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I had said let her respond then we open again. Unless it is on this specific issue, let her finish then we can start. On this specific issue? Yes?

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, I would like to seek clarification from you. I am quite aware that in Kibaale, children are still going to school and they are mixing with other children from other places. What measures is the ministry putting in place to protect those children? (Hon. Atim Joy Ongom rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On this same matter? The specific issue that is under review?

MS JOY ONGOM: Yes, Mr Speaker, you know for sure these issues are interrelated. Thank you so much. I want to seek clarification. 

Madam Minister, you mentioned the district taskforce and then the inter-ministerial taskforce. We are very sorry for the Ebola incident, but as hon. Cecilia Ogwal has just said, we also have an outbreak of Nodding Disease already in Lira District and the district task force has made some effort, but as I talk, they are in a centre - you know for sure that Ebola is also related to nutritional cases. There is no food at all for the patients and as I talk they are withdrawing from the health centres and going back home. I want to seek clarification from your office on what you have done. As you have had that incident already - when you talk of the North, it is in Acholi sub-region, but it has already broken out in Lira and Lango sub-region. Thank you.

DR ONDOA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mama Cecilia Ogwal, raised the issue about how prepared we are as a ministry. In Ministry of Health, we have a division for epidemic diseases and outbreaks, and that also includes disasters. We have a budget line for this particular division. But it is also true that when we get a series of outbreaks like we have experienced recently in the country, this budget runs out because it stretches us. And at the district level, we also have the district epidemic and disease preparedness teams. We also put in line budgets for emergencies for all the districts and when disease breaks out, those are the funds the district initially uses and then they ask for reinforcement from us. 

But also, we are blessed to have our health development partners who support us with funds, especially when we have epidemics, outbreaks and disasters. They come to our aid. Notably, we have the World Health Organisation, the Centre for Disease Control, Medicines Sans Frontiers, the Uganda Red Cross and many others that I may not be able to exhaustively mention now. These health development partners work hand-in-hand with us whenever we have this kind of disaster. 

We have also trained many of our health workers at regional level and at district level to be able to handle most of these epidemics. They only call upon us to go and confirm. Like when I gave you the update on the Ebola outbreak, the health workers in Kibaale already did investigations on the samples of the patients who were reported to have this strange disease. But when they could not conclusively come up with a diagnosis, they came to ask us and we had to beef them up. So, there is capacity at district level, there is capacity at regional level and also at national level. But I must say, we need more health workers to be able to do all this work when the need arises. 

There was also a question of why Government is not constructing centres for isolation and we are leaving it to development partners. Most of our health facilities, especially from district hospitals onwards, have isolation wards. These isolation wards are meant to isolate patients who may have contagious diseases and you may not want to mix them with other patients. But diseases like Ebola come with very special considerations and you cannot start constructing special centres for Ebola everywhere because they break out not every now and then. We have isolation wards for other diseases and so, when we get cases like Ebola, that is when we have special isolation wards for these kinds of patients. And as I mentioned earlier, our development partners are always ready to come and help us with this kind of work; so we share the burden together with them. 

Travel bans

At the moment, the World Health Organisation regulations confirming disease outbreaks, and especially one that is highly contagious like the Ebola Haemorrhagic fever, state that Uganda at this level is safe. We do not need to have travel bans. What we have done by stressing the contacts and isolating them is adequate for now and that is what is done all over the country when you have outbreaks of diseases like Ebola. You only raise the alert levels to maybe level four or level four when the spread and outbreak reaches a certain level. But where we are now, we do not have to have travel bans. If only we took the precaution measures that we have already mentioned to the public that should be adequate to control the spread of the disease.

Concerning the compensation of health workers who die while working on their job, this is a matter that we have been and we are still consulting with Ministry of Public Service, the Ministry of Gender and the Ministry of Finance, and at an appropriate time, when we have concluded with it, we will be able to update honourable members. It is also our wish that our gallant officers who die while in combat need to be compensated and their families also supported.

Ebola has very many serotypes as I mentioned. We have five serotypes at the moment. We have Ebola Sudan, Ebola Zaire, Ebola Bundibugyo -(Interjections)- Ebola Reston and Ebola Cote D’Ivoire. These names are given according to where the species are isolated from. So far, the outbreaks in Uganda have been Ebola Bundibugyo and Ebola Sudan. Ebola Sudan was the one responsible for the outbreaks in Gulu and in Luweero, and now in Kibaale District.

Maybe, I should also give this information. Ebola Sudan compared to Ebola Zaire is a milder type. When you isolate it early and you manage the patient early and quickly, the recovery is quite good and that is why we are confident that we will be able to contain this disease and no further deaths should occur.

We are working closely with many other partners as one of the honourable members mentioned, involving the Police. We are extending our training to them, but when it comes to handling suspected cases of Ebola, that will purely be handled by the health workers who have been trained and they have protective gear. Right now, in Kibaale, we have supported them with more vehicles. One of the vehicles is an ambulance which is fully equipped with protective gear, so that once the community alerts us that there is a suspected case anywhere, we go and pick that case ourselves. Once a victim dies, it is us to bury that victim because we use the teams that have been well trained and have protective gear.

Uganda, as one of the honourable members mentioned, has had a good experience. These tragedies that have happened in our country have been a blessing in disguise, somehow for us, because now we have well trained battle hardened veterans who can manage cases of Ebola very well. I really commend my health workers for a job well done, for especially the Luweero case, and even this one. Much as this one is presented atypically, we were having a high index of suspicion and we were able to isolate the virus quite quickly. Perhaps the reason we are seeing many cases of Ebola in Uganda is because we are highly suspicious; we have raised the alert levels even in the communities and they are able to report to us any strange disease that they observe.

We have also beefed up our laboratories at Uganda Virus Research Institute. We are able to isolate the virus and within 24 hours, confirm it.

Ebola is a self-limiting disease. In some communities where it has not been dictated, it may wipe away the whole family or perhaps even the whole village and when there are no more people to infect, then it dies down. Perhaps that is what is happening elsewhere with our neighbours and so on. We do not know, but here, once communities get alerted, they alert us and then we quickly isolate it. Perhaps that is why we are seeing many more cases in Uganda. 

I want to thank the honourable member of Kumi for giving us the three things that we need to address. We will take that seriously and take that recommendation and put it in place. At the moment, we have embarked on ecological studies of animals such as monkeys and bats so that we look at the behaviour of these animals and take specimens from them, and try to see if we can isolate the Ebola virus from these animals.

If we, for instance, find in a particular forest or in a particular location that these animals have been infected with these viruses, we will then take action. But so far, from the studies we have done, we have not isolated them yet. Yet now, because of these frequent outbreaks, we are going to expand our horizon for the research and include more areas. So, that is ongoing and we will be able to inform you of the updates and the results.

One of the honourable members asked how safe the staff in Mulago who have got in contact with the victim who died, are. We have isolated these staff and we are following them closely. As I mentioned before, this follow-up will go on for up to 21 days or more and if need be, we will treat them accordingly.

The suggestion of volunteers to be trained and equipped and to assist in situations like this; yes, we will consider this, but Ebola haemorrhagic fever being a very highly contagious infection, we would rather limit it to the health personnel who have not only the practical skills, but also the theory behind what to do and how to handle it.

I agree entirely with the honourable member who says that we need to have emergency funds and to have strong legislation on handling outbreaks and emergencies of this kind. I want to thank the honourable member from Hoima, who has reported that there are suspected cases there now. We will take this very seriously and follow it up very closely. We will also put in place measures to see how we can support Hoima Hospital to handle the influx of patients.

I have already answered some of these. We are including the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, Tourism, Education and Finance in this inter-ministerial committee to handle emergencies.

Lastly, on the Nodding Disease in Lira District. I want to thank the honourable member for that. We have received that report already and we have trained health workers in Gulu and Lira regional referral hospitals whom we have asked to do the needful for the suspected cases that have been reported, and confirm these ones as we work on the other logistics for the medicines, health supplies and also food for the affected children and their families.

Mr Speaker, I think I have tackled most of the issues raised to me. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you honourable members. This matter is important, but I should not lose sight of our Rules of Procedure. Our rules give us one hour for this kind of debate. We have exceeded it by 45 minutes because of the significance of the subject. I am, therefore, thanking the minister for the statement and Members for your responses.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 74.1 MILLION (EQUIVALENT OF US $120 MILLION) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO SUPPORT THE ELECTRICITY SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this statement was presented to the House. The motion is by the minister and it relates to the transmission aspect of our electricity, not generation and not distribution, but specifically on the issue of transmission. We received this report; I will now ask the minister who was going to stand in for the Minister of Energy to make a presentation on the motion.

4.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIVATISATION (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. The motion before the House is to seek authority of Parliament to us as Government to borrow $120 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank to support electricity sector development.

We are aware that significant challenges still exist in the power sector like lack of adequate and reliable power supply, weak sector finances, low levels of access to electricity at less than 10 percent overall, and high distribution system losses of about 30 percent. 

Government has, therefore, been focusing on addressing these issues by investing in generation capacity like the 250MW Bujagali hydro electric power which has just been completed. Karuma is due to start. Isimba and Ayago projects are in the pipeline. We are also focusing on transmission and distribution, rural electrification and renewal of energy development in regional interconnection, involving several interconnection projects with our neighbouring countries under the East African Community and the East African Power Pool like the NELSAP. 

To do this, we are currently developing these generation projects and also trying to upgrade the transmission grid to improve links with export markets, but also extend services to the rural areas. Government is also pursuing development of mini-hydros through the private sector, given that there is need to take care to ensure that development of transmission and distribution networks does not outpace development of generation capacity and vice-versa. Government is regularly addressing these plans to ensure that we adapt to changing circumstances.

This loan, therefore, is to address financing of the Kawanda-Masaka transmission line which is a very important segment of the network proposed to evacuate power from Bujagali hydro power plant at the same time serving as a basis for the proposed transmission interconnection to Tanzania and Rwanda as it forms part of the ring around Lake Victoria for the interconnection of the East African grid.

We expect that from this project, we shall achieve improved reliability of power supply to Masaka, increase supply through the Masaka sub-station, but also increase project beneficiaries of the areas in residential, public, commercial and industrial electricity customers currently served by the line. 

This project will be under three components. Component one of $95 million will be to upgrade and replace the 132KV line from Mutundwe to Masaka with one of 220KV. We shall also supply the existing communities around the area by component three which is $8 million. It will supply community projects and households in the region along the transmission line. The investment component will involve street lighting, marketplace lighting in the municipality and peri-urban areas of Masaka Municipality.

The second component of $7.6 million will involve technical assistance to the Uganda Electricity Transmission Company to undertake studies of other expansions and reinforcement of the transmission network, specifically that one from Lira, Gulu, Nebbi to Arua.

This loan has very high concessional terms. The maturity period is 40 years, including 10 years of grace. The service charge is 7.5 percent per annum on disbursed and outstanding balances, and there is a commitment charge of 0.5 percent per annum on undisbursed balances of the credit.

The conditions are also very friendly. All procurements are to be undertaken within the IDA procurement guidelines as also enshrined in our public procurement laws. UETCL will be responsible for implementing the big project of the transmission and the Ministry of Energy will be responsible for implementation, the strategic studies and also the extension of electricity to areas where this line traverses.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, did you say UTL?

MR KAJARA: UETCL.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR KAJARA: Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, we are seeking support from Parliament to enable us borrow this money by passing a resolution in accordance with Article 159 of the Constitution, so that this credit of SDR 74.1 million equivalent to $120 million is secured from the International Development Association of the World Bank in order for us to improve our power sector as I have enumerated. 

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is one of those requests which feed into our budgetary processes just like the previous one. This one is on the sector of electricity distribution in areas which have been mentioned. The purposes have been stated clearly. Any debate on this matter? Guidance?

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I know this is a very difficult matter, but we have a Ministry of Economic Monitoring. I think it would be better for us to be informed about our level of borrowing. It is important we know so that we can track activities on the ground and advise accordingly. But as far as I am concerned, the purpose for which the loan is being asked is very good and I want to support it. Can we be guided as to how much we have borrowed for specific areas in various sectors so that we can track. I know that in Dokolo, they have been promising us electricity, but they have left out trading centres, and health centres; how do they expect a new district like Dokolo to get power in the health centres and so on? We want to know; we want to track the performance of previous loans borrowed. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, do you have any information on this?

4.46
THE CHAIRPWERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. A senior colleague, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, thanks for raising that important question. The Minister of Finance on reading the budget laid on Table the performance of loans and grants. Every Member got a copy. It is an annual ritual. However, I explained here last week that arising out of that, the Committee on National Economy is preparing – I asked the other day when committees were reporting that I want to be given space on the Order Paper to present the committee’s analysis of that report. It is also a responsibility of every sessional committee to look at their sector’s performance of loans. You are right. It is important that we analyse that and make that report annually. The committee has a draft and we shall, at an appropriate time, come here and present a report. But that does not stop individual sector committees from looking at their loans. I thought I should give that information; but everybody got a copy of the performance of loans and grants. It is in yellow, a national colour. At least I remember what mine is. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will have hon. Mudini, hon. Nankabirwa, and the honourable member for Fort Portal.

4.47
MR IGNATIUS WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the loan, but on page 9 of the report, on the loan terms and conditions, it says that unresolved land acquisition issues of Bujagali Power line connection are sorted. I want the minister or the committee chair to give us the status on that because that is one of the conditions. We thought we were done with Bujagali, but it is coming in now. 

The committee was recommending that Government should in future compensate those people on the wayleaves. But there are cases where Government has acquired wayleaves and yet in the long-run you find settlements along those lines. Who gives them authority to settle there? I thought when Government acquired wayleaves, it acquired titles. There are cases like Nakawa Industrial Area where the ICDs are – those car bonds are in the wayleaves – how do they acquire that land?

Secondly, we pass these loans, but then we get challenges with the issues of counterpart funding. I have seen where there is 70 percent financing needed here on the table; that is a huge sum of money; do we have that kind of money in the budget? As Parliament, we had a stock of non-performing loans. So, we agreed in this House that before a loan is passed, we have to ensure that there is money in the budget for counterpart funding. In this respect and the previous loan, do we have the money -(Member timed out.)

4.50
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion for Parliament to approve acquisition of this loan. Honourable members, we need to support this together. Today, we are trying to increase generation; we have the rural electrification programme, but it must be alongside transmission. Otherwise, it will not be successful. 

When you look at the transmission line from Kampala to Masaka, it is operating on low voltage and it needs to be upgraded. Actually, many of our transmission lines need to be upgraded to 220KV or more to avoid losses. Today, the end-user tariffs we pay are determined by first of all determining the losses. And part of the power loss incurred in transmission is because of poor lines and low voltage. 

Two, there is the component of distribution to areas where the power lines pass. When I consider Hoima Road, which is my road, I notice that many town centres are living in darkness because of the wayleaves. They are not supposed to access the land through which the power lines pass. This was caused because we did not provide that kind of service to benefit the people living in places where these lines pass. But that is not only for Masaka – in fact, I would like to ask the minister - perhaps this goes to the Ministry of Energy - what plans do you have? Today it is Mutundwe to Masaka, targeting Bujagali interconnections. But what about in areas where we already have transmission lines and the people are not benefiting from these transmission lines -(Member timed out.)

4.53
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion. I wanted the ministry to justify value-for-money, SDR71.1 million (Special Drawing Rights). 

When I read on page 5, I was very keen to look at the beneficiaries of the project. The first point is quite generalised. When you talk of industrial, what kind of industrial base do you mean and how do you tell that if you invest in that, you will benefit in the long-run? I was touched, when I came to page 6. You say that the project is expected to generate new customers at its end, numbering 1,000, representing 7,800 persons. Then you beautifully moved to please the ladies; 3,978 are women. 

I am looking at the amount of money involved; I am looking at the input -(Member timed out.)

4.56
MR JOHNY SSASAGA: (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not against borrowing of funds for development purposes, but borrowing each and every time we have a need without proper checks and balances in the economy worries me. This morning, I was with the honourable minister in the finance committee, while meeting the PPDA officials. One of our big concerns was that much as they have made recommendations about proper accountability where they expect the administrative officers to take action, they are very disappointed because most of them have been reluctant to implement such recommendations. 

As we continue with this rate of borrowing and counter borrowing, I do not know which checks we have in place. Honourable minister, this money we are borrowing, what assurance is there that it will not be misused. The burden of paying this money largely lies on our grandchildren and 30 years from now, we shall not be here, but these people will have to pay the money. 

So, I foresee a situation where we shall be in that vicious cycle of repayment and we may be unable to pay, and those who gave us the money may even come and ring-fence this country and everybody within for the sake of recovering their monies. Otherwise, I do not have any objection on the loan, provided we have the proper checks and balances in place to minimise the –(Member timed out.)

4.59
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to really thank the ministry for this loan request. However, I have some queries on this, and I want some clarification on the project costs and financing. 

If you are to turn to page 7, you will realise that the construction of the new Kawanda and Masaka, will be US$112 million, but when you come down to (d), there is what they are referring to as unallocated US$5.6 million and then there is physical and price contingencies of US$15.8 million, much more than what is supposed to be used for the technical assistance and community support project and many more. I need clarification on this.

Above all, I do not know whether it is me, but if you check their additions, the total project cost will never total to US$153.2 million but slightly less than that. Can I have some clarification on that? I thank you so much.

4.59
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Principally, I have no problem in supporting rural electrification to this country, but someone in this House and in Government ought to educate me before I lend my support to this particular loan. I have three issues that I think Government ought to clarify to me and to this nation.

The first one is that, we are borrowing a loan for Bujagali. Bujagali has been skyrocketing from the inception. I think the bid price was US$560 billion and then it went to US$875 billion, the highest for a dam of that size in the whole world, and that is what I have been hearing from this House. Now, you want to add another 120 putting the cost of Bujagali alone at that size to almost one trillion. Really, what has gone wrong with Bujagali?

Secondly, I thought you had started commissioning Bujagali, but now you are borrowing more money for Bujagali. I need to be helped. Has the money come short? What is wrong?

Lastly, but very importantly for this House, Mr Speaker, your office set up an ad hoc committee and we said that they investigate matters of electricity generation in this country and they come back to Parliament and tell us about the wastage, expansion, corruption and everything. Before we pass this loan, may I propose that the ad hoc committee that you assigned this work first comes back to educate Parliament and then we will be willing and really very keen to put more money on this. Otherwise, I am really worried about this loan without feedback from our own ad hoc committee in this sector. That is my prayer to you the chair. (Applause)
   
5.02
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am looking at the funding on page 7 with percentages. Under (a), there is a cost there under project cost in dollars, and under (a) IDA, the total cost in percentage totals to 70 percent and the rest of the costing is 100 percent notwithstanding what the honourable from Lira has talked about. I am wondering, where is the 30 percent going to come from in that column (a) because you have not told us where this is going to come from? Even when you come down to the total, the whole total is 78 percent. Where is the 22 percent going to come from? 

My second question is on page 9, that gives a list of loan terms and conditions, and I wish to be informed about how favourable or feasible these terms and conditions are because nobody has told us. There is a bullet that says that the Government of Uganda will lend US$90 million to UETCL at an annual interest rate of 0.75 percent. I was beginning to wonder whether this is the Government of Uganda contribution or is it making a business? 

The next bullet talks about US$7.6 million that Government of Uganda is going to give. Is this the Government of Uganda’s contribution, because it does not total to the balance of the percentage that is remaining? I thank you.

5.04
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): I support the loan, but on the conditions that the following are clarified to me. We have a lot of loans and we have borrowed a lot of money, but this money remains unspent while the lenders continue charging interest and commitment fees. 

When you look at page 9, it says that there will be a commitment fee of 0.5 percent per annum. This will be charged on undisbursed amounts. The disbursement of the loan also has conditions, procurement guidelines from IDA, compensation to the owners of the land where the lines will pass and at the end of the day, we shall pay more in form of commitment fees and interest. So, I want to get that from the Government or minister, whether these conditions have already been met, so that we can approve this loan and it is used immediately. I thank you.

5.06
MR TONY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County Apac): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I support this motion, however, the Ministry of Energy is not very popular with this Parliament because of the way they have been handling issues on electricity. 

Just like honourable members have said here, we have not received the report on all the investigations that were supposed to be done. 

When you get to page 9 of the committee report, among the loan terms and conditions, Government is supposed to ensure that unresolved loan acquisition issues on the Bujagali interconnection line are sorted out. So, can I know from the minister, now that you are moving to make this presentation to Parliament to approve the loan, whether you have already sorted out the issue of land acquisition for Bujagali? Have you even moved to handle the issue or resettling people and compensation? 

Immediately we approve this loan, you will realise that other issues will come; there will be serious delay and then Government will again be asked from time to time to increase more money on Bujagali. I think this is one thing that I want you to make very clear.

Lastly, I want the minister to assure Parliament that all the procurement undertakings will be followed because if you look at Karuma Power Project, it is meeting a lot of challenges because of procurement. And this is one of the issues that normally come up, and again in the electricity sector. 

So, Mr Minister, can you put this very clearly to the House so that tomorrow you do not come again to Parliament to say that the procurement process is challenging; or that there are thugs who are causing a lot of challenges and making the project not move. Thank you. 

5.08
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I am in support of the loan. However, accountability for this loan should also be taken very seriously. Barely two months ago, there was a loan request before this House. We passed it. Before that one, there were also some other loans. We have got loans from BADEA for electrification projects in different areas. A case in point is that of the extension of the Kapchorwa-Bukwo power line. From 2010 to 2011, a loan was secured from BADEA. A top-up loan was again secured last year, but we do not have electricity up to today. Where does this money go? I think the performance of loans should also be paramount. 

The Committee on National Economy, before they bring a loan here, we must be conversant with the performance of previous loans so that we are not seen to be adding loans on top of loans when we are not seeing their impact. Thank you. 

5.09
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I have heard many Members getting concerned about our debt sustainability levels. 

However, I note on page 3 that one of the challenges is the low level of access to electricity, which is less than 10 percent. I am extremely concerned about how long it is going to take us to achieve 50 percent coverage or even 90 percent coverage. 

We are already concerned about how much we are borrowing but the coverage ratio is still very low. I need to be informed by the honourable minister what measures are in place, and I don’t know whether he is listening to me, Mr Speaker, because I am putting a question to him. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to know, given our current coverage rate of 10 percent, how long it is going to take us to achieve 50 percent coverage, especially given that the debt sustainability level already seems to be threatening and that the supply of wood fuel is more or less now in a crisis. Where are we heading to as a country in terms of energy supply through electricity and wood fuel, which this country seems to be heavily depending on? We seem to be in a crisis, but we are not being shown the direction. It is like we are in a firefighting situation. Today we talk about a piecemeal Masaka line. When are we talking about the whole country? How long is it going to take us to cover the whole country? I think we need a bigger outlook to this problem. 

The second concern is about the high distribution system losses of more than 30 percent. You have been lamenting about this problem for far too long, and I don’t know when you will come to a meaningful conclusion –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I allow the minister to make some responses to this. They have become very many now. 

5.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The very first question which I want to answer is from hon. Alaso. We are not borrowing this money for Bujagali. The money for Bujagali was for generation of electricity. This electricity has already been generated, but we need to evacuate it, and we need to distribute it. We did not have sufficient capacity to transmit this power to the areas where it can be distributed. So, this loan seeks to cover the transmission costs of this power from Bujagali. 

Mr Speaker, these two go together, and I did say in my submission that all this must balance because the power you generate must be evacuated, in terms of transmission, but must also be distributed. Otherwise, you do not access it.

On the problem of land acquisition and compensation in Bujagali. We had a number of people who were affected –(Interruption)  

MS ALASO: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I seem to have a faint memory that the previous money we got for the Bujagali project included generation and distribution. Secondly, the faint memory I also have is that this House is investigating those money issues. So, besides what you are suggesting, my appeal has been that we educate ourselves on these matters –(Mr Baryayanga rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is happening now? Hon. Alaso, what is going on? Have you finished?

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I was being helped. I don’t know whether you would allow – Okay. I thought that the House could be educated. Mr Speaker, I only ceded because I thought some of these people are very expert in this field. But my prayer to you, the Chair, in regard to what the minister was saying, is that we have issues with generation, distribution, the cost of the dam, and the wastage in the electricity generation sector, and we thought it would be helpful before we pass the loan to try to cover up those gaps. But we really love electricity. How I wish it could go to my village as well. That is my prayer, Mr Speaker. 

MR MIGEREKO: I just want to give information to enhance hon. Alaso’s memory in regard to the borrowing that was carried out in regard to the financing of Bujagali and the associated transmission, and not distribution. The borrowing for Bujagali was for generation. The information available is that that has been achieved up to the projected 250MW. But there was also a component for transmission, which was Bujagali-Kawanda substation, and this has also been taken care of. 

Now, this other transmission, which is from Mutundwe to Masaka, and which is part of the regional network - because this is supposed to cover the ring around Lake Victoria, to improve on security of supply; and to bring down losses because the lines we have presently are dilapidated. With new projects coming on board, with increased power supply, if we do not have a reliable network to evacuate that power, our investment in terms of increased power supply into the system will just be wasted. So, this is the essence of this loan. I thank you.

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give to this House is: I am seeing all this money going to be managed by UEDCL yet I am made to understand its board isn’t yet in existence because its mandate expired last year in December. There is no new board to date.

Two, I recall this House asked for a vote for the Rural Electrification Agency, but this issue seems to have been ignored. It is very important for us to know this because when we passed monies to the tune of Shs 12.5 billion for this agency, only Shs 4.5 was received. So, there is need for us to be assured that this money will be used very well.

The minister should also tell us more about the cost escalations for Bujagali. I am saying this because as we talk, these costs have never been passed by the authority. We only see the minister yet the mandate to approve is with the authority. But also, I understand that there are more loan requests for Bujagali, but before that is done, can they show us how these cost escalations came about? Can they substantiate why this has become the most expensive dam in the world?

Lastly, we all understand that when this year started, the procurements for Karuma took off – I know it is about 270 days for any procurement to take place. So, what happened? Are you again going to say that it was the Ninth Parliament that stopped the generation of power at Karuma Dam? Are you going to start blaming this Parliament the way you have done with the other parliament for having blocked the construction of the Bujagali Power Dam? Will you again say that the Ninth Parliament blocked Karuma Dam from taking off? That is the information I had to give.

MR ASTON KAJARA: Mr Speaker, you clarified, when we started the debate, that this motion is for a loan to have a transmission line constructed to transmit power from Mutundwe to Masaka. So, the issues on the costs for the Bujagali Power Dam are very important, but I think they can be substantively handled by the sector minister; I mean the Ministry of Energy when it interfaces with the relevant committees.

But let me say something on the unresolved land acquisition issues on the Bujagali inter-connection line. These issues arose because there were a number of people who were affected in the areas through which that line goes. The number was 2674. The majority of these have been compensated though we still have an outstanding number of 35. But still, I would like to report that Uganda Electricity Transmission Company is still negotiating with them for a resolution. The Chief Government Valuer is being involved to value and offer adequate compensation. That is why we are trying to solve the outstanding disputes.

On the issue of counter-funding, I would like to say this is very important. I am saying this because Government projects can stall if there are no funds to supplement the money we borrow or get from the donors. This financial year, Government has prioritised, among other things, counter-funding in addition to the loans and donations to projects. This counter-funding will cover taxes, and compensations for this project, I can say that we have a budget line. This year alone, $12.9 million has been budgeted for to take care of compensations. This means that these issues will certainly be addressed.

Hon. Alex Ruhunda asked something on value-for-money. He asked which industries will benefit from this loan. But certainly, you cannot say that this or that industry will benefit. Wherever this electricity line passes, I imagine there are industries. For example, there are industries in Masaka, Mpigi and even in Kampala as the line extends from Mutundwe.

It is important to note that all industries largely depend on the availability of electricity. We know, for example, that Namanve – we have actually secured $20 million to extend electricity to that industrial park. So, districts or areas where – especially in South Western - this line traverses will benefit from this money.

The term “new customers” refers to those people who have not been connected by the current service providers, Umeme.

Mr Speaker, there was something on value-for-money. First of all, there are these interconnections with our neighbouring countries. We have a project under the East African Community where we have to construct interconnection lines. This transmission line upgrading will certainly be part of the value- for-money.

On the issue of an unallocated amount of $5.6 million which covers contingencies for any of the components that we have mentioned, I would like to say that it will cover cost overruns – the amount of 5.6 of the total amount is only 3.7 percent, which is very normal in the implementation of projects that take some time. This is because they are not a one-off. For example, when implementing the Bujagali Power Project, we hit some snug where the physical features happened to be different from what we had anticipated. So, we had to incur extra costs.

In our report, we have said that PPDA procurement guidelines will be followed to the letter to ensure accountability, transparency and value-for-money in any of the procurements that we shall engage in.

There was something on the board for the Uganda Electricity Transmission Company. Yes, the mandate of this board expired in May 2012. However, the appointing authority, which is the Ministry of Finance, is in charge of this and is processing the appointment of a new board. The members have been nominated and we only await inauguration of the new board.

Mr Speaker, there was a question on how long it will take us to reach electricity coverage of 50 percent. I would like to say that it is the aspiration of Government to actually not only reach 50 but 100 percent coverage. However, we have to also keep in mind that under our national development plan, access to electricity is a key priority, though we still have constraints, as Government, to get all the money that we need to cover the whole country. So, we have been doing it piecemeal and it is our hope and with Government prioritising investment in the energy sector, we think that we should be able to achieve higher connection rates. 

Mr Speaker, for your information, Uganda has been selected as one of the 15 countries in the world to achieve this target because the United Nations passed a resolution to achieve universal access to electricity in the coming 25 years, and it is our aspiration that we should be one of the targets and we think that the 50 percent will be achieved by the year 2025 through grid extension, through solar connections, through geothermal projects like the small hydro projects which Government is planning and the other mini-grids as per the government’s aspirations.

Mr Speaker, I did cover price variations; they occur from time to time during project implementation and this project is supposed to last some time, and with time in project financing, physical and price contingencies have to be catered for. That is why we have some of those issues budgeted for and 0.5 percent on charged on and disbursed balances of the credit. Usually, when you get loan terms, among the loan terms and conditions, this is a credit. If you remain with money undisbursed and yet it is due, the lender will certainly want to benefit from it. It is a kind of penalty. So, it is up to Government to ensure that you execute and implement the project in a timely manner in order to avoid that kind of penalty. 

Mr Speaker, it is my hope that I have covered most of the issues and it is my prayer to this House that Parliament does support Government and agree that we borrow this money in line with the Constitution, by passing a resolution in support of this motion, so that we can access this money, and so that the electricity, which we have just generated or we are just generating in Bujagali, is not put to waste for lack of a strong transmission line, but also to increase access to power to Ugandans as per Government aspirations. I beg to move. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, points of guidance are factual. You do not seek guidance from the Speaker, you seek procedure. I cannot rule on issues of fact. It is not even in our rules. But on a procedural point, I have the authority to make a ruling on it. 

MR MUDIMI: Mr Speaker, I want to be guided on Rule 23. We are moving a motion to commit Government that the quorum of Parliament shall be one-third of all Members of Parliament entitled to voting, to any question. So, I want to be guided. It seems we are less than the quorum. I don’t want to be challenged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What rule did you cite?

MR MUDIMI: Rule 23, page 24. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am not preparing to put the question. So, that matter does not arise. I have not moved to propose any question; so, that matter of quorum does not arise. 

MR MUSINGUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It was rumoured that the board which is supposed to be the implementing agent of this loan is not in place. I have been hearing it in the corridors, but the minister has confirmed the rumour. Now, why don’t we wait? You have said that you are about to put the board into place. In Ntungamo, we have been in darkness since life immemorial. We can still wait. Let us wait so that you put the board in place – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you pass the resolution today, the loan will not be here tomorrow. It is a long process. So, let us understand these things and talk contextually. 

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to be guided. It is very true that this House has got issues to do with the electricity sector and it was for that reason that this House thought it very wise to put up that ad hoc committee to help us investigate and report back to this House issues to do with the electricity sector. Could it be procedurally right that the minister holds on for a while as we wait for the findings and the report of that committee? It is for our own good and for our own digestion of the decisions we are to make, that we shall make them from a very informed point of view and this one can even guide us better on how the coming finances we are borrowing are going to be further utilised. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, when this matter was brought to the House, indeed a motion for the institution of an ad hoc committee was brought and that motion passed and indeed a committee was created. I am part of the people who participated in drafting the terms of reference for that committee. It does not touch issues of the future; it deals with issues of the past; to reveal what had happened and advise this Parliament on how to proceed. It does not have anything to do with things like this budget. The budget we are going to discuss is not affected by the report of this committee because there were specific issues and I happen to have been, by pure accident, one of the legal people that sat on that committee – the electricity committee – that looked at some of the things way before I came to Parliament. And it was partly what was raised in that report that became subject to discussion in Parliament and that is why the matter was sent to the ad hoc committee. Part of the terms of reference actually, were to review that report, which I participated in writing and come and advise the House on why these economic losses are there, why the technical losses are there, why time in, time out we were giving money to bring the power thing down. It also arose from the Vote-on-Account debate when the electricity matter was brought, of the Shs 60 billion; that is how those matters came about. Let us not mix up these issues. If we have specific reasons why we should not deal with this matter, we should not tie it to the report of the ad hoc committee. The ad hoc committee will not report on this loan, so let us deal with this loan if we have the capacity to deal with it now.

Now, the issue of whether the House has ability to process this to final conclusion has been raised. I agree that this House cannot process this matter to its final conclusion. So, I now suspend decision on this matter to tomorrow and move to the next item.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON THURSDAY 7TH JUNE 2012

(Debate Continued)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that this particular motion was presented, spoken to and seconded, and the Leader of the Opposition made a substantial reply to the address on the state of the nation by the President. The motion is that thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the address on the state of nation by H. E the President to this Parliament on Thursday, 7 June 2012.

I have been trying to consult with the whips to see how we are going to handle this debate but we have not finalised that consultation. In the spirit of my other ruling that we will be closing Parliament at 6.00 O’clock everyday to allow Moslem colleagues go and break their fast, I have 25 minutes and I will entertain debate of three minutes each on this motion.

5.39
MR PATRICK MULINDWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I agree with the President on page 2 when he says that one of the cornerstones of our economy and development is the UPDF. This force has been a force to reckon with in the East African region and beyond, in the horn of Africa. It is the one currently carrying the trophy for the military games for East Africa; it is doing a lot of work in infrastructure and production. I feel that at sometime this Parliament should come up and thank this force.

I also agree with the President when he talks about roads in class A and class B. However, I am concerned that the road in my constituency, from Lusarira through Kasambya to Konge, was pledged by His Excellency but it does not appear in either list A or B.

On page 15, the President addresses himself to core issues of the economy but there is a major issue that is affecting our economy and that is labour productivity. We are proposing to increase salaries of workers but we do not address ourselves to labour productivity. It is a very big disease in this country. It is on record that for a job done by one Kenyan you need about five Ugandans to do the same job. We need to address this as a nation. 

We need to see how we can best tap this resource of Uganda by increasing labour productivity. We could look at the man hours; we can motivate our people by looking at what someone has produced and how we can motivate that unit of labour. (Member timed out)

5.43
MS HELLEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank His Excellency for his speech. I am going to begin on page 14. I want to thank the President for thinking about the LC I chairpersons and the district councillors, that they should get some kind of remuneration because they render a good service to this country.

However, I have a complaint on some kind of selective salary increments. He said that the only civil servants who are worth getting an increment were the scientists. All civil servants are important in this country. I was looking at the district quota admissions and most of these students who were admitted at the university on district quota are going to take humanities and not sciences or arts. The question, therefore, is: why should the Government continue wasting resources on unwanted courses if it feels that the scientists are the ones who have the solutions for the problems of this country?

I want to talk about agriculture, mentioned on page 3. I want to thank His Excellency for talking about agricultural zoning. He emphasised that 68 percent of the population in Uganda are subsistent farmers and only seven percent are involved in commercial farming. This shows that we still have a lot to do because 80 percent of Ugandans are employed in this sector. There are no extension services, most of the people are using hoes and there are no agricultural inputs. I have a feeling that he should have talked more about agriculture since it is also the backbone of this country. 

I want to go to page 1 where he talks about the recovery of the economy. It really beats my understanding whether we should continue to say it is recovery of an economy or not. I was taught that an economy of a country keeps fluctuating; at one time it is booming, then it goes to depression and then to recovery. Some of the indictors of an economy which is recovering are things to do with low inflation, low interest rates, high productivity, high market, thus high revenues and therefore better service delivery. (Member timed out)

5.46
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to join the rest of my colleagues in thanking the President for the speech made. 

I will go straight to agreeing with the President especially on page 15 where he raises core issues for the economy to perform well. Among these, the President raises serious concerns on road development, electricity, education, health and others. I entirely agree with the President in that regard. Specifically as a Member of Parliament for Buhaguzi County, I was very happy because one of the major roads, Hoima-Kaiso Tonya Road, was mentioned. There was also another road, Kyenjojo-Kaboya Road, which was mentioned. 

The biggest challenge I have is that there are inconsistencies in the statements made. In the speech of the President, the road is Kyenjojo-Kaboya Road while in the Budget Speech it is Kyenjojo-Hoima Road up to Kigunga. This has been the concern of the Banyoro Parliamentary Caucus because that is what we regard as Kitara Road, which we are pushing for in our request. When the Minister of Works was launching the Hoima-Kaiso Tonya Road, he assured us that it was the road but when you read further, you realise that it is Kyenjojo-Kaboya Road. So, I call upon the minister to clarify as to which road he is exactly talking about.
 
I am glad that quite a number of roads have been mentioned in the President’s speech but right now, there is very great concern especially to do with the Hoima-Kaiso Tonya Road regarding the compensation. The people along that road are in tears because of the poor compensation rates that are being given to them by UNRA and the Ministry of Works. A lot has been said, petitions have been raised to the minister and to the President, but there seems to be no major headway. The people are still making claims and expressing need to be compensated. 

As a leader from that region, I call upon the Ministry of Works to plan for these major roads’ compensation and budget for them very well. (Member timed out­)

5.50
MS FLORENCE KINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me also take this opportunity to thank H.E. the President of Uganda for the comprehensive address. 

My colleagues have talked about highlights of areas of concern in the economy but my major concern is on the issue of piped water in big towns. Mr Speaker, allow me to register my concern especially in the area I represent. Much as this was highlighted, I would like to inform this House that this project of piped water was started a long time ago but is not functional in some areas. All the towns in my area are on the list of those served by piped water - Kiwangala, Lubirizi and Kinoni towns - but when the project was opened, it lasted only six months and it has now taken three years without being rehabilitated. We have been approaching the concerned ministry but we do not get any answer and we do not know why it is not operating. So, I think that should be put in place when this project is re-implemented. 

Another concern is from page 23, where I agree with His Excellency the President when he noted that Ugandans have relaxed as far as the HIV/AIDS epidemic is concerned. I would not, however, say that Ugandans alone have relaxed but rather the government has relaxed. We realise that time and again the population is increasing and thus getting new contacts. So, we have to review the mechanisms of fighting HIV/AIDS. Let us increase on radio programmes to make the people aware of the epidemic. Let us review the community sensitisation - (Member timed out)

5.53
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues to thank the President for the good speech. On the first page, the President gave an elaborate explanation about the growth of this economy, what he called the recovery. It is true that in the last 26 years this country has seen tremendous growth. However, much as we have seen the growth, the general development is not seen.
  
Actually, the President admits that 68 percent of this population is still living on subsistence farming, which shows that we have to do a lot. We are seeing a few individuals in the country who have a lot of money and of course, when we calculate the wealth of the country these people are included. However, the general picture is that people are still poor and we need to do a lot. What he says is that we have not mobilised the population. It is true we need to mobilise the population because poverty is real. 

Mr Speaker, why we still see a lot of poverty in the population is mainly because we have not addressed the real problems of this country. We have not allocated resources where we need to put them most, like in the sector of agriculture where most of our people get their income and other areas like tourism, where we would get a lot of benefits. We have not addressed this.

The other issue is in the area of corruption. Actually, the President did not address this so much, especially in regard to the manner in which our own officers and politicians who are taking a lot of taxpayers’ money - (Interjection)- This one is talking of Kazinda but that is not my concern.

On the issue of corruption, we have really done very little. I believe we have faulted on the promissory note we gave Ugandans, as NRM, when we said “we want zero tolerance to corruption”. On this one, we have really not done a lot. I would say that we gave them this note and on coming back, the cheque is reading, “Insufficient political will.” (Laughter)

5.56
MR AMOS MANDERA (NRM, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I have two issues to raise. First of all, I would like to comment on the alternative infrastructure funding, and I would like to commend H.E. the President for exploring the Public Private Partnership (PPP) arrangement for funding as one of the ways to improve the infrastructure development in our country. However, the government should expeditiously review and strengthen legal and physical frameworks for introduction and use of PPP.

As we speak, the law on PPP has never been introduced to Parliament and perhaps that is why some projects like the Soroti Fruit Processing Factory have delayed. This may therefore call for some efforts to pass that law so as to enable the alternative infrastructure funding to take place.

Secondly, on page 20, His Excellency cited Sango Bay Sugar Estates as one of the areas that the government intends to re-vamp and expand so that it can contribute to the economy of this country. However, the ministry is concerned with spearheading the initiative of re-entry- (Interruption)

MR MIGEREKO: Honourable member, I thank you for giving way. I thought that I should give you information, which could come in handy as you continue debating and for the benefit of other members. 

Yes, it is true that we have not dealt with the legislation for the PPP arrangement, but we have dealt with this matter in Cabinet and Cabinet has given approval to the Bill, which will be coming here for debate. Therefore, fairly soon, this matter will be before the House. Our financing arrangements for particularly the big projects and others, which require several partners to work together, including Government, will come before you here. This will enhance financing for our various projects. I thank you.

MR MANDERA: Thank you, Government Chief Whip, for enriching my concern. I was commenting on Sango Bay. The ministries concerned with spearheading the initiative have not played their role. (Member timed out)

6.00
MS GRACE NAMARA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to join my colleagues and thank His Excellency for the shortest speech ever on the state of the economy. 

However, on a serious note, before we jubilate over the increased revenue and over the increased private sector investments, I think we need to consider what really brought this up. I believe, while I agree with the President, that what contributed to this is security. Members, I think we need to give credit where it is due. With unrest, we would not be talking about increased revenue, which glancing back 26 years ago was at Shs 5 billion and now we are looking at Shs 7,132 billion which we hope to collect in the coming financial year. So, I think we need to commend the UPDF and all the forces for that security. We can now see our brothers in the North and even in Kasese settled and contributing. We commend the work they are doing.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, on infrastructure especially roads, His Excellency expressed disgrace especially on the high wage bill. However, recently there was a motion to increase districts, which is actually going to increase the wage bill, and I understand the President supports the creation of the new districts. I therefore wonder whether he still shows his disgrace on the wage bill.

On the 44, he mentions road networks to be tarmacked this financial year. All I request the government to do is to seriously implement this and stand by their commitment.

On page 13, when the President talks of borrowing from NSSF, to me this is welcome because initially this money was just lying in the coffers, which tempted those who were near the coffers to swindle this money. I think if this money can be borrowed, this is an internal source and this is welcome. I have no problem benefiting as a contributor to NSSF as well as my grandmother deep in the village who is not a contributor. 

On corruption, I will differ from the President’s suggestion or opinion. Last year, he talked of zero-tolerance and even brought up the creation of a committee to investigate and continue fighting corruption. This year, he comes up talking about bringing a law. I think what we lack is not institutions to fight corruption or anti-corruption laws and institutions; what we lack is commitment from the political leadership up - (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had said we would close at 6.00 p.m. Tomorrow when this debate starts I will start with hon. Okuonzi and the honourable member for Adjumani. Right now, I will close business on the Order Paper and allow the hon. Yona Kanyomozi to make his short statement as a question.

6.04
MR YONA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Mr Speaker, Yona Kanyomozi is a person I defeated in Ntungamo Municipality and I am called Yona Musinguzi. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What did I say?

MR MUSINGUZI: Yona Kanyomozi is a person I defeated in Ntungamo Municipality and I am Yona Musinguzi.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, very similar. For me coming from the North, the names are very similar. (Laughter)

MR MUSINGUZI: He is UPC but he crossed to FDC and he is still living in the goodwill of ignorance.

Mr Speaker, I have several letters from the office of the Executive Director Kampala City Council Authority terminating workers today, the 31st. Members, if you recall, two months back I submitted a petition to this august House against the same. This House took it up and the Speaker directed the Presidential Affairs Committee to look into the issues and report to Parliament. The committee did commendable work - I was one of the witnesses, the ED was a witness, former workers were witnesses - and the committee promised me that it was about to submit its report.

At the time before it submits its report with very many findings and recommendations, which would address the grievances of 1,000 workers of KCC - We are talking of Ebola but they are looking at this letter as more than Ebola. It is not easy; it is like someone telling you to leave Parliament today. Let me stop there.

The letter reads, “This is to inform you that you have been-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, just raise the issue.

MR MUSINGUZI: Members, the reason why I have come to raise this issue today is to seek your indulgence in this and we see things done the way they should be done. The committee recommended some issues, which are not captured in the letter terminating the workers. The committee recommended that these people get their terminal benefits as per the law. To get their -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we have not received the committee report yet. Please be-

MR MUSINGUZI: The prayers in the petition, which we submitted to the committee, were requesting this committee to give them a clear cut way on how they will get their terminal benefits, how they will get their abolition of office benefits and pension. This has never been communicated to these human beings. We are talking of 1,000 people! 

Members, I wish to move that this Parliament, with its unlimited powers, restrains the KCCA Executive Director from implementing her inhuman and irrational decision. Let us wait for the report and Parliament appreciates the recommendations and we can then move on after putting everything in order. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you indeed brought a petition to this House. As far as the House is concerned, that matter is before a committee and that committee will soon report. As you say, you also appeared as a witness. The committee will come and advise the House on how to proceed, capturing all the issues that you raised in your petition. 

The issue of termination - when it should happen – does not arise before this House as of now because Parliament cannot stop the operations of institutions. Parliament cannot interfere with the discretionary powers of people authorised by the laws of this Parliament to do certain jobs. They operate until they have breached the law and have violated the rights of people, in which case they will go to court and Parliament will have recourse to that. 

To the extent that members are affected and there is a substantial committee report coming on this subject matter, this House will wait for what the committee will say in terms of recommendations and then will communicate clearly to whoever is concerned or affected by these recommendations appropriately. As for now, we cannot say, “Stop the termination.” It is only courts of law that can do that. This House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.09 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 1 August 2012 at 2.00 p.m.) 

