

Thursday, 26 July 2018

Parliament met at 3.00 P.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I would like you to join me in welcoming a special young lady, Elizabeth Mwesiga. She is a female disabled Para-Badminton Gold Medalist; there she is with all her medals. (Applause)

She won a gold medal at an International Para-Badminton Tournament that attracted 27 countries, seven from Africa. She has also a track record of excellent performance in many tournaments. She won a silver medal at the All Africa Tournament and two bronzes - one in Dubai and one in Uganda.

She is the reigning Global SL3 Gold Medallist. She has been nominated to represent Uganda at the 2020 Paralympics Games in Tokyo, Japan. (Applause) However, in order to participate in Japan, she must also participate in four build up tournaments: in Thailand, France, Australia and finally in Japan. That will cost her $10,000, which she does not have.

Therefore, honourable members, I know that we have supported the Uganda Cranes, the She Cranes and many causes including cancer. This is one young girl who needs $10,000. I am appealing to the Members that we support her to get the $10,000. Are you in agreement?

3.06
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that communication and I would like to congratulate the young lady for the achievement; we are proud of her.

Government should give its all for this cause. I do not see why we should have to - (Interjection) - Members of Parliament have so many obligations, as you must know. Surely, Government should stand up and support this young lady. 

Madam Speaker, even if it means a supplementary, Government should raise this money to make sure that this lady participates in the games. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister -

3.05
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the young lady for going that far.

I would also like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for asking Parliament to assist this young girl. It is not the first time that we are doing that and we cannot do it for others and segregate others.

Therefore, to make it easy, let it be optional; if you do not want to do it, leave it but do not stop everybody from doing it. It does not contradict or stop Government from helping. Therefore, we should go ahead and support this girl.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the sum she is asking for - Minister for youth, do you want to say something?

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I particularly stood to thank you for your ever-constant concern for the people who are vulnerable and especially those who have particular talents.

The girl sitting right here in Parliament is first of all a youth, is someone with a disability, a person who is talented and female. Parliament has always been associated with doing work from the heart. I stand here to propose Shs 100,000 per Member. Let us resolve and I stand here to second your proposal, Madam Speaker.

3.07
 THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to my colleagues’ and thank you for always standing in the gap because you have brought up this issue.

Madam Speaker, whereas Government is capable of meeting this young girl’s need - the $10,000, it causes no harm - there is what is called pro-bono; this when people of good will come together and - (Interjection) – Yes, I am ready and I am going to do my bit and I am sure hon. Elijah Okupa will also do his.

Therefore, as hon. Moses Ali has said, this is voluntary. Those who are willing to do it, let us see how much we can give; this is pro-bono, honourable members. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I really do not know whether we should argue in front of this child about supporting her. What she needs is just about Shs 40,000,000 and we can raise it. 

3.09
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is not the first time we are going to support people with talent, those who have excelled and represented the country in different activities. In addition, it is on record that this Parliament has been standing with the less privileged. Why don’t we have the heart for the less privileged? It is on that note that I want to move a motion that a question be put. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House do support the proposal.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is Shs 100,000 each, we can afford it. The clerk is directed to deduct Shs 100,000 from each Member towards support of Elizabeth Mwesigwa. Thank you.

3.10
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am not against the ruling. I would like your guidance on those who want to give more than Shs 100,000. 

I was supported by Government to attain the position of the President for the African Women in the Pan African Parliament and I would like to give $1,000 and not Shs 100,000. I would like to give it as soon as possible; it should not be deducted from my money. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: First, I would like to congratulate our Chair of the Pan African Women Caucus. Congratulations on your election. We welcome the $1,000; bring it to my office as soon as possible. Thank you. (Laughter) 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for spearheading what is passionate to Ugandans. I also congratulate the young lady for making Uganda proud. It is not the first time we are doing this and it is out of our good hearts. 

At Parliament, we also have responsibility and our talented members do not live on handouts. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Madam Speaker, with all these upcoming demands to Parliament for handouts that we let Government get committed to talents which we have in this country?

As I speak, I have a girl called Agnes Apio in Kitgum District. Last month, she was supposed to go to Finland because she was the best but she did not go because she did not have money. On Saturday, she is supposed to go to Nigeria but she cannot go because of the same $10,000 and we have been running up and down. The President promised but money was not delivered.

Through you, Madam Speaker, let Parliament put it categorically clear to Government that people who are talented and are making Uganda proud should not be turned into beggars. We need to appreciate their talent and we must avail money through the relevant ministries to ensure that our best shine within and outside the country. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the way we can do it, is probably in the new budget cycle to create a special vote for this category. If you agree, we will find a home for that vote.

3.14
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Madam Speaker, as a representative of persons with disabilities, I would like to first of all thank you, as an individual, and not as the Chair. You have really been there for persons with disabilities; the albinos and others. It is not only these young girls; you have been there for them and we have witnessed this.

THE SPEAKER: Children, wait. I need to introduce these children –this is your job. You sit and wait, I have to introduce you. Hon. Asamo, continue.

MS ASAMO: Madam Speaker, this House debated a motion on supporting Paralympics. The minister in charge of sports promised here that a budget would be brought particularly for these people but I do not know what is happening. Even in the primary and secondary schools sports, the head teachers have to call Members of Parliament, “Please honourable, can you contribute? These children are going to be taken to Mbarara and you know they are blind.” The ministry is not doing anything and sometimes we have to dig into our pockets.

I would like to demand - Madam Speaker, the other day you were very annoyed when you were at a certain function. This girl is going to carry the flag of Uganda and when she comes back and that flag is flying, we shall be very proud. You will get somebody running to say, “This is the winner” and they will bring a motion here appreciating her. When the person is struggling, nobody wants to assist. I think it is high time persons with disabilities are taken like human beings.

First, I am a woman and the disability comes later. That girl is a sports lady and that disability comes later. I think we need to have hearts. There is a young lady here, we have one who has been in Amuria and she is blind. She does not even get a lot of money yet she won a gold medal – (Interjection) - Four gold medals? I think the MP is correcting me. This young lady is rotting in the village and nobody is concerned.

However, when she brought the medal, everybody was running around. When it came to following up the money, I think hon. Susan Amero moved in the ministry many times and you know how hon. Amero is. It was until they gave her the money - I do not want to go to the details.

We must take all citizens equally. Today it is the Cranes and they will be given something. However, for Paralympics, a motion was brought here and I think the recommendations of that motion should be brought back so that we ask the Minister of Education and Sports to come and explain where the budget for Paralympics is. Our children are trying to perform and shine but that is the challenge.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for your heart because you are coming out of sympathy but for how long will you do this? Hon. Beatrice Anywar has said that there is another one looking for money and they have written to us letters and you feel pain. Therefore, their talents are going to be destroyed and demoralised. By the time they reach there, they will even have a negative attitude thinking they have no support from their own country. I think Government should come up and be able to support their citizens – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Information from hon. Julius Acon who is a very big sportsman. 

MR ACON: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give is that very many times, these sportsmen and women who have won medals have been promised houses built for them and a monthly salary, which has never happened. Every time I look into this, we have many sports in a year. 

Coming up this month, we have African games where some of these athletes are going to win medals and they will bring the same matter to the House. That is why I would like to urge the Government to at least come with a special portion for these athletes. 

In Uganda, I would say she is the third lady ever in the history to win the medal. In 1998, it was Wamombesha from Mbale District. They promised her a house and it was not given to her. Dorcus Inzikuru was given a house. I think we should follow up and we do not need to keep coming time to time on the Floor here to raise this issue where many medals have been won in this country.

Therefore, as Members of Parliament to keep contributing, I think time will come where we shall get tired. Let it come from the Government and some companies or well-wishers. This is the information I wanted to give.

THE SPEAKER: We have already taken a decision. Hon. Asamo, let us conclude; we have got other work.

MS ASAMO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Members who have accepted to contribute. They say the little you give to the poor will also deliver something else. I will contribute Shs 1 million for this young girl. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the deductions will be effected in August. Honourable members, I was still continuing with my communication. 

I received a petition from the Uganda Fish Maw Traders Association. Fish maws are a by-product of fish. They are not fish. These traders have been arrested by the UPDF soldiers, not in the water but outside the water. 

Their fish has been confiscated; some of their assets burnt and some disposed of by the soldiers under unclear circumstances. There is a complaint that the ministry has issued guidelines which lock out the small African operators and are favouring the foreign companies. I thought I should let you know about that one. 

I have decided that I will invite the Prime Minister and the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries so that we look at this. I did not know about fish maws. I am told it is very big business and it employs very many people. The Prime Minister will be arranging for the meeting so that we can discuss their problem together with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Agriculture. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, there were some matters of national concern. Hon. Anywar, please use two minutes. Can I call upon our public relations office to really style up? Each time people come and sit in the gallery, I have to call someone and inquire who the people are. That is their job; it is a very simple task.

3.21
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I was away two weeks ago and there were some allegations that I am one of those members of Parliament who are very unhappy with the catering service in Parliament. There were also allegations that there are already cases of poisoning of Members from the parliamentary canteen.

When I read this information, I found it disturbing because I have never complained about the catering service in our parliamentary canteen. That was false and I am not one of them. 

Secondly and more grave is to allude in the media that within the institution of Parliament, there is a threat to Members’ lives through the service, which is offered within the institution. This is something we need to clarify. This is going to scare Members who are here. Even the public might think that our intention of being here is different. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I wanted to bring it – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give is this is blackmail. There are people who are interested in taking the contract for the canteen. We, the consumers have never complained. There is a restaurant in Ntinda, near my residence and the owner of that restaurant is the one who bid for the tender. He is the one behind all this mess in order to win a contract to offer the service to this institution. 

We cannot accept people to go to use people’s names in the media. We have never complained about being poisoned. Let any Member in this House state that this caterer has poisoned a Member of this House. 

Madam Speaker, being the chairperson of the Commission, you should fight these type of people who want to blackmail and spoil somebody’s business. If they don’t want to give him the business, they should not smudge his name.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I have taken note and we shall advise you after meeting with the Commission.

3.24
MR GIDEON ONYANGO (Independent, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Last week on Friday, a resident was shot dead in Busitema Forest in Busia District. 

All security forces, including the UPDF and police have denied responsibility. A post mortem was done and the medical report shows that the person was shot. The National Forestry Authority has also denied responsibility. I would like to put this to the House that I think it would be proper for Government to come out and tell us what is happening in the forests. Is Government responsible for the security in the forests or is there rebel activity taking place in the forest?

Secondly, during the burial which I attended, there were claims by a number of political actors that Busitema Forest was given away to an investor. I would like Government to come out clearly and explain to Ugandans whether Busitema Forest was given out to investors because there are a lot of lies – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, what is the name of the victim so that we can ask the police to take us through?

MR ONYANGO: The victim is called Moses Oundo. Other people were arrested but with my intervention, they were released. There is information from hon. Macho from Busia.

THE SPEAKER: We should not have information; this is not a debate. You are raising an issue for the Government to answer [MR MACHO: “We share a forest.”] You share the forest? (Laughter)- Okay, let us hear from hon. Macho.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I am a neighbour to hon. Gideon Onyango and we share the forest. (Laughter) 

I would like to inform the august House that when you go to Busia District, you would think that we are at war with Kenya. There is too much deployment of security organs; UPDF, Police and there are also people who drive a black numberless vehicle, arresting people without any cause. 

In fact they go to the extent of going into people’s houses to see what people have cooked. When you have cooked chapatti, they claim that you have smuggled wheat floor. This is very unfair to our people. 

Many times, I have told the security organs there to give uniforms to the personnel who carry guns. They need to have uniforms so that the people are able to identify who is a security operative and who is not. That is why we have problems on the border. 

I therefore would like to inform Members that there is a very big problem in Busia. This, however, is not just in Busia; from Busia to Kampala we have 18 road blocks. I do not know what all these are for. There is a roadblock in Mayombe, another in Busitema, again in Kibimba, in Iganga, Jinja, Namanve and other one in Musita. I do not know why we are going to this extent. This is bringing down business – (Member time out)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Internal Affairs is directed to come and report to this House the  circumstances under which Mr Oundo was killed and to also explain the deployment in Busitema Forest and the different security organs in Busia. Thank you. 

Honourable members, before hon. Koluo comes, on this side are children from Tagy Primary School, Entebbe Municipality in Wakiso District. They are represented by hon. Tumusiime and hon. Seninde. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.30
MR JOSEPH KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the status of Toroma Health Centre IV. Toroma Health Centre IV is still regarded as a health centre III because it receives very few medical supplies. Since the supplies are few, the patients from that health facility are referred to Soroti Hospital and others are referred to Katakwi Hospital.

Madam Speaker, this is denying the people of Toroma the right to healthcare. My prayer is that the Government, especially the Ministry of Health, considers upgrading the status of this health facility to a health centre IV instead of health centre III. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, of course under the Government policy, every constituency should have a health centre IV but I hope the minister will come and give us an update on what they are going to do about Toroma or when. She is here.

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue being raised by the Member of Parliament for Toroma is an issue that we have picked up because we realised that there are health centres IV which are “health centres IV” by name but operationally, they are health centres III.

Madam Speaker, we commissioned our teams to go to all the districts and now we have a list of all health centres IV that are fully functional and health centres IV that are “health centres IV” by name. This is what we are working on. 

However, I would like to make it clear that the budgeting process was already done. We shall be able to correct this in the next financial year because the focus for this year, as you are aware, is to commence on the construction of health centres III in sub-counties where there are no health centres III and also upgrading health centres II to health centres III in those sub-counties where there are no health centres III. Therefore, Madam Speaker, that is a valid issue but I request colleagues that we shall correct that in the next financial year. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, join me in welcoming the children of Rimma Kindergarten School from Busiro County East in Wakiso. Please, stand up. They are represented by hon. Sseggona and hon. Seninde. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.34
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance which occurred in my constituency. On 24th July – this week – policemen came and raided a village and arrested nine people in the wee hours and this has caused a lot of discomfort in the area. The arrested people include: Joseph Ssensiko, Jeremiah, Julius Bukenya, Kayanja, Robert Muyingo, Mohammed Nsereko, Sam Katongole, Lawrence Ssemakula and Cosima Kavuma. The police broke into their houses at 3.00 a.m. and arrested these people brutally, destroying their property including doors, windows and others.

Madam Speaker, the police acted contrary to Article 212 of the Constitution of Uganda which compels them to protect the lives and property of the people. The people are living in fear after being brutally and unlawfully arrested during the wee hours.

Madam Speaker, my prayers are that-
    1. the Ministry of Internal Affairs comes and explains why the police are arresting people in my area at night and at the same time destroying their property;
    2. the police compensates for the people’s property destroyed.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Internal Affairs is directed to come on Wednesday and explain to the country the issue of Bukoto, as requested by hon. Muyanja.

Honourable members, join me in welcoming hon. Lilian Greenwood, Member of Parliament for Nottingham City in England. She is the first woman Member of Parliament in that constituency ever. We welcome her. (Applause) 

We welcome Kate Faragher and Susie Latta of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, UK. They are here to give us training in running the affairs of committees. They are training the women Members of Parliament. You are welcome and thank you very much. (Applause)

3.37
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to the transport crisis in my region. We all know that of recent, there have been a series of accidents that led to loss of lives on the northern route and we are all saddened by what happened. However, the reaction of the Transport Licensing Board has been a bit erratic and very inconsiderate. 

Madam Speaker, GAAGAA Enterprises operates over 70 buses and 50 of these buses ply the West Nile route. The recent accident that led to the immediate suspension of the operations of the entire fleet of GAAGAA involved a bus that was coming from Koboko. We were surprised when the Transport Licensing Board took a unilateral decision to suspend the entire fleet, yet there are conditions or regulations that the ministry has put in place where buses are actually licensed singularly and given a licence to operate on a particular route.

After the recent accident, all the buses from GAAGAA were summoned and so far, 30 buses have been fitted with speed monitoring instruments and many are still undergoing verification. This suspension has crippled transport on the West Nile and northern routes. 

As this verification and various refresher courses are going on for the drivers, managers and others, the bus owners association sat yesterday, after pleading with the ministry but the plea was not yielded to. They took a decision that if the ministry does not comply with their prayers to stop all operations across the country, they will cripple transport operation in the entire country with effect from tomorrow.

Madam speaker, can this House prevail on the Ministry of works and Transport to see that something is done so that as the various conditions that have been put on ground to be fulfilled are undertaken these buses should be allowed to operate. Otherwise, it is the common man suffering.

Madam Speaker, these are locals who have invested their money. No bus owner would wish to invest money to be wasted on the road and many of them bought these buses using loans. Now, when you suspend the entire fleet, what happens to their monthly loan repayment – (Interruption)

MR ETUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. The information I would like to give to the Member of Parliament for Ayivu County is that from the time GAAGAA Bus Service was suspended from operation, the transport fare to Arua has hiked. KKT Bus has increased the transport fare for the Comfort Bus from Shs 50,000 to Shs 75,000.

Besides, this suspension has come at a time when primary and secondary schools are participating in games and sports. GAAGAA Bus Service is used by most schools to transport students from their various schools to the activity areas. Madam Speaker, because the bus company has been suspended, people have resorted to lorries to transport students and pupils to go and participate in games and sports activities. This has exposed students to more risks. It is, therefore, our prayer that GAAGAA Bus Service is allowed to operate. That is the information I wanted to give. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I conclude on this matter, I would like to say that all bus drivers go through the Transport Licensing Board (TLB) before they are given an appointment. It is, therefore, incumbent upon the Ministry of Works and Transport to assess these bus drivers.

Secondly, the ministry should look into the mechanical inspection that buses are subjected to. As I said, for the GAAGAA Bus Service case, so far 30 buses have undergone - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Works and Transport is here. I do not know whether she is ready to say something. Would you like to be given more time to think? Otherwise, hon. Atiku says there is a looming countrywide strike by bus owners.

3.43
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Ntege Azuba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that GAAGAA Bus Service was suspended from operation for safety of passengers; safety of passengers comes first before everything. Otherwise, it does not make sense having buses plying the routes yet the same buses are being involved in accidents.

As a ministry, we took the decision to suspend GAAGAA buses and look into what is causing the accidents because in the recent past, lives have been lost. The findings show that the faults are to do with the drivers. We took that decision to suspend the bus service from operation for only one month.

However, I would like to request that Members should understand that safety of passengers is very important; they should leave the ministry do that work so that Ugandans who use that bus and the owners of buses come out in a win-win situation and we save the lives of Ugandans .

3.45
MR STEPHEN KISA (NRM, Luuka South County, Luuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance.

Last week, a group of people entered Luuka District, particularly my constituency of Luuka South, claiming they were mineral explorers. They informed the community that they were going to start scooping soil and sand from people’s land to find out the existence of minerals in Luuka District.

As political leaders in the area, we have not been informed of this activity. However, these people have started manoeuvring the population, tipping them to allow them to start mineral exploration in the area.

Madam Speaker, this is an era of land grabbing and we are scared. My prayer is that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should explain procedures under which explorations are done.

Secondly, if the intention is good, these said investors should always invite the local leaders before involving the community. 

Thirdly, the ministry should gazette these people in case they are licensed to avoid suspicion and exploitation.

Lastly, the ministry should also tell us whether these soil and sand scoopers have presented an environmental impact assessment plan to protect the environment of Luuka. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I can take the information. 

THE SPEAKER: But you have finished your submission. Hon. Abbot, I know you have a problem.

3.46
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island, Namayingo):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give is that if we are not careful, we are going to have problems in this country. I come from Namayingo District and these people that the Member has talked about are everywhere. When you go to Banda, Kigulu Island - some of these people are armed. When you go to them, they say local leaders have no powers over them. 

The Government should come out clearly and tell us who is involved in this activity. As I talk - hon. Kisa has said some people are coming as land grabbers. In fact, the information we have is that the whole of Loluwe Islands was leased to someone. The ministry should come and tell us who actually leased the entire island to an individual. This is a very serious matter. That is the information I wanted to give, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we touched briefly on this issue. I would like to remind you that last week, there was a big headline in the papers about who owns mineral licenses in Busoga.

People have taken licenses all over Busoga and we do not know who they are. Actually, we do not know when they were given and Government has never told us anything. I think these people will go to the entire country wherever there are minerals and grab them.

Therefore, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development should come and explain to us how these people come and who they are supposed to contact. When we were in a meeting, hon. Abbot Ouma told us that these people have cars with soldiers and they cannot talk to them. I think eventually, Ugandans are going to become dispossessed if we are not careful. Therefore, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development must come next week and explain to us about those licenses. It is a very serious issue. 

3.50
MS SARAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning an army officer called Fred Mwesigwa, who is evicting people from 10 square miles of a forest reserve in Kinyogoga sub-county.

I raised this issue earlier and on that day, you ordered the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to bring a report before the House, which report has never been submitted. This gentleman has gone ahead to evict and intimidate people. People are living in fear and we are wondering how Col Mwesigwa received a land title on a forest reserve – (Interjections) - No. The other one is Col Fred Mwesigwa. He is not the one. 

I have a letter from National Forestry Authority confirming ownership of the forest reserve and I beg to lay the letter on the Table. I also request you, Madam Speaker, to order the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to produce a report before the House on the issue concerning forest reserves in Kinyogoga sub-county. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that matter was with us in the last session and we asked the ministers to come. Therefore, the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs is required to come here on Tuesday and explain to us what action he is taking because the issue of Kinyogoga is a long outstanding matter.

3.52
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, the matter for which I rise concerns three different types of strange water weeds that have invaded Lake Kyoga. These strange water weeds invaded Lake Kyoga in 2013. Today, they have cultivated a nasty behaviour of growing out of control. It is awful.

Two weeks ago, as I was travelling to my constituency and crossing from Nakasongola to Namasale, we found half of the lake area at the crossing point covered by these strange water weeds. They form a very thick canopy on the water surface, to the extent that they have affected navigation.

Madam Speaker, we are worried. We do not know whether at one time, the roots of these weeds will not lead to collapse of the ferry. In addition, as we circumvented the weeds, we were worried as to whether we would not run out of fuel because the operators of the ferry did not expect that. Fishing expeditions are greatly affected in Lake Kyoga and even the calm water surface has become a breeding ground for mosquitoes.

Five years down the road, we have not seen any intervention from Government. What is the problem that to date, there is no single attempt by Government to manage the weed that is currently expanding unabated? Madam Speaker, can you kindly help us?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems the people who live on the mainland do not consider the people who have to use water all the time. If that weed finishes our ferries, there will be a breakdown of transport. I do not know if it is the Ministry of Works and Transport or the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries that is in charge of the ferries. I do not know who is in charge of the water and who should take care of the weed.

It has been five years of reporting. Hon. Anthony Okello has raised that matter many times in this House. Who is doing anything about Lake Kyoga and the water hyacinth there? Prime Minister -

3.55
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, this matter has been discussed extensively in Cabinet and both ministers of Agriculture and Water were directed to take action. Maybe you could ask them to come and brief Parliament on the steps they have taken. Otherwise, steps have been taken.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Minister for Water and Environment should make a joint statement concerning the spread of the water hyacinth on Lake Kyoga and the failure of transport there. That should be on Thursday as we have many issues on Tuesday and Wednesday.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, hon. Sarah Najjuma, during her presentation, had promised to lay a document on the Table but she has not done so. I think it is procedurally right for her to lay it on the Table. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Go to the microphone and speak to the document, for the record. What is the document, date and author?

MS NAJJUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The letter is from National Forestry Authority dated 20 February 2017. National Forestry Authority presents its compliments to you. The letter is addressed to Dean Bategaya and Company Advocates. I beg to lay. 

3.58
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda North County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in relation to the newly created councils, which started operations this financial year. Unfortunately, these councils have not been given any funds. The sub-counties and the different districts have managed to second some officers but you cannot second officers to a town council that does not even have an office.

These people are now putting politicians on pressure. For example, in the town council in my constituency, hon. Jovah Kamateeka and I are now paying rent for the town council to operate. My prayer is that we find money for these town councils so that they can start operating. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is directed to come here and give an update on when he will finance the new town councils. Thank you. 

3.59
MR PATRICK OPOLOT (NRM, Kachumbala County, Bukedea): Madam Speaker, my issue is also in relation to the new town councils. Much as my colleague is addressing the issue of lack of funding, there is also a dilemma in the administration of these councils. It is provided that once these new administration units are created, the councillors who come with the new administration unit elect and form their government. 

However, the Electoral Commission has issued a statement stopping them from forming governments and directing them to still be supervised by the LCIII chairpersons of where they belong. This is causing a lot of confusion. (Interjections) No, those elections have been called null and void and they are supposed to substantively report to the mother LCIII sub-county chiefs. Practically, it does not augur well with the new - Can we direct Electoral Commission to allow these new town - (Interruption)

MS LOWILA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, there is a big concern on this issue of the new town councils that became effective on 1 July 2017. Honourable colleague, I would like to give you information that there is selective operationalisation of some of these town councils. Some of the new town councils were given funding and elections are also being carried out in them.

Therefore, we are concerned because we have not been given the criteria they have used to operationalise some town councils and leave out others. We created 91 town councils, which became effective on 1 July 2017 but there is selective implementation by the Government. That is the information I wanted to give you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to item 3. The Minister of Local Government should come and brief this House on how we are going to manage the new town councils since they have not been elected. This should be done on Thursday.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON WORLD BREASTFEEDING WEEK

4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Every year, the world commemorates the World Breastfeeding Week and it takes place from 1st -8th August annually. The importance of this day is to raise awareness on breastfeeding and its benefits to both the mother and the child as well as to increase breastfeeding rates and improve the health and survival of babies around the world.

Uganda is a signatory to the Innocenti Declaration of 1990. This was a meeting that was held in Italy that declared the World Breastfeeding Week to promote, protect and support breastfeeding. This commitment was reaffirmed further at the 2012 World Health Assembly that called upon member countries and all global actors to commit more actions and resources and to improve infant feeding practices. 

Madam Speaker, Members are talking, especially here - 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. This is very important. Listen to the Minister of Health.

MS OPENDI: Breastfeeding is the foundation of life that provides perfect nutrition for babies and protects them against diseases including obesity and the Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs) that are now becoming rampant in our population. 

Research shows that children who are not breastfed exclusively for six months, in adulthood actually develop cancer, diabetes and high blood pressure. Therefore, it is important that Members take this issue seriously if we are to fight NCDs and also improve the intelligence quotients of the children in this country.

Breastfeeding is the richest and unrivalled source for all nutrients for human growth and survival of the child and the practice of breastfeeding a child is inherently human. 

This year, World Breastfeeding Week will be held under the theme “Breastfeeding: Foundation of Life” and we shall focus on three main aspects that are vital for sustainable development of the society. Breastfeeding prevents malnutrition in all its forms and that will be the first focus area. The other will be that breastfeeding ensures food security for infants and young children. Lastly, breastfeeding contributes to nourishing people and nations out of hunger and poverty cycle.

In Uganda, the Ministry of Health has been recommending early initiation of breastfeeding within the first hour of delivery, exclusive breastfeeding for the first six months must also be done and of course, the introduction of complimentary foods can be done after six months. 

As Government, we have put in place a number of measures to improve breastfeeding in the country, one of which is that we have a conducive environment policy that is in place. We have the second National Health Policy of 2010 that promotes breastfeeding as an integral component of this policy. 

The other is that Government is enforcing the International Code of Marketing of Breastfeeding Substitutes. This code prohibits the advertising of food supplements, prohibits health workers, in any way, from talking about these food supplements to mothers at the health facilities and completely prohibits those that may wish to donate or promote breastfeeding materials not to put any logo on them. That is what this code is about and as a country, we have ensured that these adverts are not placed in our media.

The ministry has also developed and disseminated policy guidelines, information, educational and communication materials. The Government has been supporting baby friendly health facilities and I would like to commend you, Madam Speaker and the Parliament of Uganda, for leading by example by putting in place a baby friendly care centre here. 

However, Madam Speaker, we have challenges and allow me mention what the majority of the workers have been talking about; the issue of inadequate maternity protection legislation of 90 working days. Some of the mothers, especially those in the private sector, have had to lose their jobs because they are not allowed to be out of the work place beyond 60 days, even when the children are still young. That remains an issue.

As such, the case to invest in breastfeeding is critical to us all as we move towards the attainment of middle income status and Vision 2040. I will not read everything verbatim; this statement should have been uploaded on your iPads. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to Members of Parliament to join us in this campaign to promote exclusive breastfeeding for the first six months because statistics actually indicate that most of the young mothers of today do not take breastfeeding as an important issue. Also, at the district level, some of the districts do not have Assistant District Health Officers (ADHOs) who are supposed to promote and speak about issues of nutrition and breastfeeding as a whole.

Madam Speaker, please note that the national celebration will be held at Bulindi Primary School, Hoima District on 8 August 2018. You are all welcome. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, before I come to the Members, I would like to make a follow up. Last year, I think the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development directed all employers to create breastfeeding facilities. We would like to know how far this has gone. Is anyone following it up? How will it be enforced? 

4.10
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the Minister of Health that there is a lot of fear in Ssembabule concerning an outbreak of the Rift Valley Fever disease. (Interjections) Yes, it is a matter of national importance.

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable member, we are discussing the National Breastfeeding Week. No, please do not smuggle. We are debating the minister’s statement.

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, I am coming to the other one. It has come in here -

THE SPEAKER: No.

4.11
MS MARGRET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the minister for the statement on World Breastfeeding Week. Breast milk is the best food for babies. It has been balanced by God with the best composition and helps a child to develop his or her brain and teeth.

However, these days, ladies think that if you breastfeed, your breasts will collapse. Therefore, they want to give artificial feeding. I would like to inform them that whether you breastfeed or not, once you have given birth, your breasts will collapse and will never be the same - (Interruption)

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you very much, hon. Baba Diri. The information I would like to give you about breastfeeding is that when there is an outbreak, it affects the mothers. For example, when an outbreak of Rift Valley Fever comes in, mothers do not breastfeed their children and this affects them so much. Therefore, this is why - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Baba Diri, please conclude.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much. You know, milk has been developed according to animals. Breast milk for cows is best for calves, breast milk for dogs is best for puppies but we humans want our children to be breastfed on another type of milk and at the end of the day, our children will not develop well. If you see our children misbehaving these days, it is because of this milk formula, which we are using for our children.

I would like to beg all the mothers who are not breastfeeding but are instead using other formula that they should breastfeed their children so that they develop normally. Breast milk helps the children become very intelligent - (Member timed out.)

4.15
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the minister for the great message and a good statement she has presented. We all know the importance of breastfeeding and the greatest concern of some of us that represent village constituencies is, we have mothers who would wish to breastfeed but their feeding levels, the food they eat, is regrettable.

We would like the Ministry of Health to come up with some programmes that can set up nutrition centres, which will not only give information to breastfeeding mothers but will also be used to promote the programme and maybe give hope to these children that we are breastfeeding.

Secondly, we would also need to have some trainers, who are specialised in that field, to go and give lectures, sensitise our constituents and advise them on better feeding habits and child handling. However, you find that concentration is mostly in urban centres. We keep thinking of those with white collar jobs who can afford to buy milk from supermarkets while those disadvantaged ladies in the villages are suffering. 

Therefore, I would like the Minister of Health to come up with a programme that can give life and hope to those people in the village constituencies that we represent. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.17
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am happy to learn from the minister how important breastfeeding is and especially that if someone does not get a chance to breastfeed for six months, there is a problem in future in form of cancer, diabetes and high blood pressure. We have learnt this and indeed we are shocked because some of us did not know this. 

However, I am wondering whether those women in the villages and their husbands know that if someone does not get breastfed for six months, that person is susceptible to such diseases. That is why I urge the minister to have a deliberate programme of sensitising Ugandans about those diseases, which a person can get if they do not get enough breast milk during their childhood. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.18
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the minister for the report. Much as we know the value of breastfeeding, mothers need to be catered for, as the colleague has just stated. Food insecurity affects breastfeeding mothers more than ordinary people. As such, Government should factor in this aspect where breastfeeding mothers are catered for. You will find that even the cows that we milk are activated to produce more milk but human beings are left to God’s mercy. This is the time to look beyond that.

Domestic violence and its associated stress affect the flow of milk from breastfeeding mothers. Therefore, domestic violence is an aspect, which we must also factor in. 

Thirdly, I would suggest that with existing technology, we should go a step forward. We know and are aware that some of these corporate ladies are looking for survival but technology has enabled them to-express milk that can be kept for almost six months.

With your permission, I suggest that we should look at enhancing technology to enable women to preserve their milk beyond the ordinary time- Government should look into how to avail that technology in this country at an affordable price because it is very expensive and yet it can help corporate women.

Like we have blood donors, there are also ladies who have more milk than their babies can consume. I have ever breastfed two children at the same time, mine and that of my co-wife because my breast milk was more. I am speaking this because there are some ladies whom God has given more milk so let us promote-(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You conclude that point because it is new.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are mothers who have more than enough milk for their children however too much breast milk can cause sickness. If there is a way to press it out; it could be donated or kept somewhere for those children, especially whose mothers die at birth so that they are catered for.

4.23
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for a very good report. The first gift any mother can give to her child is breast milk. If you deny your child breastmilk, that means you are going to kill that child.

Sometimes we talk about breastfeeding towards the breast feeding week, that is why I would like to encourage the ministry to emphasise it in the entire country-(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform my colleague that we cannot talk about breastfeeding without demanding for a specific budget toward this activity. It is pertinent for this Parliament to demand for a provision in the next budget.

MR ABALA: Thank you, I would like the minister to tell us the plans they have in recruiting nutritionists in all the districts in the entire country because it is a big challenge. Sometimes women -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You were generous with your time.

4.25
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the minister for your statement. In the rural areas, mothers love breastfeeding their children. However, there is need to also sensitise them on good eating habits and supplementary feeding for the children.

Whereas hon. Anywar Beatrice gave us her experience that sometimes some mothers have a lot of milk, some of them on the other hand have depleted breast milk because of excessive alcoholism and smoking. 

I would like to call upon the Ministry of Health to help us sensitise the communities so that mothers reduce the intake of alcohol and smoking. The learning aids that the minister talked about are good and some of those pictures of women smiling while breastfeeding are seen in some health facilities but they do not replace them when they are old, honourable minister you need to keep replacing them. Thank you. 

4.26
MS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for such an important statement to the nation on the breastfeeding week.

Holistic healthcare for women especially when they are pregnant is very critical to prepare them for breastfeeding. However, the ministry should continue lobbying the men to support their women during breastfeeding. It is the ministry itself that was complaining that men share breast milk with the children and this was a challenge –(Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a father of four and I have never struggled for breast milk with my babies. The insinuation by the Woman Member of Parliament for Kampala is that I deny my children breast milk when they need it most.

Is she in order? If she does not have evidence of any manner unless she proves to us that she has undergone the same experience?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you substantiate.

MS NAGAYI SEMPALA: This information came from the Ministry of Health; saying that women are being harassed; we do not know whether it is true but we encourage men to be partners in this endeavour of breastfeeding. Let them support their wives by providing for them adequately especially during the first weeks of breastfeeding. 

We would like to urge our communities through the women councils to provide breastfeeding centres. We should encourage communal breastfeeding centres so that those women who cannot do it adequately can get support from the community, sub county, healthcare providers – (Member timed out.)

4.30
MS JANE NABULINDO (Independent, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the minister for the statement. I have some three issues to raise. 

First – (Interjection) - yes, I am a breastfeeding mother - the Government should come out with a budget to support the breastfeeding mothers. 

Secondly, the kind of work we do prohibits us from breastfeeding our children. A period of 60 days is not enough for a mother of twins or triplets. 

Thirdly, there must be a law to have breastfeeding mothers stay with their babies for a period of six months. Thank you.

4.31
MS ROBINAH SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice in thanking the honourable minister for that elaborate report on how we can improve the welfare of our children. 

I would like to request that in addition to breastfeeding, we add education and awareness. What is happening now is that women do not want their breasts to fall – to become “socks” as they term it – and they are now using certain brassieres that have implants. They even put implants in their breasts to keep them sharp. Many breasts have become infected with diseases resulting from that. 

Therefore, even before we reach the time for breastfeeding, we need to protect the young women by helping them to know the importance of the breast. My point is on prevention in terms of having –(Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. In addition to what my colleague is raising on the education of mothers, I would like to inform you that many young mothers do not know the importance of breastfeeding, especially the working mothers. When they leave work, they give maybe 20 minutes to breastfeeding yet a baby needs time to feed. 

We are saying that because we lack breastfeeding centres at the workplace, mothers do not give enough time to their babies, so they do not get enough milk. Therefore, in addition to what my colleague is raising, we need to add sensitisation and education of the young mothers even if they have not yet conceived. Thank you.

4.34
MS MARY KABANDA (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. 

My worry is about the venue where the celebrations are going to be held. It is at a primary school on 8 August 2018. Remember that children from upcountry schools drop out of school when they become pregnant. On that day, we expect sensitisation of mothers and yet some of those breastfeeding mothers are children who have dropped out of school. Therefore, we need a venue which will be accessible to all, especially the feeding mothers, so that they feel free.
 
This is information to the minister: Research has been carried out in America and Haiti on how to improve breastfeeding. It was done for three years in both countries and it was found that Moringa capsules improve milk production. Moringa is everywhere in Uganda. We were encouraged to grow Moringa but we were not told about its use. Is it possible for the ministry to carry out more research on that? I will give you the contacts. If it works, we could encourage our people to use it because every mother in the village can afford a cup of Moringa. Thank you.

4.37
MR HAROLD MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonzo County East, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. 

First of all, I would like to ask whether all the milk that comes from a woman is good milk. I am asking this because we seem to have taken it for granted that as long as a mother has given birth, that milk will always be good. I would like to get guidance from the technical people as to whether there has never been bad milk. 

If there is a possibility that some milk is bad, it means that the children that we have in this country have been fed on such milk. Are there any measures in place to test the milk before breastfeeding the children –(Interjections)- Information will come later; I would like to give this point first. Okay, I take the information if it is about the bad milk.

MR JAMES BABA: My honourable colleague, if you look around at these honourable members, all of them seem to be products of breastfeeding and you can see how healthy they are. Therefore, the issue of bad milk does not arise, unless medically proven. So far, there is no evidence that breast milk is bad. Otherwise, populations would be extinguished. Thank you.

MR MUHINDO: I still insist that we need to get a medical report on whether all breast milk is good.

Secondly, I would like to salute all the women who are breastfeeding, from those in this House to those out there, because this is the first survival step for a child. However, we have seen mothers who love breastfeeding but probably do not know all the requirements of sanitation and hygiene regarding breastfeeding. We have seen women who come right from the garden and the first thing they do is breastfeed without caring about how clean the breast has been throughout the day – (Member timed out)

4.40
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also thank the minister for the statement to the House about world breastfeeding week. 

I will start with the point that hon. Muhindo began with - good milk and bad milk. I guess what the minister did not tell us about is the precautions required, especially for mothers living with HIV. I must say that, as much as many mothers have been encouraged to breastfeed their children, most of them actually live in a lot of fear, thinking that anything can go wrong. Therefore, they would rather save their children. I am just talking about the fear which is out there. They would rather save their children and not breastfeed them. Perhaps, that is what hon. Muhindo was talking about.

I would also like to encourage us, Members of Parliament, and leaders; how many mothers here can actually breastfeed a child in public? I am just posing a question. A Member of Parliament in Australia was seen breastfeeding in the Chambers of Parliament. We need more role models, so that the public and the people out there – even the young girls that we are talking about - will know that breastfeeding is a good thing to do. 

I must also say that for those who have never breastfed, it is one of the best experiences you can ever have as a mother. It is the best way you can bond with your child – (Member timed out)

4.42
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the good statement. 

It is important to note that in the first two weeks after delivery, mothers produce breast milk that has protective substances. Therefore, if you deny your baby breast milk, you actually expose your baby and make them vulnerable. When the child comes out of the mother’s womb, it has to be protected.

Very many people are proud of their children refusing breast milk; they proudly say, “You know, my child has refused breast milk”. That is not true. You are proud for nothing. You are actually doing a lot of disservice to this baby. 

I would like to suggest that sensitisation be done at health centres I. A health centre I is a converging place for many people and they get a lot of information. We need information, especially for our young mothers. The young mothers seem to be very proud of not breastfeeding. They are too proud about it and yet breastfeeding is the best thing a mother should feel proud about. You are parent and parenting starts right from the womb, and bonding with the child requires that you are close to your child. 

I know that parents are both the father and mother, but a mother is very important. That is why we the Acholi, if you knock yourself, you do not say “father” – (Member timed out)

4.44
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to use this opportunity to thank the minister for making this statement on breastfeeding. 

I am a beneficiary of breastfeeding; being an only child, I did it for years. According to my mother, I would go and play football and then return to continue breastfeeding. As a result, we have a very strong bond. Up to now, she calls me “boy”. I do not know how many of us here are called boys.

Madam Speaker, breastfeeding is the first point of contact between a child and their mother. In our culture, if you want to provoke a fight, insult a person in reference to their mother. It will not call for any resting; it would automatically provoke a fight. This is because it is the point where you pick all the wisdom.

The question which we have today is: What is wrong with young girls today? They are out there, very protective of their breasts; they do not want their breasts to disappear. Actually, that is the problem. That is the fact out there. I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Health to sponsor breastfeeding related programmes on television and radio stations. Our appeal should be to young girls; we should urge and encourage them to support breastfeeding -   

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that I have to raise a point of order against my brother - boy. Women of this country are struggling almost single-handedly to feed and sustain families, especially the young children. We have seen so many mothers who have been abandoned by their so-called husbands or those that impregnated them. They leave the mother to struggle through the period of pregnancy and early childhood alone.

Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to allude that women of these days do not care for their children and yet 90 per cent of the children are in the hands of the mothers? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether he said it in bad faith.

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. I did not say that in bad faith. I was saying is that let us continue encouraging the young women out there, not the ones of our generation. I am talking about the generation of those who are 30 years and below. They do not want to breastfeed just because they fear that their breasts will fall, and that they will be rejected. Whatever the situation may be, even if you are rejected and abandoned by your husband or your fiancé, this should not be a reason for you to deny your child breast milk.

Finally, breastfeeding is a point of diagnosis. Our mothers actually diagnose our problems before we get to the health centres. They know when a child is healthy and when it is not. My grandmother used to tell us that if you want to know if a child is not fine, they will have a cold mouth. How do they get to know that? They get to know that when they are breastfeeding. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.48
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to observe and associate myself with comments from colleagues that breastfeeding is under threat in Uganda. While a number of countries have registered success in the practice of breastfeeding, I think that this is not the case in Uganda. I have observed that we do not have a national policy on breastfeeding, which everybody seems to understand. Therefore, in the absence of such a policy, it would be very hard for people who are supposed to breastfeed.

Breastfeeding is also under a threat from substitutes to breast milk. While there is an international code which stipulates and is supposed to regulate how those substitutes are supposed to be marketed, we seem not to be complying with those international codes. Therefore, I would like to find out from the minister what they have done to ensure Uganda is complying with the international code of marketing of breast milk substitutes in our country. It seems to me that all these formulas are just accessible to people everywhere and they have forgotten about feeding their children. 

Thirdly, countries have also put in place legal instruments or regulations to ensure children are breastfed. What has our Government done to ensure that we have laws in – (Member timed out.) 

4.51
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to thank the minister for prioritising breastfeeding because in the future, it can positively affect the health budget. Once the child is breastfed, he or she is resistant to many diseases. 

Secondly, I would like to applaud the Speaker because at least Parliament is one of the institutions that has a nursery, which caters for breastfeeding mothers. It actually encourages many women Members of Parliament, who are mothers, to breastfeed their children. 

Madam Speaker, there is a role for fathers to play in relation to breastfeeding. There has been neglect in society by fathers. There is a saying that “If you starve a milking cow, you equivalently get less.” A mother is like a cow because she has to feed and she is the source of the food. As we continue asking for Government to provide roads and infrastructure, fathers should take on their roles to provide resources for their wives such as food and even love. 

One of the things that affect breastfeeding is stress. This mother has to provide for the family and she is stressed, so she cannot breastfeed. Therefore, fathers need to motivate their wives. They need to tell them how attractive they still are while they are breastfeeding and not go for those who still have sharp breasts. This does not motivate mothers and they will not have enough – (Member timed out.) 

4.53
MS STELLA ATYANG (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for bringing this statement on breastfeeding to the Floor of the House. 

Breastfeeding is very important for the health of a child. As we sensitise the women to prioritise breastfeeding, it is key that we mainstream the component against alcoholism during breastfeeding. In rural areas, you actually realise that breastfeeding mothers take alcohol. They normally leave their babies at home with other children while they go away to drink. Of course, when they come back home, they do not mind about the child’s health or wellbeing. When it is time to sleep, there is a tendency for these women to oversleep and forget the children. Sometimes, they even roll over the children and end up killing them. Therefore, it is key that we stress the issue of alcoholism during breastfeeding. 

I would also like to comment on the issue of technology, which hon. Beatrice Anywar raised. It is a good idea but, of course, to whom are we packaging this information? This technology comes with certain conditions, which cannot be managed by our rural women – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, use half a minute to conclude on the point of technology. 

MS ATYANG: First of all, it calls for maximum hygiene. It also calls for certain conditions of storage like refrigeration, which are not found in the rural areas. Therefore, we should know where to say that and where not to say it. Thank you. 

4.55
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Health for the statement. 

In my opinion, breastfeeding is a multi-sectoral issue; it is not only an issue for the health sector. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has a stake because the issue of food insecurity affects breastfeeding mothers. This is because there is need for nutritious foods for the mothers to breastfeed effectively. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development also has a stake. The issue of domestic violence seriously affects breastfeeding mothers. We have heard of fathers neglecting their responsibility, abandoning their families. Therefore, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development also has a stake to really ensure that families live together and all the parents take up their responsibility.

I feel that the Ministry of Health can take on the responsibility of giving information about the effects of poor breastfeeding. However, the elite mothers, the working class and the dot-com mothers, may require a different strategy from the grassroots mothers. 

According to the information that some of us have, it is very important to note that the brain develops fully within the first two years of life. Therefore, this should really indicate to us the importance of promoting breastfeeding and ensuring that mothers breastfeed – (Member timed out.) 

4.57
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report. 

Members have discussed here that some mothers do not want to breastfeed. However, I do not want to totally agree with that because I know the majority of the mothers in the rural areas actually breastfeed children from the first day to at least two years. However, the question I would like to ask is: What has changed? Why the change? If there are mothers who do not want to breastfeed, why is that so? The simple answer I would like to give is that as leaders, we need to look at the socio-economic pressures on a woman. No woman would want to leave her child the whole day unfed on the breast. Well, as a woman, I would not do that and I have never done that.

Sometimes it is due to the socio-economic pressures. You have to go to a market very far away, and with the poor roads we have in the countryside, when it rains you cannot make it in time to breastfeed your child. It is not a matter of breastfeeding; it is the intervals - how many times are you able to breastfeed your child in a day. 

Just last weekend, I was in Pakwach and by 11.30 a.m. and women were still lining up for water. What happens to the children they have left at home? We need to look at our social services. Why are mothers not breastfeeding their children in time? As a working woman, you have to go to the field, you left your child in the morning and you cannot go back to breastfeed at lunch time; you cannot leave your job – (Member timed out.) 

5.00
MS CHRISTINE ACHEN (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will go straight to the point. In order for somebody to do something well, you have to be motivated. Men have abandoned their role. In a home, when a woman is breastfeeding, the man has to make sure the woman is breastfed the other way - I am very right there. (Laughter)

Our men of today leave their night roles. When a woman is pregnant up to the time of breastfeeding, they abandon that role which makes a woman fail to breastfeed a baby in a good way because she was not motivated at night. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

5.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Mutuuzo Peace): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What the Members have raised are the facts on the ground. There are big challenges we face as the Ministry of Gender in implementing the directives we issued last year. 

We have resorted to sensitisation because the majority of the people who are not breastfeeding exclusively are ignorant. When you visit health facilities, a big number of people who are delivering right now are young girls and yet the health service providers are few and cannot provide all the sensitisation they need. 

We are now coordinating sector agencies, which are responsible, so that we team up and do a good job. Even right here, we are sensitising. However, this is not all; a few hours ago, before I walked in here, we were meeting multi-sectoral organisations so that we can handle issues of domestic violence, breastfeeding and many other gender related issues together.

Luckily, we are getting resources in our budget very soon so that - (Interjection)- Not supplementary resources; we already passed the budget and we are about to get resources, which we are going to put aside to ensure that we do more robust sensitisation and iron out issues of gender based violence. They are burning issues and need a concerted effort. I, therefore, want to support the minister. We shall be part of the campaign throughout. Luckily, the whole Parliament is on board and many other people will also come on board.

However, Madam Speaker, we have realised that the people who benefit from the legislations that we do here are very few - those in the public sector and parastatal organisations. There are some of those who work in the public sector, like teachers in primary schools, who are not allowed to carry their children to school and yet they are the majority. Female teachers in public schools are quite a big number and constitute the biggest percentage of the staff in those schools. 

Therefore, mind-set change is the way to go. If we decided to imprison everybody who is not doing the right work concerning breastfeeding, I think we would fill the prisons. Therefore, the best we are doing is inspecting work places. We have so far inspected 15 ministries and we have realised that a number of them have shortage of space and they have not put aside any baby centres, even when they have young workers who are still in the productive age. We have already given them parenting guidelines and requested them to reserve space. We shall get back to them in the next five months to ensure that whatever guidelines we provided are being implemented.

Madam Speaker, we shall continue coordinating, sensitising and we are still on course. We are lucky that we have been joined and supported by the Ministry of Health. We wish many ministries could join us, especially the agriculture ministry because 70 per cent of the women who are into agriculture do not have the time to breastfeed their children. Many of them do not even own land, therefore they are employed by other people to work on their farms and yet those people do not give them time and a chance to breastfeed their children while they are working. 

Therefore, the best is to do sensitisation. We are translating guidelines and legislations into local languages so that people get to know what we do and legislate on and how it affects them. The best way to transform community is to give them the right information. Once they know how it affects them, - the dangers involved in not breastfeeding children - then people will be on board and work with the employees and employers to ensure that they are all on board and we do the right work together. 

5.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, colleague, for the contribution that you have made. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to start with the issue of the venue. We usually ask the district to identify the most suitable venue for any function that we are supposed to have at the district level. Therefore, this primary school was their choice. We, therefore, strongly believe that they will mobilize adequate labour. In addition, and most importantly, the beauty with Uganda currently is that even when people do not attend the function, there are local radios that will relay the information in the local languages in most of our districts.

Madam Speaker, somebody asked if breast milk is safe. It is extremely safe for the baby and that is why we recommend exclusive breastfeeding for the first six months. Thereafter, you may introduce some foods to this baby, but make sure that the child is breastfed up to two years. A few go up to four years like hon. Oyet, but two really is recommended.

Madam Speaker, allow me to inform Members that we actually have sensitisation that goes on at the health facility level. This is why we encourage all pregnant mothers to go for antenatal care. When you go to our facilities, whether it is health centres II or III, there are normally classes. Mothers who are pregnant and those who have been to the hospitals know that there is normally information given before a mother can be checked and before they leave. Therefore, it is something that we are not just doing now. 

What I am talking about is commemoration of the national breastfeeding week. However, messages on the importance of breastfeeding go on at health facilities and this is countrywide. It is also backed by the National Health Policy. Somebody said that we do not have any laws in place but this policy exists and it promotes and encourages breastfeeding.

Madam Speaker, the issue of breast pumps is not new. We have breast pumps in this country but Government cannot come in to buy them – (Interjection) – It depends on what you want to buy; they range from as low as Shs 35,000 to about Shs 150,000, depending on where you buy them from. A mother can buy one and express the milk but they must have a refrigerator to keep it. This milk can be kept in the refrigerator for even up to six months as she said. You do not need to add any chemicals.

Madam Speaker, the issue of implants in breasts is a serious matter and this is one of the causes of breast cancer. Since we are talking about breasts, yesterday we received a van from one of our very good Indian friends, His Excellency the Honorary Consul of Uganda to Mumbai; he donated a mammography van that is going to traverse all our districts, with health experts, screening women for breast cancer. This is because statistics indicate that most of the mothers that are referred to the Uganda Cancer Institute come when the breast cancer is already in advanced stage 4 and sometimes, it is difficult to save their lives. Therefore, we really need to appreciate this man who gave us a full donation of a fully equipped facility with state-of-the-art equipment in it. This will help in – (Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. You have just mentioned that we got a good van that will be traversing the country with health experts to screen women for breast cancer. What about the other types of cancer, because men are equally vulnerable to other forms of cancer like prostate cancer, penile cancer etcetera? Is this van only going to attend to women or men will also benefit from this facility?

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, the Uganda Cancer Institute has been conducting outreach programmes for cancer screening. However, this was a donation of a mobile van and that is why I talked about it. It has state-of-the-art equipment, different from what we have been using, which is a static health facility. Therefore, with this van, the health experts can go and stage anywhere and screen for cancer. They will be screening for cervical, prostate and other cancers. However, in the van there is mammography equipment that will be able to electrically screen for breast cancer in women.

Madam Speaker, allow me to conclude. Colleagues, it is not lack of information that makes young girls not breastfeed. We have a challenge - I do not know whether it is competition - where young mothers of today want to remain with sharp breasts because they believe that if they do not do that, their husbands may go looking for other women. That is where the problem is. Therefore, while we talk of sharp shooters, people are also thinking of sharp breasts. (Laughter)

I would like to appeal to colleagues; please, let us join hands and promote breastfeeding, especially the men because you are part of the problem. Madam Speaker, some of the statements being made here by colleagues are from personal experiences - a mother is breastfeeding but you also want something on the other side. (Laughter) This is very unfortunate. (Laughter) This was mentioned by one of the Members. 

Hon. Nabilah Naggayi talked about the challenge of men and the information she heard from the Ministry of Health that some men take breast milk. Madam Speaker, this is a trend that is growing. The challenge we have is that some of these men are being deceived by witchdoctors sometimes, that this breast milk can actually treat some of the diseases that they have like HIV/AIDS, cancer and even male dysfunction. They think they can be cured by breast milk. This myth is what is resulting into this trend of men going for breast milk.

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was just one good example from hon. Joseph Koluo. I will allow him to tell us about a situation where someone died but the child has grown up. Use just one minute.

5.16
MR JOSEPH KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report presented. 

I would like to assure the whole House and the people of Uganda that breastfeeding is 100 per cent very good. Two months ago, my brother lost his wife. We tried to take that child to a baby home centre in Soroti but we could not. So, I decided to bring that child to Kampala where we had one of our sisters who was also breastfeeding another child. I wish there is a way I could lay the photo of this child on the Table. 

I think we should encourage our mothers to breastfeed. Maybe what we should do, as parliamentarians, is to ensure that sensitisation of mothers, especially those upcountry, is done very well using the village health teams. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO ESTABLISH NATIONAL FOOD RESERVES

5.17
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, this motion is for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to establish national food reserves. This motion is moved under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of this House. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, under Objective XXII of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy enjoins the State to take appropriate steps to encourage people to grow and store adequate food, establish national food reserves and encourage and promote nutrition through mass education and other appropriate means;

AND WHEREAS objective XXIII in the Constitution urges the Government to institute effective machinery for dealing with any hazard or disaster arising out of natural calamities or any situation resulting in displacing of people or serious disruption of their life;

AWARE THAT Goal 2 of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals calls upon the UN member states to end hunger and to achieve food security, among others;

NOTING THAT the country has over the years experienced droughts that have led to a decline in food production, an increase in food prices and acute shortages for the majority of the population;

CONSIDERING THAT the country occasionally enjoys surplus production of food crops, which are often wasted due to lack of market and poor post-harvest handling and that there have been several calls for the establishment of a national food reserve;

KNOWING THAT access to food is the most fundamental human need and that sustainable agricultural development is urgently needed to prevent the reoccurrence of food crises such as those experienced recently;      

CONVINCED THAT food security is a matter of utmost urgency for the Government and that the establishment of national food reserves will play a key role in attaining sustainable food security and independence, averting the collapse of food prices due to overproduction, and providing emergency responses and humanitarian assistance in Uganda;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that Government urgently establishes a National Food Reserve.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion Seconded)

THE SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by several Members of this House. You can justify your motion. 

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have moved the motion and indicated the provisions of the Constitution of this country that require Government to establish national food reserves. This is a matter of a constitutional directive, which Government has abrogated for a long time. 

This particular provision in the Constitution, which is part of the articles of the Constitution by amendment 8A, was not a result of an amendment but was in the original Constitution of 1995. However, Government has all this time overlooked this particular provision and has not implemented it. This is therefore, an invitation to Government to implement these provisions of the Constitution. 

No country should claim to be secure unless the food security of its people is guaranteed. Even the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, under Article 11, paragraph 2, requires governments to ensure that there are proper provisions and measures taken to ensure food security for the people. Our Constitution, as I have already said, states that Government shall endeavour that all Ugandans enjoy the rights and opportunities with regard to food security. It also states that the Government shall establish food reserves. 

This is a very important and fundamental issue because it is about the livelihood of the people. In case of disasters, the population completely becomes vulnerable. We have seen this in the recent history when we experienced fluctuating food prices in this country. Last year, Government even endeavoured to supply some food to the citizens. I would like to say that it was more or less a mockery because where I come from in Kaliro, households were given food but it was only about two to three kilogrammes per household. This is not sustainable and it is not acceptable. Government should simply come up with a measure of establishing national food reserves and make sure that there is food in times when we need it. 

Madam Speaker, last year, some Members travelled to China under your leadership and I was one of them. When we got there, one of the things the Chinese reminded us about very fast was that they had actually supplied us with food; they had donated rice to Uganda. I think Uganda should not accept this because we consider ourselves to be the food basket of the region but here we are, looking for food from miles and miles away. So, there is every demand that this Government should implement what the makers of this Constitution foresaw. 

National food reserves are important. One, once they are established, definitely there will be a direct impact on the production of food. The reserves will need to be fed with food and this means the producers will have to up their production because there will be market for the products. Two, it is also important to note that once these reserves are in place, the price of produce will be stabilised. If there is shortage of food, the reserves can release food into the market. This would mean that people can afford to buy food at a fair price. When there is a rise in production like is happening now, it means that there is market for the produce. 

As I speak, people are grappling with their produce. They have maize and beans but there is nowhere to sell them. Maize and beans are the highest produced cereals in this country. Actually, Uganda is a net exporter of beans. Other countries buy maize from Uganda to build on their food reserves as you will hear later from my colleagues. 

We have had instances of disasters. We have had displacement of people like it happened in Bududa and other places. We need food to be available. Once this happens, Government starts looking everywhere for food but why should we go to that extent? 

I would like to inform this House that the Government of Uganda of the olden days once run these national food reserves. They were there and were being run through the commodity exchange. The food reserves were in different parts of this country, including Jinja and other places. Once privatisation happened, this whole system failed. At the time of compiling this information, these national food reserves had not been sold off but they are there lying idle and unutilised, or those who were utilising them were using them as free facilities, according to research findings.

What we would like to say with this motion is that Government cannot leave the duty of preserving food for the population to private individuals because the private people who are running their own silos are doing it for purposes of making a lot of money from a community, which is hungry. Why should a community that is suffering and hungry be made to buy food at a price that is probably 10 times more? Today, maize is just Shs 200 or Shs 300 per kilogramme in some parts of the country. It will be surprising that the price of maize will reach Shs 1000 or even Shs 1500 when it is no longer available and people will go hungry. 

We are trying to remind the Government that this is their fundamental duty, which is actually a demand of the Constitution of this country. Government should come up and establish these reserves as a way of guaranteeing the security of food for our people. 

Food should be economically and physically available. Economically in a way that it should be affordable when there is hunger. There should be some way of making food affordable for the people. Physically available means that when there is scarcity of food in the communities, then there is somewhere these people can get it from. It is for that reason that this motion is brought to this House. 

I would like to invite colleagues to support this motion because it is very important. It deals with every household in this country. It deals with the economy of our people. It deals with the smallholder farmers who produce and afterwards they have no market for their produce. Actually, because of poverty, many people sell off their food and sometimes they sell it all. What happens in a situation where these people cannot feed their own families? Government should not run away from this responsibility. 

I, therefore, request the House to support this motion urging Government to establish these national food reserves. Since the infrastructure is in place already, it should not be very expensive for this Government. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS MUGENI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising is about the absence of the minister for the docket that we are talking about. We know very well what Ugandans went through last year and the matter we are discussing is very important to this country. Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the minister in charge of this docket to be present as we discuss this matter? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think the debate is raising serious policy issues. The matter hon. Lubogo raised indicates that actually, the silos are there and yet for many years we have been told that they were disposed of. I think we need the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. The minister in charge of trade is here; you know about the silos, can you speak to the issues?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I think this motion would actually involve more than the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. I would beg that colleagues from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries also be present so that the two ministries can respond to this.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, tell us whether they sold the silos or not.

MR WERIKHE: We will be able to respond to that after the debate has ensued.

THE SPEAKER: The minister in charge of agriculture is not here.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, at times we get disturbed. On several occasions, the Speaker of Parliament has been here saying that when an issue is on the Order Paper, at least one minster from that docket should be around. 

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has four ministers. This item has been on the Order Paper since Tuesday; it did not just come up today. We have come back for another session and the ministers have begun their same games of hiding here and there, delaying this and the other.

Madam Speaker, when we were receiving the State-of-the-Nation Address, I remember very well you said that few Bills had been processed and few items had been handled and one of the issues that had caused that was the absence of ministers. I think it is high time, Madam Speaker, that you put yourself in a position – I do not know which rule you will evoke – to make sure that these minsters attend the House. If they cannot handle what they have been entrusted with, let them tell us so that we can see how to continue proceeding with matters in their absence. Otherwise, their absence is delaying and affecting our performance. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, ever since this week began, we have had debates on very important issues and we have deferred them because the ministers were not there. I am warning the ministers; we shall be forced to evoke Article 118 of the Constitution. We will be forced to censure minsters because we cannot go on like this. You are the Government and I am warning you. Article 118 will be invoked very soon. So, let us defer this matter until next Tuesday.

5.35
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate hon. Kenneth Lubogo for tabling this motion. I am not debating his motion, but in 2012 this House voted money for two items in financial year 2012/2013 - for the petroleum reserves and silos. I can recollect that money was voted for these two items and we were assured by the minister that they were revived.

Madam Speaker, we would like to have the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development here to explain to the House what happened to the money we voted for in financial year 2012/2013 to revive the petroleum reserves and food silos. I was part of this House that voted the money. The fact that an honourable member is moving a motion urging Government to handle a matter for which we voted money means there is a big problem, Madam Speaker. 

We need the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come here and explain. Money was voted for in financial year 2012/2013 to revive petroleum reserves and food silos because we had a crisis in the country. Our people in Teso and Karamoja were starving and had been reported to be eating termites and tree leaves.

MS ANN NAKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, the honourable colleague is very right. We established the Grain Council and we appropriated money to the Grain Council and they are running a warehouse receipt system. Therefore, we wonder what is going on when maize is being bought at Shs 200. We need to be updated. We appropriated money and the council is in place.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, I could have really spoken out of turn but the honourable member is a witness that we actually voted money for this purpose. We need a comprehensive report on both the petroleum reserves – (Interruption)

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to give some clarification on these two issues. 

Hon. Ann Nankabirwa talked about the Grain Council but I think we need to be mindful of what the mandate of the Grain Council is. My honourable colleague is talking about the appropriation of money for the silos. Yes, I believe we should actually demand for what has been done with the silos. 

However, Madam Speaker, this particular motion is talking about establishment – maybe I should have called it revival – of the national food reserves. This goes beyond setting up a silo. It goes beyond the receipt system she is talking about. This is because under the receipt system, a farmer deposits their produce and they can use it to get credit. 

A silo is a store. What we are talking about is where Government goes another step to buy the grains and stores these grains to be used in times when there is need. That has not happened. At least that particular portion has not been captured. That is the clarification I want to make.

THE SPEAKER: The minister in charge of cooperatives wants to say something.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (COOPERATIVES) (Mr Fredrick Gume): Madam Speaker, there are two things here. The first issue, as raised by hon. Lubogo, has to do with the storage of food to cater for unexpected eventualities. The issue of the warehouse is different, in a sense that the warehouse receipt system is based in the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and its role is clear. 

When maize prices are at their lowest now, the farmers are being encouraged to form cooperatives, get their produce and keep in the warehouse. If one has 10,000 tonnes of maize, for example, they can store their maize in the warehouse and they will be given a receipt, which can act as collateral, such that when the prices are low, the farmer can be able to use the receipt to get urgent financing in case he needs it. When the prices improve, then the maize can be sold such that the farmer gets maximum benefit.

Madam Speaker, I intend to produce a paper for the honourable colleagues to support the idea of farmers coming together, to get rid of the middlemen. The middlemen are a problem to the farmers. When we work on that chain, we will be able to solve the current problem. In fact, maize in my constituency is Shs 250 a kilogramme and the farmers cannot break even. I thought I would make that clarification. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Please, finish your submission, hon. Mpuuga.

MR MPUUGA: I thought the honourable minister would clarify the issues that were hanging in the air. However, he again threw a spanner in the works by introducing a new matter altogether.
Madam Speaker, the motion moved by hon. Lubogo is actually an indictment of the processes Government is undertaking. First of all, the minister has not clarified as to whether when we allocated money, they actually moved. Secondly, he has not also told us whether hon. Lubogo’s motion is actually moving ahead of their preparations. He has his own plan and yet we have a problem on our hands.

I believe we can process hon. Lubogo’s motion properly and in due course, we should be able to compel Government to report on what it is doing in a scattered manner, so that we can consolidate it into something feasible. Otherwise, mandates of ministries are different but the sufferings of our people are uniform. We have a mandate for those who are trading but we have also a duty to those who want food to eat. We, therefore, need to find a balanced way to deal with trade and food. I believe the Member’s motion is trying to bring the two in tandem - you are in position to have food and also trade when the need arises. We need to find a way and I do not think the minister has helped us.


THE SPEAKER: We are going to debate the motion fully when we have all the sector ministers here. Today, we have received the motion but the seconders of the motion have not yet spoken; we want them to speak when the sector ministers are here so that we can have a full debate on it.

The issue of food is very important. It is very annoying that Government does not take these matters seriously. Honourable members, the matter is deferred to Thursday next week. Item five. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO PROMOTE FRUIT PRODUCTION IN THE NORTH AND EASTERN UGANDA BY PARTNERING WITH INVESTORS AND OUTGROWERS IN THE CATCHMENT AREA OF SOROTI FRUIT FACTORY

5.43
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kyoga County, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity to present a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to promote fruit production in the north and eastern Uganda by partnering with investors and out growers in the catchment area of Soroti Fruit Factory.

“WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, under Objective IX of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, provides for the right to development and enjoins the State to encourage private initiative and self-reliance in order to facilitate rapid and equitable development;

AND WHEREAS the Constitution, under Objective XI of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, sets out the State’s duty to stimulate agricultural, industrial, technological and scientific development by adopting appropriate  policies and enactment of enabling legislation;

RECALLING THAT commercial fruit production for domestic consumption and export had been successfully undertaken in the 1960s under Government-run schemes in Kiige, Ongino and Odina, and these schemes produced various citrus fruits that supplied Nairobi, Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi but collapsed due to political turmoil in the mid l970s;

AWARE THAT Government has formulated strategies, plans, projects and policies like the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP), Prosperity for All (PFA), Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA), Farm Income Enhancement and Forest Conservation (FIEFOC) Project, and Water for Agricultural Production Project, where three other schemes in Kiige in Kamuli District, Ongino in Kumi District and Odina in Soroti District will be rehabilitated, aimed at increasing productivity and income of farmers as well as providing water for irrigation for agriculture;

RECOGNISING THAT Uganda has fertile soil, a conducive climate and a Government policy that is highly supportive to fruit production as a strategic export - this great production potential - the increasing domestic and regional demand is not satisfied and the processing of fruits is low because of no large-scale fruit growers at the moment, and fruits are produced exclusively as a small holder crop in the northern and eastern regions under rain-fed conditions and this seasonality in production affects supply;

FURTHER RECOGNISING THAT there is demand for fruit juices, however Uganda’s fruit industry is not that developed to meet this demand, hence a range of fruit juices are imported into the country; and also important to note is the increasing number of fruit out growers in northern and eastern regions, though with several challenges like high incidences of pests, fake/low quality agricultural inputs like fertilisers, limited or non-existent irrigation, weak farmer organisations, which affects productivity;

NOTING THAT the above challenge can be overcome by Government partnering, through joint ventures, with investors in fruit processing and out growers in northern and eastern region to enhance sustainable fruit production for raw materials to fruit industries;

FURTHER NOTING THAT Parliament is the voice of the people and is mandated to ensure people’s issues are voiced out to Government;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this House that Government is urged:
1. 	To promote fruit production in northern and eastern Uganda by partnering with investors in the sector and catchment areas of Soroti Fruit Factory.

2. 	To strengthen primary cooperative societies through mobilisation of all farmers to join the cooperatives.

3. 	To enable banking and collective marketing of fruits through provision of trucks to the farmers’ cooperative societies. 

4. 	To control pests and diseases through provision of agro chemical and motorised spray pumps.”

 Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, again I see a problem because the bulk of this work is for the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. The cooperatives are here. I do not know how we shall handle this matter because issues of the spray pumps, agro chemicals and identification of the land  -  We have ranches that people are playing with, which we would request the Government to facilitate; there are ranches which are being wasted.

I think we still need the agriculture people here. When we are considering the other motion, then we can also complete this one because the biggest part is for agriculture. The other one of marketing is already a product for the minister in charge of cooperatives. Can we defer this to next Thursday? In doing so, hon. Anthony Okello, can you identify some ranches that we can talk about here so that they become part of our resolutions, because there are ranches which Government is not using?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: I will, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the movers of the motion. As you have rightly guided, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we receive the motion and second it, so that as we are going to discuss it, we would have already received and seconded it?

THE SPEAKER: You know, the other group had divided theirs into different sections and each seconder was going to speak about something different. We think that the minister should be here to listen to all those components.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I came and talked to you last session about this motion, although it was not moved before the closure of the other session. However, you have now directed the agriculture minister to come and give a statement on the food prices, or something like that, on Tuesday. 

Madam Speaker, I think it would be proper for this motion to be moved and debated since the contents of the motion probably could affect or have a bearing on the statement. If need be, they would be debated together when the motion is moved and the statement presented. I would request that the motion on national food reserves comes on Tuesday, Madam Speaker, if you please. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think they should now both come. I think we will need to devote that day to food issues - Get the statement on the prices and also have these two motions on the food reserves and on fruit production. If the ministers are not here on Tuesday - (Laughter)

5.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I was briefing my boss, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. We are going to make sure that the ministers are here.

THE SPEAKER: I think even the second one on the Shea nuts and tamarind should be discussed. 

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for allowing me to rise. You asked whether the silos were sold or they are still there. However, the honourable minister technically dodged it, saying that we would defer it to the future. 

Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be proper that when the minister comes up – because he is here and he knows what is within his ambit – he tells us whether the silos are still operational, with your indulgence?

5.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (COOPERATIVES)(Mr Fredrick Gume): Madam Speaker, the issue raised regarding the silos is clear but the details of the same shall be produced here because that is when we will have all the details and know which ones exist and which ones do not exist. 

We will answer it on Tuesday because now we will be giving half-baked information to the House. That is what we proposed. I would like to thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, item No. 7 requires the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the Minister of Water and Environment and the Minister of Trade and Cooperatives. It requires all those.

Honourable members, I think it is very disappointing that we have been let down for two days. We have done our part but we have been frustrated by the Government. House adjourned to Tuesday at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 5.55 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 31 July 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

