Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Thursday, 18 July 2019

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We had a discussion about the externalisation of labour and I had given guidance that today, the minister should come with a comprehensive statement to deal with it. However, somehow, inadvertently, the matter does not appear on the Order Paper.

I accordingly amend the Order Paper to accommodate the Ministerial Statement from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development on the issues of externalisation of labour. This statement will be made and debated in accordance with the rules.

Today, we will also be dealing with the Prime Minister’s Question Time at 3 o’clock. I will start with the matter from the Member for West Moyo.

2.11
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This matter of national importance is about cattle raids in my constituency.

The residents of Padiga Village, Pamujo Parish in Metu Subcounty, Moyo District whose animals were looted by suspected South Sudanese gunmen are yet to be compensated. On 11 March 2018, armed men raided Bari and Arapi villages and made off with over 1,295 heads of cattle that have not yet been recovered to date.

On 11 August 2018, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, while addressing a rally at Celecelea Stadium in Moyo District, said that Government would compensate the affected people as he pursued diplomatic means with South Sudan to stop the raids.
Recently, while on his tour for wealth creation and household income in May 2019, the matter was brought to his attention in a rally in Moyo Town. 

Over the weekend, the affected residents petitioned the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) over the matter. Earlier on, I had brought this as a matter of national importance on the Floor of Parliament where the Minister of State for Defense and Veteran Affairs and the Chief of Defense Forces flew there to do spot checks. However, after going to Moyo and checking the area, up to now, we have not got any reply from them. The effects of the cattle raids -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is the urgent matter? 

MR ALERO: Our prayers are compensation for the lost cattle, security at the border points for both the people and the animals and boundary demarcation. There should be day and night patrols by the security personnels.

Lastly, diplomatic engagements between the two countries; South Sudan and Uganda should go on. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is that Member for Moyo District or the minister?

MR ALERO: It is the Member of Moyo District who has come to –

2.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for raising that matter. Indeed, it is true there was an issue of cattle raids by alleged armed forces from South Sudan and that was way back in March last year. 

Following that incident, the Minister of State for Defense and Veteran Affairs led a delegation, including the Chief of Defence Forces, myself and other people. We met the community and immediate interventions were put in place, among which was to institute a unit in the village.

Mr Speaker, this matter has been on-going. The President was notified and indeed, he communicated to the people. What my colleague has said is true. Last week, on 12th of this month, the people petitioned the RDC about the same issue as to why their cattle had not been given back to them.

Following the petition from the residents of Metu to the RDC, Government immediately intervened. The First Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business instituted a committee and he wrote to the Minister of Defense and Veteran Affairs concerning this matter.

Mr Speaker, a team from Moyo was invited; they came in yesterday. The same meeting has been scheduled for tomorrow as directed by His Excellency, the President –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA LUBEGA: Mr Speaker, I am constrained to raise a matter of procedure. My brother, hon. Mario Kania says, “as usual” but that is not me. 

The point that prompts me to rise is that this particular date is dedicated to Government answering our issues. Looking at the Frontbench, the minister responsible for Defense and Veteran Affairs is not here yet this is a cross border security issue. The Prime Minister is not here. The Deputy Prime Ministers are not even here particularly those responsible for government’s business. 

I heard my sister, Dr Moriku rise up to speak without disclosing – even when you are prompted, the capacity in which she is responding - Mr Speaker, we have had cross border security issues from the Turkana, South Sudan and DRC especially those porous border points. I wonder whether it is not procedurally correct first, that you either summon the persons responsible for answering these questions or that we get clarification from the government on whether there is someone competent to respond to these issues.

Mr Speaker, if the minister, for example, was here, he would be telling us why he deploys soldiers in Kampala where there are no cross border security issues, where there are no security issues - doing police work. Guide me, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have raised these matters but usually when the Frontbench is here they have an arrangement made to be able to deal with the issues. As for the Prime Minister, the Prime Minister’s Question Time is at 3 O’clock and I am sure that he will be here by that time.

I do not know how to deal with this question because repeatedly, we have been raising these matters and in the area of Defence and substantially, we do not see somebody in charge of that sector to deal with these issues. Are you going to handle them? 

2.20
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (General Duties) Ms Mary Karooro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, my colleague is not correct to say that the First Deputy Prime Minister and the Second Deputy Prime Minister are not around. 

When you see me it means that they are here; honourable Speaker, I do not know whether the honourable is suffering from gender myopia but I respect him because he is very intelligent.

Having said that, when these issues come up, we usually inform the relevant ministers. Yesterday, the Minister of Defence was here albeit a bit late and I am very sure that he is coming but even if he does not come I will make sure that I pass on these issues to the relevant ministers and during the course of the week, they will answer. I thank you.

MS MORIKU: Mr Speaker, a meeting has already been called by the First Deputy Prime Minister, he has written to the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs. My colleague the honourable member is aware that tomorrow at 9 O’clock; a delegation from Moyo came for this meeting - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, hon. Karooro Okurut the Deputy Prime Minister designate and a senior person has spoken and guided this House that she is going to pass these issues to the responsible ministries so that they come and report.

Is the honourable member who is a Member of the Cabinet but also happens to share the same district with the Member who raised the issue; in order to dilute the message given by the honourable Prime Minister Designate in the names of Ms Karooro Okurut?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable Member for Moyo District who is also the minister of State for Health had started talking and she had not finished but she was interrupted. It is important to finish; so, she was just finishing.

MS MORIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your wise ruling. As I conclude, I would like to thank my colleague for raising that matter while aware that the community in Moyo has called for a meeting together with the responsible ministries.

Mr Speaker, I would like to beg that you allow the meeting that has already been called to take place tomorrow at 9 O’clock to go on. In any case, feedback can still be brought after we have come to a logical conclusion together with the ministry of defence, the Prime Minister’s Office and the community from Metu Subcounty. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, very much, honourable minister for that information. I would not be in position to stop a meeting that has already been scheduled; so, the meeting will go on and we only hope that its outcome will be able to deal with the issues raised by the honourable Member for West Moyo.

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have teachers and pupils of Primrose Nursery School from Wakiso District, Kyadondo East. They are represented by hon. Robert Kyagulanyi Ssentamu; they have come to observe the proceedings of the House.

We also have teachers and pupils of Kamanda Primary School in Bukomansimbi South County, represented by hon. Deogratious Kiyingi and hon. Veronica Nanyondo. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them.

We also have a delegation from Optimal Manpower Placement Limited; they are represented by hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara who is the Workers’ MP. I am sure that they have come to listen to what the honourable minister will say about externalisation of labour.

We also have a delegation from Usuk Football Club represented by hon. Peter Ogwang and hon. Violet Akurut Adome; they are here to observe the proceedings.

We also have a delegation of councillors from Moyo District, represented by hon. Tom Alero Aza and hon. Joyce Moriku Kaducu. I am sure that the matter they had come to listen to has been - now they know what is going to happen.

We also have pupils from Proverbs Junior School, Busia Municipality, represented by hon. Geoffrey Macho and hon. Jane Namulindo. They are here to observe the proceedings; please join me in welcoming them.

Honourable members, there is a communication I should have given which has an effect but I had not seen the honourable Member so, I could not do it. Let me do it now;

Honourable members, as you will recall that in exercise of its authority under the Constitution, the Parliament of Uganda passed a resolution for the creation of 24 new districts; some of them including Karenga District became operational effective 1 July, 2019. Karenga District was curved out of Kaabong District.

In accordance with section 85(a) of the Parliamentary Elections Act, hon. Rose Lilly Akello the elected Woman Member of Parliament of Kaabong District has elected to represent the newly created Karenga District. She has notified Parliament and the Electoral Commission of her decision and choice. 

This is therefore to notify you that henceforth hon. Akello Rose Lilly shall be reflected in this House as the District Woman Representative for Karenga District. 

As required of the Clerk to Parliament by Article 81(2) of the Constitution, the Clerk to Parliament has written to the Electoral Commission informing them of the existence of a vacancy in the district of Kaabong; occasioned by the choice made by the current woman representative of Kaabong District.

It is so communicated by the presiding officer - I do not know whether I should say; congratulations. 

MR SSEGGONA LUBEGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you. I stand to be guided procedurally. While I congratulate my very own for making a good election, we have had a precedent in this House where someone chooses to go for an election while continuing to represent another constituency. (Laughter)

My concern, in my capacity as the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs –(Interjections)– do not worry because I do not see my shadow across. (Laughter) We have an arrangement, Mr Speaker, that when am not here, he will stand in for me and when he is not here, I am both the minister and the shadow minister. (Laughter)

However, on a more serious note, we have continued to create districts. I have reservations about creating districts and the astronomical administrative costs in this country. I intend to give notice to move a motion to freeze that.

The procedural guidance I am seeking is, it is stated – I do not want to use the word “alleged” – that by creating districts, we are trying to strengthen and promote service delivery. However, correspondingly, the Judiciary continues to limp. We create districts which we do not provide with chief magistrates and we have chief magistrates trotting from one district to another.

We strengthen the Executive and the Legislature by providing for members of Parliament to come from the different constituencies and districts. We are not making corresponding increments in the judges’ appointments, even when we have passed resolutions in this House. 

The guidance I am seeking from you, Mr Speaker, is whether it is not time to veto the Executive in creating these administrative centres without assisting the third arm of Government. The judges are not there; we get problems with backlog and we create more backlog in these districts. Guide me, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, you have asked whether it is not time for us to freeze or take decisions to that effect. It is not time because the matter is not before us. So, right now, it is not the time. Thank you. 

Can we go to the Order Paper now?

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. A few months ago, the Ministry of Works and Transport brought a supplementary here for the purchase of aircrafts. In that discussion, there arose a case about the Board. There were resolutions that were made in this House that when the Board is appointed, it should go before the committee and be brought to this House.

It has come to our attention that this has not been followed by the minister. To date, we have the Board, which has not been approved as directed by this House because that was the condition at that time when we discussed this.

It is not even surprising that Uganda Airlines has not taken off. On 18th June, when we said that this would have been the right opportunity to promote Uganda Airlines to be chartered to take the Uganda Cranes to Cairo, hon. Bahati said we are ignorant and that they had informed this House that come rain or shine, on 1st July, Uganda Airlines will be in the air. To date, they are still grounded; they have not taken off and are parked in Entebbe.

So, this is connected to this issue of the Board because the resolutions, as directed in this House, have not been followed. They even left the people who had been recommended and have the knowledge in aviation totally out of the Board. Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for us to continue without the minister coming to tell us why she defied directives of this House? Why is she continuing to be defiant to the resolutions of this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Of course, the minister cannot be defiant to this House. However, on the second aspect of the question of the procedural matter raised on why the planes have not taken off as promised by 1st July, there is a substantial question that the Prime Minister is going to respond to. Also, we do not have any proof that they are not flying; they might be flying at night when we are not there. (Laughter) So, the minister will be able to guide us on that.

On the Board, I do not know whether it has been constituted and whether the requisite resolution of Parliament when we passed that loan has been abided to. So, I am supposed to rule on this procedure and I need the assistance of the minister so I can guide the House.

2.36
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Azuba): Mr Speaker, it is true that the Board has been appointed. Cabinet went through a big process; it took about three weeks to approve the Board, which has been appointed. The issue of coming to the committee is unprecedented but it is not too late.

However, I would like to inform the Member that among the Board members is an aviator. So, it is not correct that –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have some order please.

MS AZUBA: Among the members of the Board is an aviator who was actually part of the taskforce. Therefore, I believe that statement is not correct, Mr Speaker.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister but could you tell us where the Board sits and who the members are. The information we have is that there are some people sitting at the Eagle Air offices - which is also defunct - at Entebbe. Help us know exactly where that Board sits and who the members are.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I am seeking further clarification.  I appreciate all those who are bringing Uganda Airlines into the country, albeit with challenges. The clarification I seek from the minister is, if she can kindly tell us who the Board members are.

Right now, we are receiving complaints since we represent the greater public out there. For example, one of the persons who flew Uganda Airlines when it was still operational then – I boarded it in 1984; I do not know where some of you were –(Laughter)- actually, our pilot was hon. Captain. Otekat, who is now in the Parliamentary SACCO.

These are people with practical experience. They applied and they are saying that the system is not fair. They are nowhere on the Board. Instead, we have people who are not from that area, like hon. Perez Ahabwe, who have been given preference. Therefore, can we be told if the system was fair? 

We have our own, hon. Captain Otekat, who our President directed to fly the President of Ghana, His Excellency Jerry Rawlings, when he came to Uganda. They have tried to get in but no one can see them. Can we be advised if the system is fair? That is the clarification I am seeking from the minister.

MS AZUBA: Mr Speaker, I will send the names of the Board members to the committee or to Parliament. Regarding the question about where they are meeting, the Uganda Airlines office has a boardroom; it is renting at Eagle Air. 

On the issue of the person who used to fly - Captain Otekat - there was a very robust interview for all pilots and those who performed best were employed. The process was very transparent and involved Government officials.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please help us so that we close this matter. Do you have the names of the Board members, which you are sending to the committee? If you have them, read them and if you do not, when you send them to the committee, give us a copy. 

MS AZUBA: Just in case I forget one, I prefer that I send the names. We have Mr Perez Ahabwe, Mr Charles Hamya – Mr Speaker, I prefer to bring the names. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it will be okay for the minister to come with the list and lay it on the Table next week so that we know the members of the Board. I am also glad that the minister has said she will send these names to the committee because that was the agreement at the time we approved this loan. Let us respect the processes that happen here because they give us the goodwill to go on together when new matters arise. Thank you.

Can we go to the Order Paper now?

LAYING OF REPORTS BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION UNDER RULE 35 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

2.42
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will give a summary of an oversight visit from 1 - 5 July 2019 by a team from the Office of the Leader of the Opposition that I led, to refugee settlement centres in Kyangwali in Kikuube District, Kyaka II in Kyegegwa District, Rwamwanja in Kamwenge District and Nakivale in Isingiro District.

The visits were in line with section 6(e)(i) of the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 2006 that empowers the Leader of the Opposition to undertake oversight and keep the Government in check. 

During the visits, the delegation interacted with officials of the Office of the Prime Minister, UNHCR, implementation partners, local governments, host communities and refugees. The interactions enabled the delegation to appreciate the work being done in settlement centres and note areas of concern that require urgent attention. 

Areas of Concern

    1. a) Access right to refugee registration system

Following queries regarding ghost refugees and fraudulent accountability, the Government of Uganda, in 2018, in collaboration with UNHCR, embarked on a countrywide refugee verification exercise. This culminated into changing the refugee system from the Refugee Information Management System developed by Government of Uganda to a progress system developed by UNHCR.

The delegation noted that the main contribution played by the Office of the Prime Minister in the management of the system was biometric registration. The general management of the progress system is exclusively handled by UNHCR. Although the Government of Uganda was granted limited access rights, substantially, UNHCR maintains and keeps the register of refugees while the Government of Uganda updates the register with new refugee entries. This contradicts Regulation 45 of the Refugee Regulations that stipulates that the register of refugees shall be kept, maintained and updated by the Commissioner for Refugees.

Recommendation

Unless amended, the Commissioner for Refugees should have powers to keep, maintain and update the progress system as provided in the Refugee Regulations. 

    b. Failure of deportation of rejected cases

Although sections 20, 21 and 42 of the Refugee Act provides for rejection of refugee application and deportation upon loss of appeal, rejected cases are rarely deported. This is attributed to porous borders, inadequate enforcement and inadequate funding of Ministry of Internal Affairs that is charged with the responsibility of deportation. Consequently, the rejected cases continue to live in Uganda without a status of either a refugee or asylum seeker. This is illegal and incoherent with the existing legal framework.

Recommendation

The Ministry of Internal Affairs should present to Parliament, by the end of July 2019, a status report regarding deportation of persons who have been denied refugee status.

    c. Inadequate funding, accountability and transparency

The Office of the Prime Minister was concerned that budgetary constraints are hampering effective planning and management of refugees and their needs. Nonetheless, for funds realised through development partners, for instance, through the Solidarity Summit, the delegation noted that accountability and transparency of realised funds amounting to US$ 539 million was a little concealed. This was envisaged in failure to disclose audited performance of the realised funds. 

This raises a risk of re-emergence of accountability issues that prompted auditing of key refugee stakeholders; Government of Uganda and UNHCR. Unfortunately, these reports have not yet been disclosed for close to two years. Besides, it was observed that international partners and non-governmental organisations directly receive and deliver humanitarian refugee services. 

However, the delegation noted that they account to funders and less to the beneficiaries and the general public. Hence, there is limited transparency and scrutiny.

Following interaction with the Department of Refugees in the Office of the Prime Minister, it was established that although memoranda of understanding were entered with l50 implementation and operation partners, they were only able to determine the proposed annual budgets and funds spent in all settlement centres in Uganda but not how much was actually mobilised.

Recommendations

As resolved by Parliament, all off-budget support should be reflected in the national budget particularly in ministerial policy statements so as to facilitate effective budget monitoring and transparency.
We urge the Office of the Prime Minister, implementation and operational partners to be accountable and transparent to the public through the provision of audited, physical and financial performance.

The findings of audit exercises into the operations of both Government of Uganda and UNHCR should be made public.

d. 	Integration of Refugees matters into Development Plans

Regulation 6l of the regulations provides for the integration of refugee matters into the development plan and local Government development plans. As a result of the integration, in Financial Year 2018/2019, host districts benefited from Development Response to Displacement impact Project (DRDIP) and Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development additional funding for infrastructural and livelihood development.

However, local leaders raised a concern regarding absence of criteria that determines beneficiaries of the funding within the host districts. It was asserted that beneficiaries were being selected based on political grounds rather than needs assessment.

The delegation was also informed that funds for social services are allocated to local governments based on population numbers of citizens in districts determined during the census. The population of refugees is not considered in the allocation formula yet they access services at the local facilities. This has compromised service delivery.

Recommendations

The Office of the Prime Minister in consultation with local governments should develop a criterion for selection of beneficiaries of DRDIP and USMID-AF.

The allocation formulae of funds for social services to host districts should, in addition to census statistics, incorporate overage number of refugees. The average number is preferred based on the fact that refugee populations vary on a daily basis.

e. Failure to define Host Communities

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, are you now presenting the entire report? Under the rule -

MS BETTY AOL: No, it is only the executive summary.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is almost the entire report.

MS BETTY AOL: Okay, let me now raise the concerns and the recommendations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MS BETTY AOL: Failure to define host communities

On this, we recommend that the Refugee Act and Regulations should be amended to define a criterion for determining host communities.

Inadequate Police Deployment

We recommended that the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Uganda Police Force should progressively increase deployment in settlement centres to acceptable international standards.

Environmental degradation

Our recommendation on this is that implementation and operational partners are urged to allocate funds towards a deliberate afforestation programme in a designated area in settlement centres where initiative is undertaken to plan and maintain at least five trees per new refugee.

Then alternative sources of cooking energy should be considered such as Liquefied Petroleum Gas as is the practice in refugee centres in Turkey and Pakistan. 

Overstretched health facilities

Mr Speaker, this was a serious one and our recommendation is that the Ministry of Health should reassess the performance of health centres in settlement centres and host districts with the intention of upgrading them to appropriate levels. Parliament should be informed of the assessment results within three months.

Inadequate educational structures

Our recommendation is that the Ministry of Education and Sports should inspect all the schools in settlement centres with the intention of coding them and allocating them additional infrastructural support. This would be in line with the Education Response Plan for Refugees and Host Communities in Uganda of 2018.

Inadequate sewerage disposals

The recommendation is that the Office of the Prime Minister should develop a sewage policy for settlement centres and ensure that all of them possess sewage lagoons. 

Titling of settlement centres

We all know what land issue is all about in Uganda today. Our recommendation is that the Committee on Presidential Affairs should take interest in ascertaining whether the land occupied by settlement centres of Rwamwanja, Nakivale and Kyaka is titled and has no encumbrances.

Albinos

The recommendations is to urge the Uganda Revenue Authority to ascertain whether the exemptions on creams used by Albinos in the treatment of their skin as provided in the Excise Duty Act has had effect on the pricing of sun creams. A special educational facility should be established for albino refugee community in Rwamwanja settlement centre.

In conclusion, while Uganda is globally commended for its refugee policy, it ought to be of interest to every nation and development partner to curb the drivers of refugee influx. This requires concerted efforts of actors particularly within the East African Community to strengthen governance structures, democracy and ensure equitable distribution of resources.

As a legislature, it is essential that Members take interest in refugee affairs through its committees and forums so as to drive policy discourse and development.

Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for this opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. Honourable members, under our rule 35, the Leader of the Opposition is allowed to present such reports and give a brief summary to them. Her summary is quite good and we will find time and have a full debate on this matter regarding refugees.

Honourable members, the issue of refugees is currently very serious. We should find time and have this discussion. On 28th of this month, the Refugee Convention will be 68 years old. It has been reviewed once because the main actors of the people who brought it into place are now reluctant to touch refugees. The burden is now falling on countries like Uganda, which deal with it. Therefore, we need to have a discussion on this matter. 

The Leader of the Opposition has given us the opportunity to do so. If the Government also wishes, 28th July could be a good day as we commemorate the Convention of Refugees, which came into force on 28 January 1951. We would get a good overview and then have a joint discussion on the matter. It is a very urgent matter.

We may have to look at our open door policy again and see how we can put our citizens right; not below those who come when they are faced with problems in their own countries. We need to have this discussion fairly once the matter is scheduled.

It is now the Prime Minister’s Time but I cannot see him so, we can proceed with the Order Paper.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON EXTERNALISATION OF LABOUR

3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND CULTURE AFFAIRS (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development an opportunity to address Parliament once again, on issues of externalisation of labour.

Honourable colleagues, I wish to remind you that this is not the first time that we are addressing Parliament on the issue of externalisation of labour. You will recall that on 20 November 2018, I comprehensively addressed you on the issue. The senior minister, hon. Janat Mukwaya, had also earlier addressed Parliament on 18 May 2017. 

We have also addressed the Parliamentary Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and the Committee on Human Rights, on the some subject matter.

In our previous statements to members of Parliament referred to above, we made clear and precise responses to questions raised by colleagues. Nonetheless, I welcome the opportunity to respond to the issues raised by Members on the externalisation of labour. Accordingly, I will address the House on the following:

    i) The background to the regulation of externalisation of labour.

    ii) Protection of workers through licensing and placement procedures.

    iii) The benefits and challenges of externalisation of labour.

    iv) The proposal to impose a ban on the externalisation of labour programme.

    v) The measures that the Government of Uganda has taken to make the externalisation of labour programme safe, regular, orderly and productive.

    vi) The case of Doreen Ghandi Magezi as reported by  hon. Betty Nambooze Bakireke of Mukono Municipality; and

    vii) Seek support that Parliament gives us more resources so that we strengthen the structures and the efforts that were put in place. 

Mr Speaker, migration is as old as history of mankind and all of us are products of migration in some form. Indeed, Ugandans have since the pre-independence period travelled abroad for work. Some have travelled on their own, while others were facilitated by traffickers. However, the interest of traffickers has always been money at any cost. As a result, traffickers often fleece their “clients”.

Furthermore, traffickers do not place individuals into any specific job but merely aid them to go to a country where they would find work by themselves.

However, in the absence of a formal, safe, orderly and regular pathway for placing people abroad, the traffickers would remain the only way out for individuals who have to make a choice to seek work abroad.

The Government is cognisant of the risks associated with individuals being placed abroad by traffickers. That is the reason we have put protection of workers through licensing of companies for placement of these workers.

In 2015, you are aware, that the ministry placed a ban on recruitment of domestic workers. Shortly after this ban, we got to realise that so many had travelled abroad in ways that we could not trace. For that matter, we had to put protection measures.

Consequently, the ministry responsible for labour, pursuant to powers under the Employment Act, issued the Employment (Recruitment of Ugandan Migrant Workers Abroad) Regulations, 2005. The objective of the instrument was to protect the rights of migrant workers through stringent licensing requirements and placement procedures.

In my statement, there are a number of requirements that companies, which are licensed to recruit workers abroad must fulfil. Since this document is lengthy, I do not know whether I need to go through them. They are in the statement, which you already have.

The procedures are elaborate and the rules and guidelines are also attached from page 4 up to around page 6. I would wish to get straight to page 6 since page 2 and 3 are talking about the procedures and guidelines. 

On page 6 are the benefits and challenges of externalisation of labour. The benefits include:

    i) The estimated annual remittances from the migrant workers in the Middle East to our economy now stands at about $600 million.

    ii) Improvement in incomes of the households of migrant workers.

    iii) Acquisition of positive work ethics and skills. You certainly know that Uganda has the youngest population in the world and 78 per cent of the total population is under 35 years and many of them are educated. 

Therefore, since our economy is still small and there are countries in the Middle East with big economies, who are willing to employ them and since there  is a risk of placing a ban but they will still go anyway, our best mechanism was to ensure that we provide a mechanism in which we can trace them. 

One can apply if they want to go and we can also find mechanisms through which we can negotiate with recipient countries for a better working environment and conditions of service.

Honourable members, you are aware that despite the above benefits, the programme has encountered a number of challenges, which I would wish to highlight.

    i. Traffickers who, often through false representation, deploy workers into unknown destinations and hostile working conditions.

    ii. Inability to trace and offer consular services to workers deployed by traffickers.

    iii. Violation of the rights of workers especially domestic workers.

    iv. Immoral behaviour by some Ugandan domestic workers who are occasionally violated because of immoral behaviour.

    v. Workers who abscond from their stations in pursuit of fresher pastures. Somebody goes to work and on reaching the destination point, after only two months, he finds another job and wants to quit yet he has a standing contract of a year or so. Although there are mechanisms through which you can terminate a contract, some people do not care to go through these mechanisms to be able to access other jobs.

    vi. Limited manpower. The Externalisation Unit has only five full-time staff.

    vii. Lack of appropriate office accommodation.

    viii. Lack of diplomatic representation in Bahrain, Kuwait and Oman; and

    ix. Limited manpower of the Ugandan Missions in Riyadh and Abu Dhabi. Those are the clear challenges we are facing as we pursue the externalisation of labour and we shall seek for support to ensure that we strengthen our structures so that those limitations are cleared.

About the ban, is it feasible? The answer is no. 

In view of the above challenges, we propose that we do not impose a ban again because in January 2016 when we imposed a ban, we were trying to ensure that we close the two gaps:

    i. To stop migrant workers from getting into hostile domestic working conditions; and

    ii. To use the time of the ban to strengthen measures for protecting Ugandan migrant workers abroad.

However, during that period, for example in Oman, in a spell of only one year, 40,000 Ugandans had gone to work in Oman when there was even a ban and in many other countries. We had to respond to the outcry of many Ugandans who, after reaching there, would send messages to us that they are suffering and struggling and on many occasions, we would find challenges following up. You would find somebody using an identification card, which does not describe him as Ugandan. He does not have a Ugandan passport but he comes from Uganda; meaning that they had used other means to identify themselves and obtain passports elsewhere.

Therefore, we lifted the ban on that ground. There is a formal way in which if anybody wants to go, they will go. Certainly, challenges are everywhere including for people who are working here in this country.

Honourable members, I beg that we do not place a ban again because we have so many people working there under contracts and they still need our support. However, we have put mechanisms and measures as Government, in the externalisation of labour programme for safety in a regular, orderly and productive manner.

There is an inter-ministerial committee chaired by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development with its membership comprising the ministers responsible for Security, Internal Affairs, Works, Local Government, Foreign Affairs and East African Cooperation.

Strengthened coordination between my Ministry and other agencies like the Directorate of Immigration, Internal Security Organisation (ISO), and the Police which has placed some manpower at the airport to support the migrant workers- those who come, those who have distress, to take some statements and at least to be able to report. As a result, 2334 victims of human trafficking were rescued at Entebbe Airport between January and June 2019.

A four party employment contract, which makes the recruitment company both in Uganda and in the recipient country jointly and severally liable for any breach of worker's contract, was adopted.

Three Bilateral Labour Agreements have been signed between the Government of Uganda and the respective Governments of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the United Arab Emirates. Negotiations for a bilateral agreement with Qatar were concluded. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is using diplomatic channels to secure a date for signing. Draft agreements have also been drawn and presented to the Governments of Oman and Kuwait.

Cooperation against human trafficking has been strengthened among members of the East African Community. For example, the National Coordination Task Forces on Prevention of Trafficking of Ugandan and Kenyan citizens continuously share information. As a result, over 300 victims of human trafficking from Uganda have been rescued at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport in the last 12 months.

Monitoring visits to Saudi Arabia, The United Arab Emirates, Qatar and Jordan have been carried out and more regular monitoring visits to host countries are planned.

Only foreign recruitment companies that have been accredited by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development on the recommendation of Uganda’s Mission accredited to the prospective recipient country are allowed to recruit domestic workers from Uganda.

All demand letters and Powers of Attorney from foreign recruitment agencies to recruitment agencies in Uganda are vetted by Uganda’s Missions accredited to the prospective recipient country.

Every prospective employment contract for domestic workers is authenticated by Uganda’s Mission accredited to the prospective recipient country before a domestic worker is cleared to leave.

The foreign recruitment companies are not allowed to transfer responsibility over a domestic worker to an individual.

The Uganda Association of External Recruitment Agencies established an emergency fund that caters for:

    a) Operations of a transit centre at Entebbe and in recipient countries;
    b) Supporting emergency medication services and repatriation; and
    c) Psycho-social support and legal aid for return of migrant workers.

The ministry has also written to the Ministry of Public Service to seek approval of expansion of the staff structure of the Department of Employment Services. The proposed structure will include labour attachés.

Hon. Janet Mukwaya had a meeting with technical officers from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to facilitate the expeditious handling of migrant workers’ business by allocating more funds to the Department of Employment Services. We are still waiting for the response from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to add us some resources so that we can have those technical people appointed and they start working with us. 

Rising out of bilateral engagements, the recipient countries have also taken the following measures:

    1. Only licensed recruitment companies will be allowed to recruit workers from abroad.

    2. Jordan and Saudi Arabia have developed online systems for tracking the recruitment and location of domestic migrant workers.

    3. The foreign recruitment company to provide all domestic workers with a telephone SIM card on arrival. Some companies will soon begin offering the phones as well.

    4. The Saudi Arabian Government has developed a system for monitoring the payment of wages of domestic workers. This includes call centres and Ugandan supervisors charged with the responsibility of monitoring the conditions of Ugandan migrant workers abroad.

In order to improve the provision of Consular Services, Labour attachés will be deployed at the Ugandan missions in Abu Dhabi (United Arab Emirates), Riyadh (Saudi Arabia) and Doha (Qatar).

The case of Doreen Ghandi Magezi

Rt Hon. Speaker, you will recall that on Tuesday, 25 June 2019, you asked hon. Betty Nambooze Bakireke and hon. Richard Oseku to give you the particulars of the young ladies under distress in the Middle East for onward transmission to our ministry.

Mr Speaker, we confirm that we received communication from you about a one Doreen Magezi. On the same day, hon. Betty Nambooze – I will spare myself the other name so that I do not make a mistake again – the Member of Parliament of Mukono Municipality, had reported that the said Ms Doreen Ghandi Magezi was in Jordan under distress. Hon. Betty Nambooze further called for assistance in rescuing the said Doreen from slavery where she had been sold for US $3000.

Consequently, you directed the ministry to facilitate her return. Accordingly, the ministry engaged Murphie International Company that recruited her and I am pleased to report that Ms Doreen Ghandi Magezi returned to Uganda on 5 July 2019.

We have examined the statements made by hon. Betty Nambooze in and out of Parliament and Ms Doreen during her interview with Sam Kasumba of NBS TV and wish to address you as follows:

Doreen Magezi was regularly and formerly placed to work in Jordan by a licensed recruitment company called Murphie International Recruitment Agency on 3 April 2019. She was never sold into slavery at US$ 3000. If she had been sold into slavery, Murphie International Recruitment Agency would not have procured a ticket for her return. 

Furthermore, Ms Doreen Magezi never paid US$ 3000 to her employer in order to exercise her right to return home. Most importantly, at no time does Doreen say, in her interview, that she was in slavery.

Mr Speaker, Ms Doreen Magezi was never arrested at arrival, as it is alleged by herself and hon. Betty Nambooze. The fact of the matter is that Ms Doreen, like all other migrant workers who report cases of distress, are received by a counsellor at the airport upon arrival. 

In this case, Marjorie Muhinda, a counsellor from the Uganda Association of External Recruitment Agencies and Operatives, was available with security to take a statement because she had reported distress. That is not arrest; making a statement is not an arrest. If you have reported a matter of concern, police would avail itself for you to make a statement so that investigations can start. 

The presence of the counsellor at the airport was to provide Doreen with psycho-social support and facilitate her to access medical assistance in case it was required. She was not taken to a medical facility, according to her desire.

Migrant workers who report violation of their human rights while abroad are often requested to make a police statement to facilitate further management by Interpol. Given that allegations of Doreen being sold into slavery had been made, it was prudent to take a statement from her. Indeed, after making the statement, she left in the company of her family members.

Whereas Doreen could have been distressed, her situation was, with due respect, exaggerated by my colleague, hon. Betty Nambooze. For example, in a social media post, hon. Betty Nambooze alleges that dozens of girls, who were trafficked to the Arab World, returned on 5 July 2019 after a protracted battle that she had started. 

She further stated that the parents wept on seeing their girls as some had been wheeled off the plane in wheelchairs. She went on to say that the girls had broken limbs, bruised faces, scars and that they were so skinny and sick.

According to Ms Doreen's interview, hon. Betty Nambooze was not at the airport. This begs the question of how she saw the dozens of returnee distressed migrant workers. Furthermore, Doreen is the only returnee we have seen in that group –(Interjection)– not a dozen, we only saw Doreen. If there is another dozen that we do not know, we would like to request that we get to know so that we can support them. 

Mr Speaker, we have also transcribed and examined Ms Doreen's interview about her situation and we have found it laced with inconsistencies, which greatly impairs its probative value. However, we are in touch and available to support Doreen in case she needs our assistance. 

Otherwise, of late, we have made efforts to reach her but her phones are off and we do not know where to find her. We wish to appeal to Doreen and the rest of the public and whoever sees her, if she still needs our help, we are available and we shall give her the support she needs, like we did act, when we got to know that she was distressed and needed to come back home. We indeed ensured that she returned back home. Therefore, she can still trust us to support her further. 

We have continued to analyse what has been communicated and I would like to also inform honourable colleagues that some people, on return, do not want people to know where they are because everybody knows that they have some money. So, some of their relatives – (Interjection) – allow me to share my experience with you. Some people do not want to disclose where they are for personal reasons and they are entitled to that. There are those who might have injuries and distresses but they are also those who might wish to keep themselves off so that they make their investments. 

Some people have remitted resources to their relatives and their resources have been misused. Some people have wished to go quietly because they are running away from some problems back home. For many reasons, we allow people to keep privacy about their whereabouts when they wish to. 

However, I do not want to limit anybody with good knowledge about someone who needs our help. We have put a number of mechanisms in place and we must test them. If people keep away information, we shall not know and so, we shall not improve on the systems of management of these programmes and structures we have put in place.

Mr Speaker, my prayers are:

    1. As we move on, we want to establish a one-stop centre where the Internal Security Organisation, External Security Organisation, Interpol and Directorate of Immigration can sit together to give appropriate support, guidance and assistance to whoever wishes to travel abroad and back; 

    2. We need to finalise externalisation of employment information management system, which we have started developing. It is incomplete because we do not have resources yet this would help us to expeditiously process licensing, vetting and clearance of migrant workers. It will be linked with the immigration systems and foreign missions. This will facilitate the capturing and analysing real time data on workers who leave and return to Uganda; 

3. 	We need to deploy labour attaches at the Ugandan Missions in Abu Dhabi, Riyadh and Doha. Some of these countries are too huge that one person deployed in the countryside of even Abu Dhabi may not get the services at the city centre with ease. Therefore, we need to find a strong network.
 
4. 	We need to strengthen the internal and external monitoring of Ugandan migrant workers; and

5. 	Strengthen community mobilisation against trafficking for labour exploitation.

As I conclude, I have attached a copy of the licensed companies. Previously, they were 178 but they are now 169. This is because we cancelled the licences of some of the companies, which were not adhering to the requirements. I have attached a table of companies that were deregistered and others that were suspect, for the public to know so that they do not continue to hook Ugandans. This was because they breached the contracts.

We have attached a table of Ugandan migrant workers per country in the Middle East. We have also attached a copy of the transcribed interview between Doreen Gandi and NBS reporter, Samson Kasumba.

Mr Speaker, I need your protection – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MS MUTUUZO: This is Parliament and it responds to any public issue and concerns raised. This is my opportunity to respond to the issues that have been raised by the public. I wrote this statement, which is precise and attached issues of externalisation of labour. Those that have appeared on media, I have a right to report about them. 

The ministry is willing to provide any information as Parliament and the public may wish, in an effort to support and strengthen service delivery, especially in employment services. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister for this statement presented. Honourable members, this is a ministerial statement. As you know, we have had reports in this House from the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, which were debated and I made references to them. We also had a report from the Committee on Equal Opportunities. I think there was also one from the Committee on Foreign Affairs. We have had these reports that have come. 

The only missing link was a clear statement coming from the responsible ministry on this issue of externalisation of labour. Today, the statement has come and we will debate it with that background. We have had three statements from the committees of this House that have gone out and met these people and seen their conditions and come back and reported. Today, arising from concerns from Members, we have heard a statement from the minister, which we should now debate and the debate should be structured along those lines.

What has come out clearly is that, yes, there are licensed companies that are dealing with the externalisation of labour; there are fake companies that are engaging in the same trade, and; there are other people who are getting their way into those situations on their own. Therefore, we have several categories of people leaving this country and ending up in those places; the legal ones, the illegal ones and the smuggled ones. However, when they are there, they are all Ugandans and we need to find ways of dealing with them.

We have also heard that while there, sometimes, our people land in bad hands and get bad employers, even if they have been processed properly when they are leaving here. Some of these people end up with bad people – like we have bad people everywhere – and they get mistreated. These are the categories of people that are there. 

The sum total of it, from the minister’s statement, is that by and large, it is a beneficial trade that is helping this country. The calculation is that about $600 million comes to this country every year from the externalisation of labour. 

What we also know is that those companies have an umbrella group. What does not come out clearly from the minister is why we, as Government, should be responsible for repatriation of our people when these agencies have networks and insurance mechanisms to be able to deal with issues where people are injured or find that they cannot work anymore. Families are being burdened to send money to rescue people. Why should they do that when they have agencies that are responsible for this? You have not handled that matter very well, honourable minister.

Honourable members, let us have this matter debated and each Member – now you want to start with procedure. (Laughter) Let us have procedure. Honourable, you can also smile. (Laughter)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have laid out the principle behind the minister’s statement. However, we seem to be at variance in a sense that the minister is coming out to say that we have people going outside, some illegally and others through licensed companies and that what is being pointed out is actually not the truth. From that principle – where the minister is disputing facts and you are inviting us to debate as if we are on the same page – I beg that you guide the House.

Whichever way through which people have arrived in these countries, they are subjected to inhuman and degrading treatment, with some losing their lives. These have been streaming through social media and other channels. Where there is loss of lives of Ugandans, we feel there should be a robust response instead of what the minister is trying to do: massaging the problem. 

Can we, therefore, first dissect it and say, yes, whereas we are looking at the sweetener of the $600 million that comes to the country, it cannot be enough to trade for the human lives that are lost as well as the near-slavery treatment. When I was painfully waiting for the minister, she engaged in denials about a one Doreen Magezi. Doreen Magezi is just one person. To my total disappointment, the minister is referring to an interview with NBS Television. I would have rested if the minister had come out to say that, “yes, we took up the matter and this is the statement”. For the minister to stand in the ventilator somewhere and watch NBS Television and bring a statement on the Floor of Parliament! This is unacceptable. You cannot be an extension of NBS Television in this House –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The procedure?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Therefore, Mr Speaker, are we procedurally right to deny the facts pertaining to the plight of Ugandans in those countries?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have we denied?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes, by the minister trying to explain it away using an NBS Television broadcast that she cannot even substantiate about. Are we procedurally right to say that, “yes, there is this problem but we are allowing the business to continue” without putting in place strong and concrete measures to address the issue of lives that are being lost? First of all, as Parliament, we must accept that there is a problem and see how to address it.

When we begin on denial, Mr Speaker, I do not think we would be procedurally right because we may not get to the correct position and the position of this country. Are we procedurally right, therefore, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable Member for Lwemiyaga County used procedure to take priority in the debate and he has debated the issue very clearly and even guided on his own procedural issue. (Laughter) He leaves me with no job.

Honourable members, if you ask whether we can have a debate when we are at variance with what the minister has said, my understanding of a debate is that it comes where you are at variance. When you agree, you do not need a debate. When you are at variance, you debate so that you can narrow the gaps and reach agreeable positions. When you have already agreed, why do you have a debate? -  because the minister’s statement is at variance with what we understand, according to you, that it deserves a proper debate. That is my understanding.

MR SSEGGONA LUBEGA: Mr Speaker, I greatly appreciate your guidance and I am not in any way opposed to it. My only worry is that as we debate – and I am very anxious to debate – a lot is missing in terms of evidence because we received the complaint by hon. Nambooze and we have received the ministerial statement. One thing that the ministerial statement has not made reference to is whether there was undertaking of any research in terms of establishing the plight. We have all received information that is disjointed. 

Apart from the reports of our committees, which may have been overtaken by events as we speak, looking at the magnitude of the issue, we need to receive concrete evidence of what is happening now. The person is talking about dozens of Ugandans and the minister is talking about one individual. Those particular Ugandans that may be distressed – my sister has consistently and persistently used the word “distress” even when she says the girls had no problem. (Laughter)
Under Rule 186 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, this House is mandated to establish a select committee, which would receive evidence and point to and respond specifically to the questions that are raised by the Speaker of this House. They are given a specific task and mandate.

I am rising up to inquire procedurally whether it is not proper  that the Speaker on behalf of this House, institutes a select committee to investigate with specific terms of reference and call upon all Ugandans and other people with evidence.

I have also learnt that the President has asked Lt Col Nakalema - he received a whistle-blower but we have no control over that process. When we start debating today, in the end, we must draw conclusions. We may find it necessary to establish that select committee, which will give us a report and then we debate. 

Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally correct that you find pleasure to establish a select committee to investigate quickly, report and then we debate from an informed perspective? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you hon. Sseggona. Honourable members, as to whether I will find pleasure or displeasure -(Laughter)– a request has been made but usually, when it comes by motion, the Presiding Officer is alerted to look at all the parameters to see what would be the proper course of action to take.

Now that it has come in the form in which it has come, I find myself in a situation where I need to consult and come back and give guidance on the same matter. Honourable members, we will pause it. I will consult on this request and give my guidance on Tuesday next week. Thank you. (Applause) Next item.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have guided and I do agree that it is proper that the Chair be given time to consult.

The procedural matter I am raising touches the lives of about 60 young ladies currently stranded in United Arab Emirates (UAE) at our Embassy in Abu Dhabi.

Before I came here, I spoke to our Ambassador, His Excellency Zake Kibedi in UAE. Mr Speaker, in a situation where we have to wait for guidance on Tuesday on whether we can debate this or have a select committee, what do we do about those people who urgently need help?  For example, a person like Nalumansi, was gang-raped and she is currently at the Uganda embassy in Saudi Arabia. There are 56 girls at the Uganda Embassy in Abu Dhabi and a number of them are trying to call us to rescue them. 

Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right if you guide on how to handle issues to do with urgent matters pertaining to the lives of our young women currently stranded and in distress in the Middle East? Kindly, guide me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I do not want to believe and hope would not be true is that we have Ugandans stranded at the Uganda embassies and Government does not know about it – 


HONOURABLE MEMBERS: They know.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would not like to believe that.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, maybe you could help us with this. Are there children at the embassies that we do not know about?

3.53
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I think you have ruled very well.  In the process of this consultation, Government will also use the time to address some of the urgent issues that have been raised, like this information that there may be some Ugandans stranded at the missions. Let us use this time to investigate and if necessary, take action and then, the House will be informed accordingly. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you have any information about the status of our people who are stranded anywhere, please, compile that list and submit it to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development or the Prime Minister so that they can take action on them. Whether it is through my office or directly to the Prime Minister or the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, please, do that. That does not have to wait for anything; we just need to know that such numbers are in India or Abu Dhabi so that they can have the information and by the time we come, we should be just getting updates that such numbers have been brought back. That would be a better way than all of us giving information here and there. Please, make sure this information reaches the right people.

Honourable members, right now, it is going to be Prime Minister’s Time in about three minutes. We will do designation of Members and then, come to Prime Minister’s Time. 

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 157 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

3.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we have re-designated the following Members of Parliament on the Standing Committee on Climate Change. I will read the committees where we have removed them from. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are we reviewing the whole committee?

MR BAHATI: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, Pproceed.

MR BAHATI: We have the following Members:

    1. Hon. Lawrence Songa - Chairperson 
    2. Hon. Beatrice Atim Anywar – Vice chairperson (Interruption)
    3. Hon.  Anthony Semuli 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order. Honourable members, can we listen to the list and then we raise the procedural matters thereafter? I do not think it relates to the entire list.

MR BAHATI:  The other Members are -
    4. Hon. Michael Bukenya
    5. Hon. Alex Byarugaba 
    6. Hon.  Juliet Kyinyamatama
    7. Hon. Ruth Katushabe 
    8. Hon. Jalia Bintu Lukumu, 
    9. Hon. Isaac Mulindwa Ssozi
    10. Hon. Catheline Ndamira
    11. Hon. Robina Hope Mukisa 
    12. Hon. Gaffa Mbwatekamwa
    13. Hon. Aisha Sekindi
    14. Hon. Milly Mugeni
    15. Hon. Richard Oseku  
    16. Hon. Denis Sabiiti.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which committee are you -

MR BAHATI: The Chairperson is hon. Lawrence Songa and hon. Beatrice Atim is the Vice Chairperson. Hon. Songa is coming from Rules and Privileges, hon. Beatrice Atim from PAC/COSASE, hon. Anthony Ssemuli from Rules and Privileges, hon. Michael Bukenya Iga from COSASE, hon. Alex Byarugaba from PAC/ Central, hon. Kyinyamatama from HIV/AIDS, hon. Ruth Katushabe from Equal Opportunities, hon. Jalia Bintu from PAC/ Central, hon. Isaac Mulindwa from Equal Opportunities, hon. Catheline Ndamira from PAC/Central, hon. Robina Hope Mukisa from Appointments Committee, hon. Mbwatekamwa Gaffa from HIV/AIDS, hon. Aisha Sekindi from PAC/COSASE, hon. Milly Mugeni from PAC/Local Government, hon. Richard Oseku from Rules and Privileges and hon. Denis Sabiiti from Human Rights. I beg to move.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The point I am raising for your guidance is very simple; whether it is procedurally right for the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, acting as a Government Chief Whip today, to usurp the powers of the Speaker who is supposed to designate Independents by going ahead to designate hon. Beatrice Anywar Atim to the Committee on Climate Change. This is supposed to be done by either your office or the Office of the Dean of Independents.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Usually, what happens is that the Speaker does not read names. The Speaker, acting on the allocation of the Members who constitute the Independent bench, delegates this responsibility to the Dean or the leader of the Independent members of Parliament.

The person who is providing leadership to the Independent members of Parliament has been the Member for Kabale Municipality but today, I have received a document from a person acting on behalf of the Member for Kabale Municipality, hon. Onesimus Twinamasiko. I do not see him here but he is the one who brought the list of the Independent members of Parliament.

The issue of leadership is discussed and these responsibilities are normally delegated; they do it on behalf of the Speaker. When this is being done, in the presence of The Speaker, there is no such violation because the Speaker would have delegated his responsibilities.

I do not have to say, “I now delegate so and so to do it” but there are processes, which we use to delegate these responsibilities to you, Members, to handle some of the things that we should do ourselves. Therefore, there should be no cause for alarm; we are proceeding very well.

4.02
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Mr Speaker, I designate the following Opposition members to the Standing Committee on Climate Change: 

    1. Hon. Jack Wamai Wamanga 
    2. Hon. Denis Lee Oguzu
    3. Hon. Betty Bamukwatsa
    4. Hon. Veronica Nanyondo

Mr Speaker, I also seek to re-designate hon. Elijah Okupa to the sectoral Committee on Infrastructure. His membership to the Committee of East African Affairs, therefore, ceases.

Hon. Joseph Ssewungu is designated to the Committee on Appointments. 

I would also like to announce that due to resistance in this Parliament –(interjections) - Yes, there was a bit of resistance about hon. Moses Kasibante being the Vice Chairperson of COSASE. I would like to appoint him as my shadow Minister for Physical Planning. He is taking over from hon. Kasozi who was the shadow Minister of Physical Planning but is now the Vice Chairperson of COSASE. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The Leader of the Opposition likes playing tricks on the presiding officer because the item that we are dealing with is designation of members to committees but now we are even appointing ministers. (Laughter)

I think it is because there was a replacement of a minister by somebody going to deputise the chairmanship of a committee. I think that is how it becomes relevant. Therefore, well done.

MR OBOTH: Whereas the Leader of the Opposition has all the liberties and privileges of constituting and reconstituting committees and the shadow cabinet, I am raising a procedural issue on whether hon. Moses Kasibante has not moved to the front prematurely before the question is put. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the appointment of shadow ministers is not subject to the approval of the House. It is by notification to the House and the Member is properly occupying the other bench. 

Honourable members, can I have the Independents? (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_) Yes, point of procedure?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the procedural issue – I am not objecting to –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Point of procedure?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, procedure. Mr Speaker, you ruled that the Independents’ names will be read by the Dean of Independents. I have looked through the Rules of Procedure and the Administration of Parliament Act and have not seen anything called Dean of either Independents or in those rules.

Is it procedurally right to announce that there is a Dean yet all these Independents are independent of each other? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in parliamentary work, we call it practices and procedures. There are those that are by rules and those that are by practice. A practice that has been accepted and practised over time becomes part of the procedure of Parliament. The term has been used from the time Independents were in this House. We now understand that a person designated to lead the team of Independent Members of Parliament is referred to as the Dean. So, it is an accepted word and if you had not yet known it, from now, please, learn and accept that it is the word that is in use. (Laughter) Thank you for understanding.

Honourable members, can I take the list from the Independent Members, please? You see, that role is also by delegation from the Speaker because the mandate was given to the Speaker to do it. So, any person can provide leadership on that. Please, let us proceed.

4.09
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Independent, Kabula County, Lyantonde): On behalf of the Speaker, I would like to designate the following Independent Members to the standing Committee on Climate Change: 

    1. Hon. Waira Majegere Kyewalabye
    2. Hon. Fred Baseke
    3. Hon. Abdulatif Sebaggala
    4. Hon. Onesmus Twinamatsiko

I hereby designate. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, you have listened to the list from the Government Chief Whip, the list from the Opposition and the person nominated to represent the Independent Members of Parliament.

Honourable members, I put the question to the approval of Members to serve on the standing Committee on Climate Change. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We also have a designation and appointed leadership of deputy chairperson by hon. Ibrahim Kasozi to COSASE. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We recognise hon. Moses Kasibante as the shadow minister who has properly occupied his place on the frontbench of the Opposition. (Laughter)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Government Chief Whip designated some Members to committees, which were not originally of their choice. This matter was brought to the then presiding Speaker and she promised to deal with it. I am one of the people designated to a committee where I spent my first term. I feel I served the country on that committee for five years; I cannot go back to the Committee on Equal Opportunities.

I brought that matter to the attention of the Government Chief Whip. She ignored me but I felt that I should raise this as a matter of procedure such that I hear your guidance, together with other colleagues who feel they are being either witch-hunted or mistreated by the Government Chief Whip.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules of this House mandate the whips to handle these matters, not the Speaker. When it comes to the House, it is for approval not debate. So, we will refer this matter to the Government Chief Whip to handle – (Laughter) – based on what you have already raised to handle in a way that brings harmony. You are accordingly referred to the Government Chief Whip for processing. (Laughter)

Honourable members, we had an omission. Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF), please, you used to have somebody who was coordinating you. Please, proceed.

4.13
MAJ. EVARLYNE ASIIMWE (UPDF REPRESENTATIVE): Mr Speaker, I hereby designate hon. Maj. Evarlyne Asiimwe to the Committee on Climate Change, from the Committee on HIV/AIDS and related matters. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the proposal from the UPDF. (Laughter) I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Committee on Climate Change is now properly constituted. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I agree that there are some things, which whether defined or not, when something is practised, it almost becomes a law.

However, Mr Speaker, I would like you to assist me to understand further - you know I come from the mountains - in this House, we have two sides. On your right is the ruling party and on your left is the Opposition. Those who are left are Members who have nowhere to belong. Mr Speaker – 

Anyhow, Mr Speaker, I would like you to help me understand this: are the Independents a party? I am asking this because if they are not a party, then who are they? If they are not – and whatever the case may be – how do we relate with them?

The reason I am raising this is because the Independents are getting more privileges than members yet, under multiparty politics, we must really nurture –(Interjections)– please, learn the rules very well. I have asked because I want to be guided. (Laughter) So, when I go to the people in the mountains, I will explain better that my colleague who is an Independent belongs to this party and that I associate with him like this; I would like your help. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, by Constitution, a member is allowed to stand independent of any political party. (Applause) Once that Member is in the House, that member is a Member of Parliament and this is a Parliament of Uganda.

So, when he or she is in the House, it is the prerogative of the Speaker under Rule 9 to sit that Member of Parliament. Normally, we say right or left but all those things are taken with some aspect of context specificity. Our context specific situation is that we have ten Members of the UPDF who neither belong to the left nor right. They are not even Independents. 

However, we have Members who are elected independent of other political parties. By the agreement of the House and by communication from the Speaker, they have been assigned that portion of the bench on my left. That is where you are sitting. So, if we are to go strictly by our sitting rules, you would not be sitting in the place you are designated to sit. So, please, that is what the Constitution says. 

Once they are already here – because we have groupings; UPDF has its own way of processing its nomination to committees. You cannot have a group of people who do not have structure on how they manage their affairs. So, on their own, they have decided this is how they will manage themselves as independent Members of Parliament, which we have recognised. It cannot go against any rule, therefore. Thank you.

Can we proceed to the Prime Minister’s Time? I think if you have not understood, hon. Mafabi, you may now have to find time and come to my chamber so that I can try to explain it from there. It looks like we are having difficulty from here. Let us go in the office so that I try from there. (Laughter) 

Honourable members, in the public gallery - I apologise - we have teachers and pupils of Kamanda Primary School from Bukomansimbi. I announced them before they entered the House. They are now here and they are represented by hon. Deogratius Kiyingi and hon. Veronica Nanyondo. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)




PRIME MINISTER’S TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I stated earlier, like we did during the last Prime Minister’s Time, let us allow the Prime Minister to deal with the questions that are pending and when he finishes, we will then have the face-to- face interaction. After which, we will then come to the ministerial statements. I see a few of them have already responded to some of the issues you have raised. 

Rt hon. Prime Minister, you will start with the questions you have responses to and then, we go to the face-to-face interaction.

4.20
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to respond to some of the pending issues that have taken quite a bit of time without being responded to. 

The first one is a question by hon. Betty Nambooze, Mukono Municipality, which is about the possible double taxation of owners of rented property by local governments and Uganda Revenue Authority. My response is as follows:

There are two different taxes: Property Tax and Rental Tax. Property Tax is levied by local governments on the rateable values of property, which is determined under the Local Government Rating Act, 2005. The objective is specifically for financing local governments to enable them offer direct services such as street lighting and sanitation services to the local governments. 

Rental Tax, on the other hand, is levied under Section 5 of the Income Tax Act, Cap 340. The tax is charged for each year of income on every individual who has rental income in the same way other business income is subjected to income tax. Therefore, there is no double taxation. 

The second question is on the torture of Jie youth by the UPDF and the people of Katabok Parish, Morolem sub county in Abim District. These youth were suspected to have stolen 21 head of cattle. This question was raised by hon. Margaret Aleper, the Woman Representative for Kotido District. My response is as follows:

During the dry seasons of November and December every year, the people of Kotido move to the neighbouring districts of Agago in Acholi, Otuke in Lango and Kapelebyong in Teso looking for water and pasture. However, some of the criminal elements usually exploit this unfortunate situation to steal cows, destroy gardens and harass the host communities. 

On 24 March 2019, a Jie youth stole 21 cows and drove them to Morolem but the kraal leader refused to harbour the stolen cows. UPDF had to intervene to recover the 21 cows and they arrested five suspects. At the time, the soldiers were few in number and they pleaded with the population not to stone the suspects. In a bid to save the suspects, the soldiers shot in the air and dispersed the angry crowd, which had already inflicted injuries on the suspects. The Deputy Resident District Commissioner of Abim who was present as the scuffle unfolded helped to transport the injured to Abim Hospital. 

It is, therefore, not right to allege that the suspects were tortured by the UPDF and neither did the UPDF hand them over to the population for torture.

The third question is on the murder of two Ugandans in South Sudan, Mr Charles Kule and Ms Willis Binsiima. My response is that on 26 May 2019, unknown assailants killed two Ugandans at Western Lakes State in South Sudan. The deceased were both teachers of Atiaba Secondary School and they were shot at while in the course of their duties in a school vehicle. The motive is said to have been a revenge killing following the death of a paramount chief in the area who was knocked in a car accident by a lorry driven by someone from Kenya. 

Following the killings, the Ugandan Ambassador in Juba met with the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of South Sudan, hon. Deng Nhial and expressed regret about the incident. We have worked closely with the Government of Uganda to repatriate the bodies to Uganda and also facilitated the burial arrangements.

Our diplomatic and security agencies are already engaging their sister agencies in the Republic of South Sudan with a view to apprehend the perpetrators and ultimately ensuring that justice is done.

Mr Speaker, the fourth question is on cancellation of titles arising from the 1990 Instrument that gave land to the people and takeover of some of this land by suspected land grabbers and eviction of occupants. This was raised by hon. Pius Wakabi. 

The response is that I wish to inform this honourable House that no title under the ranches scheme has ever been cancelled; specifically for the mentioned ranches No. 15, 20, 21, 22 and 30 which are located in Kiryandongo. These were leased by Government to specific individuals.

It should be noted that during the ranches restructuring exercise, they were earmarked for change of use so that they become forest reserves. This exercise did not materialise and so, the lawful owners retained their land and dealt with it as they so wished in accordance with land laws.

Mr Speaker, question No.5 is on the need to consider waiving taxes on surveillance cameras. This was raised by hon. Luttamaguzi Ssemakula of Nakaseke South. The response is that security equipment including CCTV cameras is exempted from import duty and VAT. This was done to make them affordable.

However, the recorders are not exempt and they attract duty tax at the rate of 25 per cent, which is charged by the East African Community and also VAT at the rate of 18 per cent because of their multiple uses that can include watching movies and playing music.

Uganda practices a free market economy. Where Government does not control prices, there is no guarantee that removal of taxes on recorders will lead to a reduction of the retail prices. Prices are determined by the market forces.

Mr Speaker, the sixth question is on the verification team set up by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in a press release on traders in South Sudan disregarding recommendations of a parliamentary select committee. This was a team led by hon. Ann Maria Nankabirwa.

In response, the select committee of Parliament recommended that both Government of Uganda and South Sudan complete the verification of traders. The verification exercise that is being undertaken by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is in line with the recommendations of the select committees and follows the bilateral agreement between the two countries.

The independent verification exercise, therefore, is to authenticate all the claims and the report shall be useful in the joint verification exercise with the Government of South Sudan. Payment of the claims shall be after completion of the verification exercise and will be done in line with the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

Mr Speaker, question no.7 is on the lack of a magistrate and the need to assign a senior state Attorney to Kagadi District. This was raised by hon. Eric Musana Member of Parliament for Buyaga County East. The response is that Kagadi District is under Fort Portal regional officer that is handled by the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, which is headed by Mr Isaac Singula acting Principal State Attorney. Therefore, services are offered from Fort Portal for all civil matters.

The lack of a magistrate has been taken up with the Judiciary and the Resident State Attorney under the Directorate of Public Prosecutions to handle all criminal matters. Therefore, the matter is being handled.

Question No. 10 is on the incursion by elephants leading to destruction of crops in people’s gardens, raised by hon. William Nzoghu and also by hon. Hellen Kahunde.

The response is that the Uganda Wildlife Act, which was recently passed by this august House, will address some of the human-wildlife relations that have characterised the wildlife conservation areas. 

Additionally, as Government, there has been a directive by His Excellency, the President to erect electric fences in the wildlife conservation areas to make sure that there are no clashes between the animals and the population.

Question No.11 is by hon. Robinah Rwakoojo on the rampant theft of boda-bodas and killings of riders in Gomba. The response is that since the beginning of this year, 10 cases have been registered. Six are murder cases, three of robbery and one case of attempted murder.

So far, six suspects were arrested and charged in court. These are some of the measures to stop the crime;

    1. Increased surveillance and deployment of both foot and motorised patrols. This is particularly in black spots where crimes are normally committed.
    2. Enhanced community policing among the boda-boda riders.
    3. Uganda Police Force has introduced a Uganda police force mob application, which operates on Global Information System (GIS). It gives the reporter direction and location of the nearest police with full telephone contacts of the District Police Commander (DPC), the Officer-in-Charge (OC) and the Officer-in-Charge of Criminal Investigation Department (OC/CID) for quick response where crime is reported. This is using modern information technology to be able to combat crime.

Question 12 regards the killing of mobile money operators in various parts of the country. The question was raised by hon. Luttamaguzi Semakula.

The response is that between 1 January 2019 and 16 July 2019, a total of 17 cases of robbery involving mobile money agents were registered throughout the country. Nine victims were shot dead while three others were shot and injured during the robberies. 10 suspects were arrested, charged in court and are now remanded. The Uganda Police has increased intelligence and has been sensitising the operators on how to secure their premises and reduce the amount of money at their disposal, especially at night.

Question 13 is about the security threats faced by vanilla farmers. This was raised by hon. Barnabas Tinkansiimire. 

The response is that police has increased surveillance and intelligence in areas where vanilla is grown. In addition, they have encouraged the farmers, through their associations, to coordinate and share security information with security agencies in their areas of operation. Also, toll free lines were provided to ease reporting of suspected cases.

The last question for this phase is question 14, on inadequate awareness of sensitisation of prospective beneficiaries of the Students Loan Scheme under the Higher Education Students Financing Board. The question was raised by hon. Prossy Akampulira.

The response is that in the last five years, a total of 8,190 beneficiaries, mainly in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics have benefited from this scheme. There have been numerous efforts to advertise and create awareness about this scheme through several communication channels. These have included online platforms, print media, local radio stations and also sensitisation and awareness talk shows about the Students Loan Scheme.

Mr Speaker, those are 14 answers on some of the questions that have been outstanding. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt hon. Prime Minister. We will now start the face-to-face session with the Prime Minister.

4.41
MR PETER OKOT (DP, Tochi County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, a number of sub-counties were created and approved by the Ministry of Local Government. Subsequently, the Electoral Commission went ahead to establish Interim Governments in these sub-counties.

However, in the Financial Year 2019/2020 Budget, we did not see money availed for operationalisation of the sub-counties yet, we see them operational. What plans does Government have to make money available for these sub counties to become fully financially operational?

4.42
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, the honourable member is absolutely right. These local government structures are in place but it is true that there are no adequate budgetary provisions. The minister responsible will come up, at an appropriate time, to indicate to the country how the matter is going to be handled –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA LUBEGA: Mr Speaker, with immense respect to the Prime Minister, the financial year has already started. These local governments are supposed to run but the Prime Minister is talking of “an appropriate time”, which he does not define. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, each time an interim Government is set up, they draw funds from the institution from which they were separated. For example, if a sub county is created from Bukomansimbi, they draw financing from the mother sub county for the immediate financing of the operations of the new one. 

Therefore, there should be no gap. I am sure that the additional funding that the Prime Minister is talking about is what should now make them become operational on their own.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a question I have raised since the last Parliament. The last time I raised this matter, Rt hon. Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali said he would take it upon himself to inform the Prime Minister to respond to it. I thought it should have been one of the responses made today.

The question regards the landing site in Kagwara, which was found to be substandard. When hon. Ruth Nankabirwa was the Minister of State for Fisheries, she went for the commissioning of the landing site and said it had to be completed.

Mr Speaker, you may remember that this was the loan that we passed in the Seventh Parliament under the African Development Bank (ADB) for the 29 landing sites. They only worked on nine, which were not fully completed. This project has remained unfinished. 

The question I would like to put before the Prime Minister is - and I have also written to the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries - when will resources be availed to complete this project?

Is the Prime Minister proceeding correctly by omitting this question that has lasted many years? When will he be able to give us a response so that the people of Kasilo and Kagwara landing site where you are setting up a dock – Maybe you could use that opportunity to have it completed because you will not need much money to complete it. It looks ugly and paints a bad picture to the Government.

Therefore, I would like to know when the Prime Minister will avail resources to have this project completed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that was supposed to be a procedural matter but you have ended up doing what you initially wanted to do. (Laughter) 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, on the procedural matter, I would say it is true that my brother, hon. Elijah Okupa raised this matter before and fortunately, the minister responsible is in the House. I would advise that five minutes with the responsible minister may close the gap and provide the answer.

4.17
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week, I raised an issue about the only secondary school for the deaf whose roof was blown down by wind. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can I know the progress whether this school is going to be roofed because the children are suffering - that is Wakiso School for the Deaf, the only secondary school we have after the one in Mbale. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon Prime Minister, this is one of the questions that were submitted to your office.

DR RUGUNDA: I think this question will require a more specific response and it will be addressed either by I or the minister responsible so that this matter can be closed.

4.48
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I stand here for the second time to raise a matter concerning stray dogs terrorising the communities in Bukomasimbi including their domestic animals; many people have died.

We do not have rabies vaccine in the health centres IV. Are you waiting for all people to die before you take action? Is your Government against the people of Bukomasimbi?

DR RUGUNDA: Let me assure hon. Kiyingi that the Government of Uganda - and I believe the Local Government of Bukomasimbi - are with you as a leader. You as the leader in the community just  mobilise the population and we will come and reinforce you as much as possible so that the problem is vanquished. (Laughter)

4.49
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I am in possession of a letter written by hon. Col Charles Engola, the Minister of State for Defence (Veteran Affairs) to the Prime Minister’s Office on 27 March 2018, on the report related to his security visit to Moyo District on 19 March 2018. It was about the invasion and cattle raids in Moyo District by armed people from South Sudan, where 1229 cattle were stolen.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, may I know from you as to when the Government will endeavor to compensate the cattle owners as was promised by the President on 11 August 2018 in a thanksgiving function in Moyo District? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But isn’t that the matter that you are going to have a meeting about tomorrow? This matter came up earlier and they were given information that there is a meeting going to take place tomorrow to try to resolve it.

4.50
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to appreciate that the Government of Uganda accepted to construct a bridge connecting Nakasongola to Kayunga.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Omega Construction Company was awarded a contract of constructing this bridge. The site was handed over to this company in May but as per now nothing has commenced. As the people of Nakasongola, we are worried because this company one time was given a contract of constructing a road from Nakasongola Army Barracks to Kafu and it abandoned it, a job given to it by the Uganda National Roads Authority.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, how can you assure this House and the communities in Nakasongola and Kayunga that Omega Construction Company will not abandon site and will construct the bridge to avoid the deaths our people have suffered especially the people of Nakasongola and Kayunga?

DR RUGANDA: Mr Speaker, contracts between Government and companies stipulate details of how a company, which does not fulfill its obligation, is handled and the same contract will be used by Government to ensure that that company is dealt with and that the bridge is built.

4.53
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there is an outcry among the youth, as you know, on the issue of unemployment. Many get driving permits but when those permits expire, and they go for renewal after one month, they are subjected to a new system as if they have never had a driving permit. Why is it so and why is the cost becoming high? Instead of paying Shs 280,000, they are demanding Shs 480,000. We would like to know why it is like that. Normally, they would have gone for renewal but they are subjected to a fresh system again.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I do not have the detailed requirements but suffice to say that we have been having many accidents. I do expect Police and licensing agencies to be more strict and more stringent and if necessary, to even make sure that the drivers are, indeed, genuine drivers and that they do not buy or bribe to get their driving permits. 

Nevertheless, this point is well taken and it will be passed on to the honourable minister responsible who, fortunately, is in the vicinity to follow it up and as necessary, will brief the House so that colleagues can be on board and can be able to explain why these measures have been taken.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When the substantive Speaker was in that chair, there was a debate on the issue of the Prime Minister’s Question Time because we were soul searching in this House how to make the Prime Minister’s Question Time serve its purpose.

I remember the Speaker who was in that chair ruled on how long each Member should take asking questions to enable us entertain more questions. At that time, she made a count and we had done 40 questions in 30 minutes.

However, the area I am seeking procedural guidance on is whether we could do further soul searching because some of the responses from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister are making this thing a ritual. For example, the Prime Minister has just stated here now that the President has directed that all national parks should be fenced. I sit on the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry and I can tell you that that is not true. We were even told that they just want to pilot, that even the South African Government has failed to fence theirs.

However, to come to this House and see such a statement from the Prime Minister, which is not even reflected anywhere in the Budget - we can bring the Budget Framework Paper and the book. Therefore, we need guidance on what kind of responses should come from the Prime Minister. He is also an individual and Government ministries are so wide; he cannot know everything, neither can I.

Therefore, I seeking guidance whether it is not about time we soul search in our rules so that even if it is Prime Minister’s Question Time, the Prime Minister should be allowed to call on a Minister to respond. For example hon. Azuba here would have more concrete answers on the driving permit, instead of postponing the question to next time.  I am just seeking your indulgence to make the time worth it, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable member, I think that is what we have been doing. Right now, we are on a trial run. We are trying to do some innovation on how we can make this time more productive. For example, we frontloaded all the questions that have never been answered by the ministers, to the Prime Minister. That is how he started; by responding with some detail. This is because they have looked at the questions, studied them, done some quick research and know exactly what to inform the people of this country. These answers are factual based on policy. That is what we are trying to do. 

However, when he responded to those now, we started the face-to-face. I have always guided that this time is not for factual things. For example, it is not the time for that pothole in my constituency in Omoro because I would not expect the Prime Minister to know about a pothole in my constituency. I would not expect him to know about a contractor on a road in some place in Pader District.

Therefore, this time, the intention was to engage the Prime Minister on policy issues. He is the Leader of Government Business in the House and therefore, he would be able to respond on policy issues. 

I had proposed that for specific questions that you find really burning, we could submit a list to the Prime Minister on Monday. This will enable us transmit on some of those factual things he can get information on so that the people down there understand that their issue has been responded to by none other than the Prime Minister. It would give them the confidence. It is like walking on the road we are building, making some changes and adjustments to see how best we can utilise this time and make it more productive but we keep learning. 

4.58
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA LUBEGA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not rising on a procedural issue but I am only relying on your indemnity. I think I have raised this question before; would it equally not be procedurally right to make the Prime Minister’s Question Time more useful by asking him where he does not have facts, he can as well say that he can get facts and get back? 

My problem, as hon. Odonga says, is even when we fall into the trap of asking factual questions, the Prime Minister, as the most senior legislator in the House, being the Leader of Government Business, has equally not been of assistance. Even where he does not have facts, he commits himself. I do not know whether he is stampeded or he needs assistance. 

I agree that the first leg, Mr Speaker, is to submit the questions in time but the second leg equally is for the Prime Minister, where he does not have facts, to state so. It is honourable and not dishonourable. 

5.00
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Mr Speaker, I would like to go on the defence of the Prime Minister. In my opinion, it is the ministers that have failed the Prime Minister. There are questions that we raise here and the ministers are supposed to answer but instead, we direct them to the Prime Minister because we have asked the ministers and they have never responded. 

For example, the matter I raised, Mr Speaker – hon. Ssempijja should have come with a statement here. Three years down the road and there is no response. Why don’t ministers respond to those questions? Then, in the end, we end up channelling the questions to the Prime Minister. 

The Prime Minister needs to either assert himself or coordinate with the Government Chief Whip to direct these ministers to respond to these questions. There are some questions on general nature, like you have said, Mr Speaker. Those are the questions we are supposed to be asking the Prime Minister. 

However, there are those specific questions that we have asked. Like today, we posed questions to the honourable Minister for Works and Transport as well as the Minister of Health. Instead of asking hon. Lokodo about this pastor, we shall again ask the Prime Minister. Hon. Lokodo should even come here before we ask them such questions. 

I would like the ministers to help the Prime Minister such that the Prime Minister is only limited to questions of general nature, which he can handle. 

Nevertheless, I also agree with hon. Sseggona here that the Prime Minister should direct his ministers. Where he does not have facts or answers, he can direct the line minister to come with a response on a particular date. We should also have a tracking system to follow such that we know when the question is coming and when the minister is going to respond. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.02
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think we, as a Parliament, need to go a little deeper in understanding the importance of the time given for the Prime Minister’s Question Time. 

At the same time, we also need to appreciate that we are a replica of the British system. We are members of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, where we have got two different systems.

Whereas in the UK and India, the Prime Minister is the Chief Executive, it is not the case with Uganda. In the UK, when the members of Parliament, the House of Commons, stand up to ask the Prime Minister questions, they are, in our sense, questioning the President, which is not the case for us. 

Therefore, we need to understand the role that the two systems play. I sympathise with my senior Ndugu here many times when he stands up and says, “Yes, I am following this. Yes, I am aware of this.”  As a human being, he is short of words and concrete explanations. We need to appreciate that. 

We need to look deeper, as a Parliament, probably in the long run, we may have to ask the Parliamentary Commission to conduct a study so that we are able to notice the two differences and then be able to crucify or to un-nail him from the cross appropriately. However, as of now, my sympathies with Ndugu Rugunda – yes, I must be very objective because I have had the opportunity of visiting the House of Commons as well as the Parliament of India; so, I know what it means. 

Let us try to put ourselves in a learning situation so that we do not rub him hard. At the same time, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that does not mean that you should let loose your ministers; probably, they are not able to respond because you are not an Executive Prime Minister. They are human beings; they may have that feeling, which you deeply know. If they are summoned by State House, I think they will all be on their knees and quickly in the middle of the night, they will rush there and give answers. 

When the Prime Minister, who is not the Executive – (Interruption) 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Wadri for giving way. What hon. Wadri is stating has been stated in this House before by the very presiding officer today, the Speaker. He guided that we should make good use of this. By then, I was the Chairperson of the Rules Committee and this was forwarded. 

We actually benchmarked and went to Seychelles. During the Prime Minister’s Question time, they have the President in Parliament. Matters are handled there and then. We are actually bothering the Prime Minister too much thinking we shall get a lot from him. It is not surprising that we get the kind of responses we get because he is a human being. I do not envy him. All these Members of Parliament want solutions and the questions are given to you right on the spot.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You do not admire him or you do not envy him? 

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, my name is in the alternative - I am called Oboth, so it would be both. (Laughter) However, thank you for that. 

It is a difficult job. What hon. Kassiano Wadri is saying is that if we want to make it more relevant, then we have to do something specifically. I was removed from Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline before tabling that report and generating a debate. I do not know what has happened to that report. You had given a very instructive instruction that we make it relevant so that we benefit. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR WADRI: Thank you very, hon. Oboth. I have absolutely nothing more useful to add to what you have said. Having that two-year sabbatical absence from this House I think was the time when you undertook that benchmarking mission to Seychelles. So, what I had in mind was already carried out and I am happy to hear about that. 

Mr Speaker, I think it would only be appropriate that Parliament as an institution traces that report, which was made at the time when hon. Jacob Oboth was the Chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Privileges so that we can be able to appreciate their findings from the Parliament of Seychelles and see if we have anything useful to learn from it. I strongly believe that we have something useful to learn so that we can be able to embrace it. Mr Speaker, I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we pause this here? Gen. Elly Tumwine, is it on this same debate?

5.08
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (NRM, UPDF Representative): Mr Speaker, I watch the proceedings of Parliament even when I am not here and I sometimes wonder where we are heading. Onetime, we went with the former Speaker, now the Vice President, to study the experience of the Australian Parliament on this matter we are discussing. We were even invited to attend the Prime Minister’s Question Time. We took time to study how they do it, not only in Australia but also in the UK, among other countries.

In those countries, it is very clean and straight. Prime Minister’s Question Time is for only one hour. Quite a number of the questions are given before and even if there is a spontaneous question, it is kept within a limit; each one in not more than two minutes. The Prime Minister answers the questions in one hour once a week. The rest of the time is given to discuss Bills and big matters. 

I have observed and have been calculating the time here, where this House has now become a “prayer House”. People come with all sorts of prayers and they want the Prime Minister to answer, even about the stray dogs in Bukomansimbi. Questions from Members of Parliament are inexhaustible because they have very many. 

The advice that was given is that many of the questions should go to the ministry concerned. You should find out from there before you bring them to Parliament. (Interjection) – Yes, I am telling you what will help. It is better because you will help the minister to explain and answer you from his office. What you cannot get from there is what you bring here. Otherwise, we schedule that time for questions and we continue with other things. 

I want you to benefit from the experience. If you know the time this Parliament has spent on endless questions, it is taking a lot of our time. I have been calculating the time and I will give you the figures. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me guide and then we go back to the Prime Minister’s Time. Honourable members, we have a situation that we have to deal with. We are just trying to be innovative to assist the people of this country to get answers to the issues that they raise.

We have a new animal in this House called “matters of national importance”. This is a complete abuse of our rules and it happens every day. Sometimes, we have up to 18 matters of national importance on issues which are not urgent. I keep saying that all questions that come under our rule 46 relate to an exception to the requirement of notice for all questions. You are saying that this particular issue is very urgent that if I waste time looking for notice, the situation will over deteriorate - there is a disease outbreak, a bridge has collapsed or a road has been washed away and all such emergencies. That is what was anticipated to be accommodated under rule 46 of the Rules of Procedure.

Ordinarily, everything in this House must be by advance notice; so because of the urgency, you create this. Now, what we are doing is that under this rule, we bring issues of 1920. Someone says that in 1920, this happened; how is that urgent? Two weeks ago, on the Order Paper, on business to follow, we had nine pages of urgent questions, which were never urgent. When Gen. Elly Tumwine said that we are turning this into a “prayer House”, he is right - “Mr Speaker, something has happened, my prayers are…” If it is urgent, you do not need prayers. 

If it is a disease outbreak, you come and say that there is suspicion of an outbreak of this disease in this area, and the minister does not have to say, “I will respond tomorrow”. They will say, “We have taken note; we are moving” and the matter is dealt with. If a bridge has broken and you have alerted the Minister of Works and Transport, she does not have to come with a statement. She will say, “We are deploying immediately, putting a temporary bridge so that people can move while we repair the old one.” Those are urgent matters. 

Why has this happened? It is because these kinds of questions should have been under questions for oral answer but the ministers have refused to respond to them. That is where the problem is. We have questions that were asked from the last Parliament but they have never been responded to. Since we have failed on the questions for oral answer, we now use this time to pray. That is where the problem is and it is a cycle.

If you look at the list of questions we have forwarded to you, all were ministerial questions but they have never responded to them. I do not want to embarrass the honourable ministers, but all the questions that were referred to the Prime Minister had ministerial assignments. Since you have failed to answer them and people want answers, now we are trying to be innovative and pass them to the Prime Minister so that we use the Prime Minister’s Time in a more productive way - answering questions that are direct and that he has advance notice of so that he can give us comprehensive answers. We are just trying to be creative to handle a bad situation.

The biggest problem, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, which you must deal with, is your ministers and the way they treat this House. If you do not do that, then we are going to be chasing our tails like this every time without any solution. It is almost a crisis.

For all these so-called urgent matters, if the ministers were here, they would respond to them and close the matters there and then. However, they pile up and the items on the Order Paper keep piling up. By last week, the total pages of the Order Paper were almost 15 and all of them had issues that could have been handled. 

Please, let us cooperate on these matters and make the Rules of Procedure of Parliament work because we have failed our rules and we are now beginning to create avenues, which cannot be entertained. It gives difficulty to the presiding officer to handle these businesses.

Be that as it may, we still have some time to engage with the Prime Minister. However, please avoid factual questions; avoid issues of dogs in Bukomansimbi and things like that. (Laughter) Let us ask the Prime Minister policy questions that he can respond to in a way that can guide us. Thank you.

5.17
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are community schools, which have been taken up by Government and they have become Government-aided. These schools are really in a sorry state. The buildings in these schools are semi-permanent and some do not have buildings at all yet we believe that Government is supporting them. 

What plans does the Prime Minister have to see to it that these schools are facilitated and given classrooms like is the case with seed schools? These seed schools are now benefitting more from Government than Government-aided schools and yet they are serving the same people. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister, what is the policy on Government takeover of community schools and what are Government’s obligations when they take them over?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, again, the policy on seed schools’ distribution and takeover is generally known. I think the Ministry of Education and Sports, in particular, has spoken a few times about this – (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, at the risk of being misunderstood by my brother, the Prime Minister, you simplified the question from the Member for Koboko by asking the Prime Minister, “What is the policy?” He is now telling us that the policy is generally known. I must plead ignorance - if that is the right word - because we do not know the policy.

The question from the Speaker is, tell us the policy. By not telling us the policy and presupposing that we know the policy and avoiding the question therefore, is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please deal with the question. (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: The position is simple; every sub county should have a Government-aided secondary school. Secondly, if there are schools already in place, one of them may be selected or a new one may be built. However, the principle is, let every sub county have a Government-aided secondary school. 

Government has done well in this direction. We know that there are some sub counties that do not have secondary schools that are aided by Government, but it is the determination of Government to ensure that this is realised.

Mr Speaker, before I sit, let me also make a comment on what my brother, hon. Odonga Otto, said. The question of national parks – animals and the population – has been a matter that has been extensively discussed. The position of Government is that we will use a number of methods to ensure that national parks and the population are not in conflict. Electric fencing is one of the methods we are going to use and some work in this direction has already started in Queen Elizabeth National Park.

Secondly, there are some plants that are going to be used because the animals find it difficult to cross such vegetation. Thirdly, there are some physical impediments that are going to be put in place; for example, trenches so that animals do not easily cross from national parks to the population.

In a nutshell, we are not playing monkey tricks here; we are stating a well-known position, which was thoroughly discussed by Cabinet and in principle, agreed upon. Actualisation may be a problem and it may be prolonged but this is the direction.

5.22
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in 2016, drought hit some areas of Bukanga in Isingiro and other parts of the south-western region. 

Last year, this Parliament sat and approved a loan totalling €120 million, which was meant for water supply to the people of Isingiro, Mbarara, Masaka and others. The problem we have now is that the weather has already changed and we have already told our people that as of now, Government has laid down some good strategies on how they are going to get water. However, since Parliament approved that loan request, we do not know about its progress. We would like to know whether that project is still on or not. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, that project is on and all of us are looking forward to its completion. If there are delays, we are going to follow up and ensure that it is expeditiously implemented.

5.24
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is alleged that one of us, hon. Idah Nantaba, a minister of state, is under house arrest and that her movements are highly restricted, including her coming to this august House to discharge her duties as a minister and Woman MP representing Kayunga District. Kindly, can you deny or confirm this allegation to this august House?

DR RUGUNDA: Hon. Idah Nantaba is not under house arrest. (Laughter)

5.25
MR MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am standing here for the second time on the same issue. Around 5 May, Daily Monitor published a news article stating that Government had stopped the tendering process for the construction of the Atiak-Laropi-Afoji–Koboko road. 

Mr Speaker, this news has annoyed the people of West Nile and they demand to know whether what the newspaper said is real. If it is true, why stop the construction of this road in particular? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, since the Minister of Works and Transport is here, I propose that she gives us the answer, with your permission.

5.26
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Ntege Azuba): Mr Speaker, the procurement for the contractors took place but the process has been stopped because it was observed that the price was too high. So, it is going to be redone. It was not stopped; it will be re-tendered.

5.26
MR GEORGE OUMA ABOTT (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. One time in 2018, the Government of Uganda, in its wisdom, decided to control depletion of fish in the lakes but this has since turned lives from jubilation to tribulation. 

Mr Speaker, one time I wrote a letter to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister requesting him to tell us about the Government’s plan for 90 per cent of the fishermen who had been removed from their activities. What is the plan of Government to make sure that these people have a good life instead of removing them from their activity? They have tried to cry to the Government but it is not rescuing them from these problems. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this matter has been discussed in this House on the basis that my brother has been raising it. However, I would like to say that the policy has already started yielding good results because some of the factories that had closed have now been reopened because there is sufficient fish stock.

The second point is that Operation Wealth Creation leadership has been directed to pay special attention to the people who have been involved in fishing, so that they can be supported to be able to earn a meaningful or alternative living. 

5.28
MS LUCY ACHIRO OTIM (Independent, Aruu North County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Acholi Sub region has been battling the serious challenge of nodding syndrome and its associated effects. 

According to the research findings by the Ministry of Health, it was reported that the cause of nodding syndrome is the black flies. As I speak, the black flies have invaded Pader District in large numbers. What interventions do you have to see to it that such invasions do not cause new cases of nodding syndrome in the Acholi Sub region? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member is right, on the basis on evidence available, that black flies are associated with the nodding syndrome.

As you may know, there has been spraying of the area in order to eliminate them. With this upsurge that you have talked about, it appears to me that there is need for us to have a robust response, which now may include respraying. 

5.30
MR PIUS WAKABI (NRM, Bugahya County, Hoima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is Government policy to have at least a university in each region. I am happy that Government has implemented this policy in all regions apart from Bunyoro. When are you putting up a university in Bunyoro Sub region? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I know that Government has taken a decision to have a university in Bunyoro. The issues of operationalisation on whether it is located in Kigumba or an associated institution – It is also true that Government has a plan and a vision to have a specialised university that focuses on training our people in the oil sector and Kigumba is being developed to be that type of university.

5.31
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality Kumi): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Government has initiated several projects across the country in the past. Notable among the few are Aterai Health Centre III in Kumi Municipality; a theatre in Kumi Health Centre IV; a landing site project, which was mentioned by my colleague, the Member for Kasilo; the project for fish fry in Gulu; the ice project in Bukungu in Buyende District. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what mechanism do you have to track projects that are initiated by Government but are not completed, so that we can save money that comes from Government coffers from going to waste?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, individual ministries have monitoring mechanisms to ensure projects in their respective sectors are successful. No wonder, the Minister of Works and Transport has told us that she has monitored the road to Adjumani and found that there is problem and stopped the procurement process so that it can be retendered. Similarly, at a national level, we have monitoring and evaluation mechanisms under the Office of the Prime Minister, which monitors projects. Where there is a problem, those projects are given corrective measures, additional resources or readjusted accordingly. So, there is a monitoring mechanism.

However, I would like to also say that Members and other leaders are critical monitors and therefore, information from you to ministers about the performance of projects in the various sectors is extremely helpful. We are ready to act as quickly as possible if we get information from you on delays or anything that will be anti-people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have gone way beyond the time scheduled for this but I think it was necessary. We have five questions that ministers are ready to respond to. These are from the Ministry of Education and Sports, the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Health. We need these matters responded to because they were raised as very urgent matters. Usually, to roll up our Prime Minister’s Time, the Leader of the Opposition speaks and then we see how to finish this.

5.31
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for those responses.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF) is under the Office of the Prime Minister. In order to reduce incidences of corruption, you have community-based monitoring groups and I believe you know about them. These groups work very hard to recover and make sure that people do not misappropriate or abuse the NUSAF funding.

Mr Speaker, I have met some members of those community-based monitoring groups from Gulu, Amuru and Omoro. They said that when they were going to be trained, they were promised a small stipend after six months, they were also promised phones and some identity cards. However, all these have not been done yet they have been working.

These are women and men with families. In Uganda, our people are still so poor; is that not a way of encouraging or deepening corruption because these people could be compromised very easily?  What do you have to say about that?

When I was in Isingiro, the Chairman of the district complained a lot about the blockage of trade. They have milk and cows but there are roadblocks where money is extorted from the farmers. Since that is happening in the western part of Uganda, I believe that you should know; if it was in the north, maybe you would complain. The Chairman of Isingiro even showed us a letter written by the President about four years ago directing that the roadblocks be removed, but they are still there blocking their trade in animal products.

Lastly, we have a problem with works. If works are done either on the roads or buildings, there must be certification. If these people certify after all payments are made to the contractors but the buildings or roads do not last long - I would like to give an example of our road from Gulu, following Nimule Road; we already have a lot of potholes which developed as soon as the road was finished. Who should be held accountable; is it those who are supposed to issue certificates to the contractors or the contractors themselves? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I would like to salute the Leader of the Opposition for her vigilance and for sharing information she has found in the field, to make sure that the projects for the tax payer and paid for by the taxpayer are indeed protected for the common good of our people.

Secondly, on the issue of NUSAF, I would request the Speaker of Parliament to allow the minister who is directly in charge of NUSAF to give us the real picture so that Parliament and the country can benefit.

5.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Northern Uganda) (Ms Grace Kwiyucwiny): Thank you, honourable Prime Minister. Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for being able to identify and bring up this issue. 

The NUSAF programme has community facilitators identified, trained and paid by the district local governments. They are facilitated to mobilise and organise the communities they work with, according to the enterprises they have identified. There should be no reason to expect more than what has been defined to facilitate them. However, if they would be tempted to dupe the communities and ask for more from them, then they are not doing the right thing. Those we discovered asking for money for facilitation from the communities have been dismissed and other people have been trained in their places. Thank you.

MS BETTY AOL: I seek clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No please, let us leave it there. We are not going to have a debate now. 

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you. The last point was on the roadblocks in Isingiro which were again observed by my sister, the Leader of the Opposition. It is true that there have been issues of quarantine in Isingiro area to ensure that we control disease among the cows, and this is necessary. However, whenever there is a roadblock, some bad elements try to take advantage. As for how long this will take; as long as the disease is a menace, there must be control measures.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much for this. We will see each time how to try and improve on how we use the Prime Minister’s Time. Thank you.

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION RAISED BY HON. JOHNSON MUYANJA SSENYONGA ON THE SHODDY WORKS ON THE MUKONO-KATOSI ROAD
 
5.43
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Azuba): This statement is presented in response to a matter raised during the Ninth Sitting of the First Meeting of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament by hon. Muyanja Johnson Ssenyonga, MP for Mukono County South, concerning the shoddy works done during the construction of the Mukono-Katosi Road.

Mr Speaker, the concerns raised regarding the shoddy works relate to the road section between four to seven kilometres from this side of Mukono, where the surface of the constructed road was irregular. This particular section had earlier on been identified by the resident engineer and the works were rejected. 

Consequently, following the rejection, the contactor undertook to rectify the section at his cost. As part of the rectification, the bitumen course was removed and a new surfacing layer was constructed. On completion, tests were done and the section was found to comply with the specification requirements.

In addition, at kilometre 3, there was a drainage system but it is being rectified; the contractor is constructing box culverts which are going to be put in that place because of the floods that come from the embankments. 

All these are going to be done at the contractor’s cost as this section of the road is still under the defect liability period. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, I do not think that item No. 4 (a) was dealt with by the Prime Minister. This is about the loan scheme. The House had asked that the deadline of the 15th be extended. Can we have a response to that because it expired on the 15th?

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION RAISED BY HON. AKAMPULIRA PROSSY MBABAZI ON THE INADEQUATE AWARENESS OF THE SENSITIZATION OF PROSPECTIVE BENEFICIARIES OF THE STUDENTS LOAN SCHEME WHOSE APPLICATION DEADLINE FOR THE ACADEMIC YEAR 2019/2020 WAS 15 JULY 2019

5.52
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro Okurut): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is from the Minister of Education and Sports. It is mainly a statement on inadequate awareness of sensitisation of prospective beneficiaries of the Student Loan Scheme under the Higher Education Student Financing Board. I am going to present the statement.

The Higher Education Student Financing Board was established in 2014 by an Act of Parliament. Its mandate includes the provision of loans and scholarships to Ugandan students, who have qualified to pursue accredited courses of study in recognised institutions of higher education but are unable to support themselves financially. In the last five years, the board has awarded loans to 8,190 beneficiaries, mainly in science, technology, engineering and maths programmes. Through this board, Government is supporting training in courses whose graduates are currently needed by the local job market.

Student Loan Applications, 2019

On Thursday, April 25 2019, the First Lady and Minister of Education and Sports, Mrs Janet K. Museveni, while launching the online portal for student loan applications, announced the 6th call for student loan applications, which was to commence on Monday, 29 April 2019 and end on 15 July 2019. The call was very highly publicised, with over 40 mainstream and local media houses covering the story and publicising the same. 

On Monday, 29 April 2019, the official call for student loan applications was advertised in the New Vision. This was followed up with an advert in the Daily Monitor on Friday, May 3 2019 and in the same paper on Wednesday, 5 May 2019, and also the Observer followed it up. The board started to receive filled applications on that same day, 29 April 2019.

In May 2019, the same board also launched the advert about the loan scheme and the call for student loan applications across the country on 16 community radio stations. These went on for a period of 60 days, ending in June. These two were supplemented by talk shows on the same media stations to help clarify on different issues, including the deadline.

To supplement this, adverts were also run on NTV and Bukedde TV during prime news in the same period. The board also extensively utilised all the available social media platforms to send out the necessary information. The adverts carried information about the call for student loan applications, eligibility, coverage, how to apply, programmes supported, institutions where programmes can be attained and the deadline. The board also pinned information on all the noticeboards of the participating institutions across the country, with all the application information and the deadline. 

In order to ease access to the loan application process, the board established four areas from which students could access application forms or apply from their remote locations. The board partnered with Centenary Bank, where at any of the 74 branches of the bank across the country, one could pick and submit filled application forms. 

The board, on April 26, also launched the online loan application system, where students could easily apply and submit at any location of their convenience, as long as they had access to the internet. This follows the new online system that universities are using for student applications, which are currently compulsory.

On the board’s website, one could download forms, fill them and submit them at any Centenary Bank branch across the country. The board also placed advertisement banners at all the 20 universities and 36 tertiary institutions whose programmes are supported by the board. They also went ahead and worked with all those institutions throughout the admission process to popularise the student loan opportunities, which was consequently captured in most universities’ advertisements.

Deadline for Application

Mr Speaker, as communicated above, the deadline for the applications was set for July 15 2019 and communicated very widely on all the platforms as discussed. The reason for setting this deadline was informed by the following:

a) 	All universities and other tertiary institutions had advertised and released lists of students for private admissions in time, except for Soroti University. Makerere University released their list on June 11; Kyambogo University on June 21; Mbarara University of Science and Technology on June 26; Busitema University on June 22; and Lira University on June 20.

b) 	The universities and other tertiary institutions have a strict timeline for the opening of the first semester for the academic year 2019/2020. Makerere University opens on August 3; Kyambogo University on August 7; Busitema University on August 6; while others fall within the first and second week of August. Other tertiary institutions such as the Uganda Institute of Allied Health and Management Sciences, Mulago, open their first semester on July 27 2019. 

c) 	In accordance with the provisions of section 21 (2) of the Higher Education Students Financing Act, 2014, which reads: “Upon receipt of the application, the Board shall investigate and verify the information contained in the application”.

Also, section 21 (3) stipulates thus: 

“The Board shall within twenty-one working days determine the application and - 
    (a) notify the applicant of the decision of the Board;
    (b) publish the list of all approved applicants on the website of the Board in the Gazette and at least two newspapers of wide national coverage.

Considerably, section 21 (5) provides that a person aggrieved by the decision of the Board may appeal to the minister within seven days after receipt of the notification, of which in section 21 (6), the minister shall determine the appeal within 14 days after receiving the appeal.

The other key consideration was made from section 22 (1), which states that, “The Board shall within seven days after the notification and publication referred to in section 21 invite the approved applicants to enter into an undertaking with the Board”.

Therefore, in accordance with the information above and the very wide publicity, the deadline was set in consideration of the timelines provided in the Higher Education Students Financing Act, while also taking into consideration the reporting dates set by the different higher education institutions.

Challenges with the Set Deadline 

The board noted with concern that while some public universities, particularly Makerere University, Kyambogo University and Gulu University, released the lists of admission on time, the process of issuing admission letters was slow and irregular with some extending to the first and second week of July. In mitigating this challenge, we communicated to some of the applicants to attach evidence of being on the admission lists along with the application forms. 

Extension of the Deadline for Diploma Programmes and Applicants Joining Soroti University

Mr Speaker, as the deadline came closer, the 21st meeting of the Board of Directors noted that:

    1. The Joint Admissions Board (JAB) commenced their national selection exercise for Government sponsorship for different business, technical, vocational, educational and training institutions on 9 June 2019 ending on 12 June 2019.

    2. The closing date for the applications to the maiden undergraduate admissions to Soroti University ended on 12 July 2019. 

Therefore, the board made a decision to extend the deadline to 31 July 2019 to cater for these two categories. 

However, the board decided to stay the deadline for the rest of the undergraduate degree applications of 15 July 2019 to provide for the designated time for the attendant processes and procedures for the board secretariat to investigate, verify the information presented by the applicants and determine the successful student loan beneficiaries. This was also to avoid unnecessary delays on the start of programmes for benefitting students. 

This statement is signed by hon. Janet K. Museveni, the First Lady and Minister of Education and Sports. I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this was an urgent question and as the rules to questions are, the Member who raised the question would be entitled to a supplementary question. However, I do not see the Member who raised this question, so can we deal with the next matter?

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION RAISED BY HON. APOLLO YERI OFWONO ON THE ANNOUNCEMENT BY UGANDA NATIONAL ROADS AUTHORITY TO REPAIR PARTS OF JINJA-KAMPALA ROAD

5.58
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Azuba Ntege): Mr Speaker, during the Ninth Sitting of the First Meeting of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament, hon. Apollo Yeri Ofwono, Member of Parliament for Tororo Municipality, raised a question regarding the announcement by Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) to repair parts of Jinja-Kampala Road without clear information on the particular sections of the road affected. 

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Works and Transport is committed to providing information on all public works and repairs that disrupt traffic. This is done through the ministry’s agencies and directorates. For this particular matter, Uganda National Roads Authority is undertaking emergency repairs on the Kampala-Jinja Highway and the public has now been informed. 

Following the concerns, which were raised to me by the general public and also the Member of Parliament, hon. Apollo Ofwono, UNRA made the following statement, which was disseminated to the public: 

“Uganda National Roads Authority, using contractor Energoprojkt, supervised by our Kampala station, commenced emergency repairs on sections of Kampala-Jinja Highway. The repairs will be conducted on several sections between Spear Motors junction at Nakawa and Mukono for the next nine months, with the first phase covering the stretch between Bweyogerere flyover and Namanve. 

The work will only be done in the hours between 11.00 p.m. and 5.00 a.m. when traffic has significantly reduced, to minimise inconveniences to road users. 

Under the guidance and supervision of the Kampala Metropolitan Traffic Police, traffic will be diverted as follows:

    1. Traffic from Kampala City centre headed towards Mukono and Jinja will continue to flow normally along the highway.

    2. Traffic from Jinja and Mukono headed to the city centre will be diverted to the Namanve Industrial Park road.
 
    3. Traffic from the city centre, which usually gets onto Namboole Road at Kireka, will also be diverted to the Namanve Industrial Park road and will not be allowed to re-join the main highway at Bweyogerere Trading Centre.

We appeal to road users to follow the instructions and directions of traffic officers and to look out for and allow for road signs. We regret any inconveniences that will be caused and call out for calm and patience in this period. For more information, please call our toll-free lines.”

Mr Speaker, this information has been disseminated to the public. The contractor will ensure that mandatory road signs for alternative roads are implemented during the contract period. As is happening now, the contractor is working between 11.00 p.m. and 5.00 a.m. and traffic is flowing normally during daytime. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. That is clear information about what is going to happen. Since the Member who asked the question is not here, we will receive the information and move forward. 

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION RAISED BY HON. MARGARET BABA DIRI ON THE PANIC OCCASSIONED BY REPORTS OF EBOLA VICTIMS WITHIN A FEW KILOMETRES OF UGANDA’S NORTHWESTERN BORDER WITH THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO

6.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Mr Speaker, at the Ninth Sitting of the First Meeting of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament, which was held on Tuesday, 9 July 2019, hon. Margaret Baba Diri, the Woman Representative for Koboko District, raised concerns over panic occasioned by reports of Ebola victims within a few kilometres from the north-western border of the Democratic Republic of Congo. 

Mr Speaker, first of all, the Ministry of Health would like to make it very clear that there is no confirmed case of Ebola in Koboko District or any other part of the country. The report of panic in Koboko District is due to a high level of awareness that has been created by the Ministry of Health and its partners. However, this certainly calls for us to calm people down and to reassure the district about the safety measures to be put in place.

The Ministry of Health, given its past record, has the capacity to respond to all outbreaks and it provides information to the public accordingly. Reports of victims of Ebola should always be confirmed with the Ministry of Health, which has the machinery to analyse and report with evidence. On rumours coming from the community, it is advisable to always crosscheck with the Ministry of Health for verification in order to avoid panic. 

Mr Speaker, the above notwithstanding, one death of a confirmed Ebola viral disease victim was recorded in Ariwara Town in DRC, which is close to the West Nile region of Uganda. The death occurred on 30 June 2019 in a place which is eight kilometres from the border of Arua District. Due to the proximity of this town, there is a high risk of importing the virus to the region. This is because communities from the affected areas often times share many social services, which include markets, churches, schools, transportation facilities and the use of the health facilities on the Ugandan side by the Congolese. However, up to today, there are two alert cases that have been investigated, because they were under suspicion, but both were found to be negative for Ebola viral disease.

Mr Speaker, as I said, the confirmed case in Ariwara is known to have used several means of transport while enroute to Ariwara and receiving treatment from various public and private health facilities along the way and on arrival in the town. The districts in West Nile, including Koboko, have since that time been on a very high alert; they have been very vigilant and strengthening preparedness activities to prevent the importation of the virus within the region.

As I speak, a lot of activities in terms of prevention and setting awareness to the community are ongoing. A total of 1,544 health workers have been vaccinated against the Ebola virus and this is still ongoing. In the unfortunate event that an outbreak is experienced, an Ebola treatment unit has been set up at Oli Health Centre IV. Therefore, that is the level of preparedness in the West Nile region.

In the same vein, I would like to inform the House that today is the 33rd day since the death of the last confirmed case of Ebola in Uganda, which occurred on 13 June 2019 in Kasese. Since then, Uganda has not registered any new confirmed case of Ebola in Kasese District or any part of the country.

On 4 July 2019, all the 144 people who directly or indirectly came into contact with the confirmed Ebola viral disease patients completed the mandatory 21 days of follow up without developing any signs and symptoms of the disease. This is good news for us all. Currently, there are no people under follow up, which means the transmission in Kasese District has been effectively interrupted by the country’s response mechanism. 

I wish to state that the Ministry of Health and its implementing partners are working very closely to follow up a case of a fishmonger who came to Mpondwe Market on Thursday, 11 July 2019, to buy fish. She was a well-known fishmonger and a regular trader at the Mpondwe Market. At the time of her arrival on 11 July 2019, she presented with Ebola-like symptoms. However, she returned to Beni on Friday, 12 July 2019 where she was admitted in an Ebola treatment unit on Saturday, 13 July and she eventually died on Monday, 15 July at the treatment centre after testing positive to Ebola viral disease.

This case might not have used the formal border point of entry to Uganda. She was supposed to have been picked by the health workers at the entry point if her temperature was high. However, working with the teams in DRC, we are closely following up contacts to this specific case, both at Mpondwe Market in Uganda and in DRC.

The Ministry of Health and World Health Organisation did indeed provide a travel advisory that informed the population about the risk in the country and what we need to do. We affirm that all places of economic and social interaction in Uganda, such as the national parks and tourist sites, are open and accessible to the population and the entire public. People are free to visit any places of their interest in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, I would like to say that I am very confident that the Ministry of Health and the implementing partners have so far contained the spread of the Ebola outbreak and for that reason, there is no cause for alarm or fear. However, we must advise all Ugandans to remain calm but vigilant and alert. We should be the keepers of one another.

I would like to appeal to and urge all Ugandans that we should avoid some of the cultural practices such as often times hugging handshaking, massive gathering, and observe infection control measures, prevention and control practices such as hand washing with water and soap and disinfectants.

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I take the opportunity to congratulate you for taking infection control measures actively in this Parliament. We observe that all Members and members of the public, as they enter this place, take precautions. Congratulations and thank you. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Hon. Baba Diri, do you have any supplementary questions? There being no supplementary questions, can we have the next item.

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION RAISED BY HON. MACHO GEOFFREY ON THE MALARIA OUTBREAK KILLING PEOPLE AND LACK OF MEDICINES IN BUSIA MUNICIPALITY
5.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Just to give information, my colleague has responded to the question regarding the Ebola outbreak but there is another scare that has been on social media of a patient from Kyotera who was admitted in Kitovu Hospital. Therefore, I would like to inform this House that results from the Uganda Virus Research Institute have tested negative. The patient has however died; so, other investigations are being done to find out if it was yellow fever or something else. This is just to assure the Member of Parliament who had even written to me on the case at Kitovu Hospital.

Mr Speaker, yesterday hon. Geoffrey Macho, the Member of Parliament for Busia Municipality, raised an issue about a malaria outbreak in Busia District that is killing people and also the lack of medicines at the health facilities within the municipality.

I would like to inform the House that malaria has remained the single highest cause of the majority of hospital visits by patients and admissions. It accounts for between 15 to 20 per cent of admissions and for outpatients, it accounts for between 30 to 50 per cent. When it comes to deaths amongst children, malaria accounts for about 27.2 per cent of the inpatient deaths.

Mr Speaker, we should be aware that during the rainy season, there is an increase in the number of malaria cases reported. So, we do not have an outbreak in Busia but an increase in the number of malaria cases. As a result of that, it is true that the public facilities run out of medicines. 

The National Medical Stores had closed for stocktaking during the month of June. An arrangement was made to pick some medicine from neighbouring districts that might not be in use. I would like to confirm that some malaria medicines were picked from Bugiri District. National Medical Stores is in the process of delivering medicines very soon. I have been told that the medicines are being packaged and they should be on their way. Busia falls among the first phase of the deliveries.

That is the information that I would like to give to this House. It is not only Busia but there is an increase in malaria cases in other districts. However, that should not be a cause for worry; we have enough medicines for malaria in the country. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we have another statement on the state of launching commercial operations of Uganda Airlines. I think this was raised by the Member of Parliament for Rukungiri Municipality. Today, it was also raised by the Member of Parliament for Kasilo County. We could alter the Order Paper to accommodate the minister’s statement.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF LAUNCHING COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS OF UGANDA AIRLINES

6.16
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Azuba Ntege): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The statement is on the status of launching commercial operations of Uganda Airlines

In 2016, the Government of Uganda promised to revive Uganda Airlines. To date, the structural and system arrangements are being set up. The key post holders were recruited and offices for Uganda Airlines have been acquired.

Two CRJ900 aircrafts for regional flights were procured and delivered to Uganda on 23 April 2019. An additional two CRJ900 aircrafts shall be delivered in September. Two more aircrafts for long distance flights will be delivered by the close of the year 2020.

Following the delivery of the first two CRJ900 Bombardier aircrafts, the airline has been working to complete the five-phase certification process required to obtain the Air Operator Certificate. The five phases of the Air Operator Certificate take approximately 90 days to complete. This informed the initial timeline to start the commercial operations in July 2019.

Considerable progress has been made on the certification process. Currently, the airline is at phase four with only a phase left before the Air Operator Certificate (AOC) can be issued. The Air Operator Certificate will show the readiness that the national airline - the planes, the pilot, the crew - can fly safely to any part of the world. The targeted date for the issuance of the Air Operator Certificate to the airline by the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) is 28 July 2019. This means that Uganda Airlines can fly after that date.

Already, the bookings, reservations, ticketing and accounting systems of Uganda Airlines have been activated but in a test environment. The systems have been set up using the provisional International Air Transport Association (IATA) designator and IATA accounting codes. The issuance of the air operating certificate will therefore trigger the activation of the codes in a live environment. This means that after CAA gives the AOC, it now has to be turned over to IATA, which will then activate what has been in test mode; they give the codes and then we go into the live mode. It is only after getting the live mode that the commercial flights can take place. Like I said, the flights can take place but not the commercial ones.

From the date of the receipt of the Air Operator Certificate, Uganda Airlines will finalise the testing and setting up of the systems and processes as well as acquiring clearances and authorisations from the destination countries before embarking on commercial flights. This is because they have to use what I am referring to as the “live air operating certificate”.

The systems and processes mentioned above include, among others, activating the airline designate and accounting codes. This involves the activation of bookings, reservations, ticketing and accounting systems of Uganda Airlines. As I said, this system is there but is operating on the provisional codes that we were given. They now have to be tested in this mode. The integration of platforms will cause the completion of the setup for the commercial operations to start. As I said, the Air Operator Certificate will trigger the activation of the codes in the live environment.

The other issue that has to be done after you have been given the approved Air Operator Certificate by IATA is that, you need to do the designation of the airline and apply for foreign operator permits. The Ministry of Works and Transport together with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs have already embarked on the above. We have written to the destination countries requesting for acceptance of Uganda Airlines to operate on the various routes. 

The airline needs permission to fly to other countries as required by Civil Aviation Authority and the airport authorities. However, before doing that, the operating authorisations can be granted by the destination countries. They need to study the Bilateral Air Services Agreement (BASA) and also receive the Air Operator Certificate to assess whether Uganda Airlines meets the requirements for operating on those various routes. We have already sent the forward letters but they will need the Air Operator Certificate.

It should be noted that the BASA allows the destination countries up to 30 days. Once you give the Air Operator Certificate, you give them up to 30 days. However, they can give the approval earlier. That is why we wrote the letters ahead of time. We give them 30 days to accept the designation of Uganda Airlines on those routes. It is therefore prudent to factor in those 30 days when setting up the date for launching the commercial airline.

The training of the key staff is ongoing and will still continue until the end of July. On completion of this training, some of the staff who do not have licences will apply to Uganda Civil Aviation Authority.  

In view of those explanations, including the 30 days, Uganda Airlines will launch commercial operations in August 2019 after completing the setting up of the systems and finalising the preparatory processes needed for commercial airline operations.

I never answered the question somebody asked earlier as to whether or not the planes are flying. Yes, they are being used for tests. Some of these tests include flying at night and carrying out evacuation in nine minutes in case of an accident. They are flying but not commercially. They are based at Entebbe International Airport.

Bombardier Sale of the CRJ900 Aircraft Programme to Mitsubishi
On 25 June, Bombardier announced the sale of their CRJ900 programme to Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Limited, Japan. Bombardier has over 1,500 aircrafts of these series in service worldwide. They also still have an order of 40 aircrafts of these series as a backlog yet to be manufactured. Bombardier has confirmed that the sale of the CRJ programme will not affect the existing and future customers because the same customer services and support will continue under the new ownership for as long as their aircrafts remain in service and beyond.

The aircrafts yet to be manufactured will be delivered in accordance with existing sales agreements and contracts. Our two Bombardiers are part of these and they are going to be delivered in September. In essence, the sale of the CRJ900 programme is a change of ownership only. The company name has not been changed and its operations with regard to aircraft manufacturing and support will continue for the foreseeable future. The changes will not have any adverse effects on Uganda Airlines as a customer and operator of the CRJ900 aircraft.

Uganda Airlines purchased four CRJ Bombardiers, two of which arrived on the 24th of April. The remaining two will be delivered in September. The third aircraft was supposed to be delivered in July. However, due to some procedural delays, it will be delivered in September 2019.

The aircraft purchase agreement requires 30 days’ notice prior to delivery acceptance. This is the one which is given by the aircraft manufacturers. However, due to the payments - We can only make the last payments in July, therefore we would need a month to give that notice and that would mean that the delivery would be maybe at the end of August or September. However, it is prudent to receive the two because the last one is set for September. Therefore, we have rescheduled that we receive both together in September since the notice has not been issued by the manufacturer. That is why we have agreed that the delivery be pushed so that both of them come together. Mr Speaker, I submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member for Kasilo, your question was answered earlier. The Member for Rukungiri Municipality was entitled to a supplementary question. Has he delegated you?

6.27
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Can the Minister tell us the specific routes we shall undertake in August when we start flying so that Ugandans can start planning?

Secondly, there are concerns about the pilots you recruited because they already resigned their jobs. Are they earning salaries until the time they start flying?

Finally, there is the issue of cargo handling at Entebbe. You remember we passed the supplementary budget here; how far have you gone to ensure that it passes on to Uganda Airlines? Thank you.

MS NTEGE AZUBA: Mr Speaker, on the first day of the launch, the airline will launch the following destinations: Nairobi, Dar es Salaam and Mogadishu. These destinations will be operated first to orient staff and service providers on the Uganda Airline procedures and standards using the two aircrafts. Immediately after that, before the receipt of the others, other destinations will be added on the phase, and these are Kilimanjaro, Juba, Bujumbura and Mombasa. These destinations too shall be operated with the first two aircrafts that were delivered in April.

As from September, after the delivery of the next two aircrafts, addition frequencies to the above listed destinations shall be operated and the following new routes shall be added: Khartoum - as I said earlier, negotiations are still going on with the BASAs - Kinshasa, Lubumbashi, Harare, Lusaka, Johannesburg, Addis Ababa, Hargeisa, Zanzibar and Kigali.

The next question was about the pilots. We went through a very long system of recruiting pilots and this was done very openly. There was an advertisement and we were surprised we had a big number of Ugandan pilots working out in the airlines across the world. We got Ugandan pilots who are going to fly the national airline and were mostly working in airlines even as far as Singapore. (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: The concern is about the pay and not the recruitment. You recruited them and there was concern that they are not being paid yet they resigned from where you picked them from. 

MS AZUBA: I have not received any complaint of that sort. I know there is a budget. I have not received any complaints but I will go and check and then report.

The other issue was about cargo handling. Of course, within this time, Uganda could not set up the cargo handling facilities because of finances. Therefore, we advertised and out of the three cargo handling companies at the airport, one is going to handle cargo for one year just as Uganda Airlines gets ready to have its own facilities and equipment. Right now, we do not have any. It is the same with maintenance. Bombardier itself has given us a company that is going to do the maintenance as we set up our own systems. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister, Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Members. This House is adjourned to Tuesday, 2 o’clock      

(The House rose at 6.32 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 23 July 2019 at 2.00 p.m.)
