
Wednesday, 17 July 2013

Parliament met at 3.16 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I apologise for the late start. We have been doing some administrative work but I hope we shall be able to cover all the items on the Order Paper. I will also be amending the Order Paper to allow presentation of one more petition later in the day by hon. Balikuddembe.

Join me in welcoming teachers and pupils of NicholasTapolis Primary School represented by hon. KhidduMakubuya and hon. Nabukenya. I do not know where they are seated. Pleasestand up.You are welcome. (Applause)They have nice colours. I will also be permitting three members to raise small matters. Two minutes each for hon.Ekanya, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi and hon. Mohammed Kawuma.  We also have teachers and pupils of Kingsway Primary School, represented by hon. Kikungwe and hon. Seninde. Where are they? Here they are. You are welcome, children. (Applause)

3.18
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In recent times, the country has witnessed unexplained firesfrom schools,to markets,to fire resulting from road accidents.As a result, the country has witnessed piecemeal action by the Government. The question the citizens and the people are asking is: “When is Government going to table a comprehensive fire preventive policy and plan of action to this House?” 

The people of Malaba, Bunagana, Katuna and other parts of the country are very worried.In case of an accident resulting from trailers carrying petrol and other related products in the customs area of Busia, Malaba and Katunaand others, what preventive and emergency action is in place? I toured Malabaand Busia parking yards where over 1,000 trailers are parked and the only precautionary measurewhich exists there is a water hose, which was planned for only 200 trailers. However, now if you go to Malaba today, it will take you more than one hour to cross to Kenya. That means, - the people are requesting, Madam Speaker - that the minister as a matter of emergency action provides all these border points with fire brigade trucks and then improve the system –

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, hon. Ekanya, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I am actually one of the victims of fire. Yesterday one of the secondary schools in my constituency caught fire, St Joseph’s Senior Secondary School next to my home. When the school caught fire, they rung Masaka District and yet we are in KalunguDistrict. One time I raised this issue here and some members never took it seriously - new districts. What was the essence of creating new districts? It was about getting better social services. Now, if a district like Kalungu, where there is no traffic jam,– (Laughter) -had afire brigade truck in the district, maybe this school would have been saved. 

I have just been talking to my people and the head teacher told me not to spend money calling the Police because they will not provide results. So, the information that I want to give is that when you talk about fire outbreaks, I am already a victim here with a district which was established with no single fire brigade at all.That is my information, Madam Speaker. 

MR EKANYA:Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.May I request for the minister to come to this House and give us a comprehensive plan of action that will make this country safe from fire related disasters, including petrol stations and other places of public facilities. Thank you.

3.23
MR MOHAMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, and this is in regard to the scam of grabbing land in my constituency. 

Last week, a matter was raised in this Parliament where one person was evicting an entire Government department.This is what is happening in Entebbe, just like in other areas of the country. We have a fisheries training institute, which is located on the shores of Lake Victoria. I believe the purpose of locating that institution there was to facilitate the training but as we speak now, there are already land titles issued making this institute landlocked and they cannot access water. The principal has written complaining to the Entebbe Municipal Town Clerk and there is no response. 

Yesterday’s papers,the New Vision and others, highlighted some of these cases of land grabbing. There are some local leaders who have taken it as a task to grab and sell this land. The land that I am referring to is land that belonged to the Civil Aviation Authority. They “eat” the land in the names of Ekochu Richard and yet the actual person who applied for that land is Miti Ibrahim.The names appearing on the title are Ekochu Richard. The other applicant - there were dual applicantson this title - is Richard Otong and his real names are MugerwaAbbas.These people are conniving with the local leaders to grab this land and sell it.

Madam Speaker, we have a survey training institute, the Institute of Surveying and Mapping. This institute will be elevated to a university of science but as we speak, they have sold all the land around the institute and there is just a very small piece left for this institute.There are many cases of land grabbing, especiallyof government facilities, including allocating land of the airport to a private person. This is terrible –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I hope the minister will be able to say something. 

Before hon. Lukyamuzi speaks, I want you to join me in welcoming a team of state attorneys from the Directorate of Public Prosecutions. They have come to witness the presentation of their petition. We also have a very big army from Kawempe Muslim Secondary School; they are up there. It is an old school where hon. Katoto and hon. LatifSsebaggla studied and they are represented by hon. Ssebagala and hon. Naggayi. You are welcome. (Applause) 

3.26
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Rubaga South, allow me to raise points of public concern very briefly. 

I recently raised concern over the promise the Attorney-General had made before Parliament on 26th February this year to challenge the astronomical court awards in the court ruling of the Constitutional Court petition of Severino Twinobusingye v. the Attorney General – that is application No. 47 of 2011. The court petition was seeking for an interpretation on whether the two ministers would step aside to allow the oil committee carry out its investigations on allegations of bribery related to petroleum. 

It is on record, Madam Speaker, that when hon. Ssekikubo raised concerns over the astronomical court awards of Shs12.9 billion, the Attorney-General, hon. Ruhindi, assured this House that he had found the costs abnormal.He said he was going to make sure that no payment is made until the appeal had been disposed of. I have information from reliable sources that no appeal has gone to the Supreme Court and yet the Attorney-General assured us that he would appeal that astronomical amount of money. 

The court costs award is excessive, exorbitant and outrageous. It is also embarrassing and scandalous to the Judiciary and brings the Judiciary in a position of disrepute in the face of the general public we defend. We demand that he assures us that he has appealed. In the absence of an appeal, he must step down. (Laughter)

On a second note, sometime back I reported to this Parliament, pursuant to Article 79(2) of the Constitution which shows the function of a living Member of Parliament. When we are elected to Parliament, we have a duty under that provision to consult our constituents. I have on two consecutive occasions tried to meet my people to consult them so that I am equipped to be able to articulate the concerns of the constituents in this august Assembly. The Police have confronted me with brutality, stopping me from interacting with the people who elected me. I am like a villain because I cannot talk in my constituency and I need parliamentary rescue –(Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, my neighbour, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, for giving way. Madam Speaker, this problem is escalating. Today, it is not that we are only stopped from addressing our voters but even waving at them has become a problem. I have been summoned to the Police several times, accusing me of waving at my voters. Actually, it is being referred to as inciting violence.When you continue to ask them what you have done, they say you were waving at people. So, waving is inciting people. As I speak, I cannot wave at my voters. (Laughter)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you for giving way, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi. Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter. In Kalungu District where I come from, we have a town council - the only town council that we have - and the water system broke down. I tried to conduct a meeting to pave a way on how we could get our water system restored. I went to the ministry and nothing was taking place. When I was about to meet my people, the DPC came. I was just in a meeting with chairs off the road in Kalungu. Police used teargas on us for two hours. Their teargas got over and they went to Masaka to bring reinforcements. The image was not good. It shouldnot have happened. They teargased a child of two days old in the house. What if that child had died? 

Let us take this matter seriously. There is no way we can consult people without meeting them.If we run out of Kampala to Kalungu– Madam Speaker, we also need to know from the Ministry of Internal Affairs the criteria used to appoint DPCs in districts. Some of them are not experienced. Thank you. That is the information.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: In conclusion, there is a problem. Government must tell us here in Kampala whether there is a law which stops Members of Parliament from interacting with their constituents. Recently, in Ndeeba, I invited the Lord Mayor of Kampala to explain what is happening in the KCCA because he is also a member and a resident of Rubaga South. The Police said he cannot speak and they used teargas. 

I want to ask a few questions before I leave the Floor.Is there a law that stops the Lord Mayor from talking to people? Show us the law, if you have passed one in my absence.  Secondly, is Kampala in a state of emergency so as to warrant no public rallies to go on in Rubaga South? I thank you.

3.35
MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto South, Masaka): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I am not only a Member of Parliament but I am a leader of a political party in this country, the oldest party in this county, the Democratic Party. 

On 11th June, I did write to the Inspector-General of Police informing him that my partywas going to have political activities in Mityana, Mubende and Rubaga. I delivered the letter to the Police headquarters here on 11th June and the meeting was supposed to take place on 19th June. I travelled with the party president to Mityana. Before we reached Mityana, at a place called Wabigalo, we were stopped by the Police and they told us that we were not supposed to continue to Mityana. We asked why we could not reach Mityana and they said they had orders from above not to allow us go to Mityana. As we argued with the Police, the DPC, MrKintu, ordered for reinforcement and it came and they started teargasing us. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table the rubber bullets that were shot at us.These are the rubber bullets. They use these rubber bullets to hit our cars. These are just a few bullets which I managed to keep. Our car was hit, the president of the party was sprayed and our people were beaten and there was a scuffle. 

For those of us who brought this Government to power, – when I look around I see hon. Kiyonga - is this why you brought this Government into power? The Democratic Party is a party that is fully registered and recognised in this country. Madam Speaker, allow me to lay these bullets on the Table, for the record, to show the brutality of the Police we have in this country. I can even read the serial numbers. (Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Let him finish laying them.

MR BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: These are the rubber bullets. I lay them on the Table to show the brutality of Uganda Police.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourablemembers. First, I want to know whether the Minister of Lands, who appears to be besieged by land grabbers, has something to say about the property of the Uganda Government. 

3.38
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr DaudiMigereko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The problem that has been raised by hon. Kawuma is indeed serious and real. Last week, on Wednesday, we had a problem regarding Government’s land housing the departments of agriculture, audit and geological survey and mines. I reported here that I had been to the site and we had started on investigations. 

We recalled the title, which had been issued to Mr James Paul Ejupu, and I reported that we were going to go through the process of cancelling that title. I also contacted the chairman of Wakiso Land Board, Mr KatabarwaMiiro, raising these matters and inviting him for a meeting. He expressed total disappointment over what happened but requested for more time so that he would be able to unearth information regarding the transaction I had reported on. 

I had also indicated to him that I had heard reports that there were a number of unexplained transactions in regard to land in the Entebbe area. You have now brought to my attention land involving the fisheries department, the Civil Aviation Authority and the Survey Training School. In my comprehensive statement, which I have promised this House, I am going to make sure that all these are captured and a clear explanation is provided. (Interjection) Yes, my dear brother from Terego?

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I thank my brother, hon. DaudiMigereko, for accepting me to seek clarification from him. All Government land in this country is held in trust by your ministry. Therefore, for any other person to be allocated Government land and that portion is cut off from the main title,it requires your signature – not you as a person but that of the institution. How do these masqueraders grab land and successfully obtain land titles without your institution’s involvement, which should have given consent and which, at the end of the day, ends up signing the document? How do they obtain these land titles? 

I wish you could clarify so that we are on the same page because it becomes very difficult for us to appreciate these stories you are telling us that you have cancelled what you issued out. What did you do and why did you issue it out in the first place, knowing very well that this is Government property? Please, shed light on that.

THE SPEAKER: Wouldn’t that be coming in the comprehensive statement? I thought you were coming up with a statement so that we can discuss it in full. Let me hear from the Minister of Internal Affairs about interrupting hon. Lukyamuzi when he is talking to his voters and the other complaints raised, including the problem of the Secretary-General of DP.

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, on the issue raised by hon. Ekanya on fires, this is a very legitimate concern. We have lost children in schools because of fire outbreaks, and we have lost a number of Ugandans through accidents. It is high time we looked seriously into this and came up with a comprehensive strategy on how to deal with it. I thank you for raising it. It may take a bit of time because it will require a lot of study and laying strategies, but because of the nature of the accidents we will try to expedite these investigations as soon as possible –(Interjection)–Maybe within a month. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourableminister, you are now creating a debate. I wanted you to make a commitment as to whether you are coming to take action but now you are creating another situation there.

MR BABA: Okay. As for the issues raised by hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, obviously there must be a reason why some of these rallies cannot take place. It is not that they are barred; no authority can bar them because every Member of Parliament should have the opportunity to consult their constituents. However, if there are assessments that there would be a breach of peace, the Police have the responsibility to maintain law and order. That is the best I can say, but – (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I had no intention of raising a point of order, but pursuant to a very prominent ruling in the Constitutional Court of MuwangaKivumbi v.the Attorney-General of 2008, the Constitutional Court was very elaborate. It said that where a person convenes a meeting, it is not up to the Police to anticipate what will occur; they have all the machinery capable of controlling the situation. Knowing that the minister is a Cabinet member of a government which is supposed to respect the rule of law, is he in order to respond to me in open ignorance of that ruling as referred to?

THE SPEAKER: Honourablemember, you had not brought it to his attention; so, he is right. Please, conclude.

MR BABA: I hope the honourable member is not also talking in ignorance of the Police Act, 32(1), which gives Police powers to regulate these activities and it was not expunged in the MuwangaKivumbi case. (Interjection) You go and read your case. However, we will look into that. I want to make sure honourable members can consult their constituencies but under situations of stability and order. I will definitely look into that.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, recently in a meeting of the Opposition, we almost unanimously resolved to withdraw our participation from this Parliament until Government explains how they want us the Opposition to carry out our business. Our role is to remove your Government using constitutional means; that is our mandate. We must address rallies and tell people how bad you are –(Laughter)– and we took oath to do that. We took oath to be members of the Opposition. 

Madam Speaker, can we be advised as members of the Opposition on how we can legitimately, using the law, be allowed to remove these people from power because wherever we go, we are blocked. Even if we give notice or ask for permission, they block us. If the situation continues like that, then we would rather withdraw from Parliament and allow the Movement to enjoy it all with the Kazindas of this world.

MR BABA: There have been elections since 2006 and we all know what the results were. Our business is also to remain in power. Finally, on these elements, which were laid on the Table by hon. Nsubuga –(Interruption)

DR BAYIGGA: Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, the matter on the Floor is a very serious one because it touches on human rights and the reason for existence of our political parties. Hon. Baba, who I respect so much, is responding to this matter very casually and painfully. The resultof this may have very bad repercussions and we can cause them.Is he in order to respond in a casual manner to a serious matter like this, which can even cause bloodshed? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourablemembers, you have just told the minister that it is your intention to remove him and he is just answering that he also intends to stay; so, what is the problem? Please, conclude.

MR BABA: Hon. Nsubuga laid some black things here but I am not aware of what happened in Mityana. He never reported to us and I am just seeing them for the first time.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. This is not the first time that matters of brutalising the Opposition are being raised in this Parliament. In the case of land grabbing, you have suggested that the minister brings a statement, which will accord the Parliament an opportunity to debate it. Each time a matter of brutalising the Opposition and breaking up rallies is raised in this Parliament, hon. Baba immediately stands up and choruses an answer, which has denied us the opportunity to discuss matters of political freedom in this country and matters of violating the rights of individuals - right to movement and right to freely assemble.

Madam Speaker, the procedural point I am raising is: why don’t we treat this matter like all the other matters, where ministers bring statements explaining incident by incident, and we accord Parliament an opportunity to discuss it instead of us rising up on points of information? We have suffered; in fact, I gave up the issue of addressing rallies because each time we attempt to have one, they break it up and beat us up and hon. Baba will come here with the same answer. He will read that provision in the Police Act probably because he does not-

THE SPEAKER: Honourablemembers, I do not want the impression to be created that this House has not facilitated discussions where there have been skirmishes between the Police and other leaders. The Leader of the Opposition has been here on the Floor a number of times and made complaints. The Prime Minister has come, responded and we have debated. So, I do not want that impression to be created that we do not discuss those issues. We do discuss them. The minister was answering and I was waiting for him to finish so that I can conclude on whether he knows about it and then we take a decision. Please, conclude.

MR BABA: Madam Speaker, I was saying that I am not aware of that incident in Mityana. I do not know where he picked those rubber bullets from, so how can I respond?

There is this framework of inter party dialogue, which we have not exhausted –(Interruption)

MR BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I am constrained to raise a point of order against my brother, hon. Baba. When this incident happened, I travelled with the party president, hon. Norbert Mao, to Police headquarters to find out why we had been treated that way. Unfortunately, we were told that the IGP had been summoned to Rwakitura, but we saw the officers in the operations and they regretted the incident. 

I did see hon. Migereko, who is the chairman of the IPOD Council. The IPOD consists of the six political parties in this Parliament. I did show him, and you remember when we even protested and said we can pull out of this organisation. Dialoguing means people coming together to talk. Hon. Kiyonga will remember outside there when I showed him these rubber bullets. I said,“My brother, you and I fought to bring freedom in this country; is this what we did?”

Honourableminister, you are taking these things casually. The regime that we fought- the UPC Government then - was treating people in this way. Therefore, if you are pushing us on the wall like this, we have supporters and we can tell them to take another alternative, which we are not ready to do now. Is it in order for a whole minister of state to come here and say he is not aware of this?

THE SPEAKER: Honourablemembers, in 2005 this country agreed to leave the Movement system and go to the multi-party system. Multi-party means many parties, and I think that is what we agreed to do. So, can we have an assurance that several parties will be able to do their work because we are the ones who agreed to this.

MR BABA: I believe that is the position of my government, the NRM Government, to allow every party to function. That is why we are represented here in Parliament by the various parties. But if there are problems of hooliganism and disorder, they have to be dealt with. So – (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Rt Hon. Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. Our Rules of Procedure are very clear that members must be very cautious about the language they use, the kind of words that they use. Hon. James Baba seems to have been in this Parliament for some time. In addition, he is just an ex-officio because he does not represent any constituency in this country. He is insinuating that the rightly elected Members of Parliament are hooligans in this House. Is he in order, Madam Speaker, to say that when he represents no constituency?

THE SPEAKER: Honourableminister, unless you can substantiate who the hooligans are, please withdraw that statement. Whether the hooligans are in this House or they are somewhere else, I want to know that.

MR BABA: Madam Speaker, I have the greatest respect for honourable members of this House and definitely, I was not referring to them as hooligans. I would not refer to any member here as a hooligan; it is the crowd out there that causes these problems. So, in order to protect everybody here, we have to ensure that there is law and order. That is all. Otherwise, we try our best to ensure everybody has political space to compete for power. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to the next item on the Oder Paper. I will come to that. Honourable members, please leave me do my work.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION BY STATE ATTORNEYS AND STATE PROSECUTORS

3.58
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort portal Municipality): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to present a petition under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. This humble petition is from state attorneys and state prosecutors being employees of the Directorate of Public Prosecution and members of the Uganda Association of Prosecutors, by myself, on their behalf.

The petition states thus:

“The petitioners are at the forefront in the fight against crime and dutifully and ably prosecute various criminal cases in the country such as petty theft, criminal trespass, corruption, white collar crimes, capital offence cases such as treason, terrorism, human trafficking and child sacrifice and numerous others;

Your petitioners execute their prosecution mandate with utmost dedication, and results have improved from an average conviction rate of 30 percent in the 1990s to the current 55 percent, save for the corruption related cases whose conviction rate stands at 70 percent.

The petitioners are, however, faced with a number of challenges -

THE SPEAKER: Please, read the title and the prayers.

MR RUHUNDA: Okay, Madam Speaker. The petitioners pray that:
1.	Parliament resolves that state attorneys and state prosecutors’ salaries and emoluments are increased to reflect their workload and to bring them in line with their counterparts in other sister agencies like KCCA, IGG, Law Reform Commission and Uganda Registration Services Bureau given the prevailing cost of living;

2.	 Government increases the operational funds allocated to the Directorate of Public Prosecutions to enable it execute its mandate;

3. 	Government considers your petitioners for exemption from taxation just like their colleagues in the Justice Law and Order Sector namely, judicial officers, the police and prisons officers, who are partners in the same cause, working under similar circumstances;

4. 	Government fast tracks the enactment of the Directorate of Public Prosecutions Act; and 

Your petitioners,as in duty bound, will ever pray and hereto, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures.

I am not going to read out the signatures; I am only reading the title. (Laughter) The title reads: “Signatures in support of the petition to Parliament by state attorneys and state prosecutors of the Directorate of Public Prosecutions and members of the Uganda Association of Persecutors.”Madam Speaker, I beg to lay these on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Alex Ruhunda. We send that petition to the Committee on Legal and ParliamentaryAffairs for perusal and report back. However, having said that, I want to remind Government that the substantive DPP and the substantive Deputy DPP were both appointed Judges of the Courts of Judicature. So, there is a vacuum and at the moment prosecutions cannot be sanctioned because the DPP is not in place. It is something very urgent and it needs to be handled. I hope you take it up quickly.

In regard to issues raised by hon. Nsubuga, I didnot get the dates but I would like to ask the responsible minister to investigate the incident involving hon. Nsubuga and the honourable Chairman Norbert Mao, together with the one reported by hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi.Give us a report so that we can find out what is really happening. That is important because it is a threat to democracy especially members who are unable to speak to their constituents.

THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I would like to say that Government is fully aware of the critical position in the Judiciary. On behalf of the Government, I want to assure this House that action is in the process of being taken – (Interruptions)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week I was granted leave by the Speaker to raise the same matter on this Floor. The Prime Minister, who is also the Leader of Government Business, and I donot know whether he conveyed the same but who seemed to have been in a relaxed mood, undertook to come back with a comprehensive statement about that matter.

I am wondering whether, Madam Speaker, we are proceeding rightly by having the Rt Hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister rise to say exactly the same statement as if nothing about that same matter has ever been said in this House. It is as if everybody is on their own in this House, to the extent that when a minister or Leader of Government Business undertakes to do something, they just rise to say the same statement 

THE SPEAKER: If the Government promised to bring a statement, where is it?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: My honourable colleague is saying the Prime Minister promised last week that he was going to bring a report here this week. He said, “this week”; he did not say Tuesday. Do not change your words. (Laughter) What I heard was, “this week.”So, I am talking about this week as you said. 

Madam Speaker, I am not contradicting any statement of last week. I am repeating that action is seriously being taken and this week is beginning only today and is ending, according to our programme, on Thursday. So, within this time we will come and do something. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I hope we can get the answer this week. I wrote to the Attorney-General, he stood on this Floor and assured this House and the country that he was going to appeal the abnormal and obnoxious cost awarded to a one Severino. Here on the Floor; that was about five months ago. I do not know why he is reluctant to file the appeal. So, we want a statement from him on that matter also. Honourable members, let us go to item No.4.

MS EVELYN ANITE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday at such a time, we were seated here during the plenary and hon. OdongaOtto made a statement that he had evidence to lay on the Table to the effect that the former Permanent Secretary of the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) failed to make statements to the Police.He also said that he had evidence from the Police to the effect that the Police have concluded investigationson all the officers who are implicated in the OPM. He, therefore, said that Government should take action but Government has simply refused to take administrative action. Can we now ask hon. Odonga Otto, because he promised to lay the evidence on the Table, to lay that document on the Table? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, yesterday you said you were in possession of the information. 

4.09
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, I want to thank hon. Anite for raising that issue because I would have missed a golden opportunity to lay these documents on the Table. (Laughter) 

I beg to lay on the Table five documents in relation to what I said yesterday.One, I said that a list of 64 officials in the OPM had been submitted by the Police to the Ministry of Finance, stating that they were under investigation for abuse of public funds. I said that on that list the Permanent Secretary, Mr Pius Bigirimana, appears as No. 4. I was trying to justify that he should not be trusted to be an accounting officer because the Police has noted that he is among the 64 people who are being investigated. So, I beg to lay on the Table – Madam Speaker, do I have to read all the 64 names?– (Interjections) - Madam Speaker, for record purposes, because my reputation was being put at stake, - actually the names are 74 - save for my accent, I will attempt to read all of them.

1. 	Mr Kennedy Lubega, office attendant in the Office of the Prime Minister who misappropriated Shs3 billion.
2. 	Mr Kazinda Geoffrey, former principal accountant in the OPM who is under inquiry for misappropriation of Shs17.7 billion. 
3. 	Mr Isaiah Ounyo, former cashier in the OPM- (Ms Namara rose_) -Let me first read the four then you raise that procedure. 

MS NAMARA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is not my intention to interrupt hon. OdongaOttowhen he is laying his papers on the Table, but I just wanted to know the authenticity of those documents - the source and whether those documents are signed. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Tell us where you got them.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I will lay these documents and your office will exercise discretion. The good thing is that they are even stamped. Let me just stop at No.4

3. 	Mr Isaiah Ounyo, former cashier in the OPM, who is under inquiry for embezzling Shs7 billion.

4.	Mr Pius Bigirimana, Permanent Secretary, OPM, who is being investigated for embezzlement of Shs20 billion under file No. GEF 370/2012.

There are many others. The list extends to 74 people. You will excuse me because yesterday I said 64 people. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay this list on the Table so that the information is availed to Parliament. 

MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, I was extremely delighted when the hon. Anite stood up on this point of procedure because yesterday when hon. OdongaOtto made that statement, all of us were extremely provoked. I am one of those who wanted to match the statement made yesterday by hon. OdongaOtto and the one he is making now by way of presentation of the paper. If I recall, to the best of my knowledge, the point of contention yesterday was that investigations by the Police are concluded but Government has failed to take administrative action –(Interjections)– Yes! I remember the minister laboured to say investigations are still taking place. 

I am one of those who thought, and I was convinced, that if investigations are over and it is really true, then we would demand for the front bench to explain why they have not taken administrative action.The point of order I am raising, Madam Speaker, is to the effect that having made the point as it was made yesterday by hon. OdongaOtto, is he in order now to come and change and tell us that investigations are going on and yet yesterday the point of contention was that investigations are over butGovernment has failed to take administrative action? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourablemembers, according to hon. OdongaOtto, there are 74 names. Maybe if he reads them out, you will understand who is in court and who is not. We have not heard the entire list. So, read the list.  

MR ODONGA OTTO: Much obliged. Madam Speaker, members will also have to know that out of the 190 cases, only six have been produced in court and only one has been prosecuted. Let me just continue with the list.

5. 	Mr Gustavo Bwoch, Accountant-General; the amount under inquiry is Shs6.9 billion on the first hand and Shs20 billion on the second hand under file E/433/2012 and E/349/2012 respectively. 

6. 	Mr Mpoza Isaac, Commissioner, Treasury Department; he has two files, one for Shs. 6.9 billion and a second one for Shs 20 billion.

Office of the Prime Minister, List of Persons
    1. Beatrice Atipo 
    2. Beatrice Mubukete
    3. Catherine Lajul
    4. Claire 
    5. Consolata Baguma 
    6. DoreenMasiko
    7. Emily Kamya 
    8. Eunice Kahimakazi 
    9. Eva Kavuma 
    10. James Minjo
    11. Jennifer Kayombya 
    12. Joy Nuwagira 
    13. Nabacwa 
    14. Catherine Lajul
    15. Consolata Baguma
    16. Elizabeth Claire Athieno 
    17. Fred 
    18. Henry Kimuli
    19. Kagumya 
    20. Wampande
    21. Abdul Muwanika, who is a principal economist andwas advanced Shs 500 million.
    22. Benon Munghinda, information officer/TV producer whowas advanced Shs 263 million which is under inquiry.
    23. Beatrice Kezaabu,Assistant Resettlement Officer, who has two files; one for Shs 617,316,700 and the second file for Shs 316 million. The second file has been committed to the Anti-Corruption Court.
    24. Benon Kigenyi, information officer/TV is being accused of embezzling Shs 263 million.
    25. Boniface Obbo, the late; he is the former cashier, Office of the Prime Minister. He was being accused of embezzling Shs 96 million.
    26. Charles Bafaki, Senior Settlement Commandant is being accused of embezzling Shs 73 million.
    27. Christine Kiwanuka,Senior Assistant Secretary/Personal Assistant to the Minister of General Duties, OPM is accused of embezzling Shs 1.2 billion. A personal assistant of the minister has an amount of Shs 1.2 billion!

Madam Speaker,I beg to lay this on the Table. I am just half way. I also beg to lay a list of companies that were being used to steal money during the PRDP. These are 54 companies and four of them belong to PS Bigirimana. I beg to lay.

Lastly, I want to lay on the Table a letter by a minister of this House stating that the Police is interfering with the operations of the OPM; they should close those files so that OPM can continue normally with investigations.This is a letter written by Minister Tarsis Kabwegyere who, by implication, is covering the backs of those who have stolen money. He is saying that Police is wasting their time in the corridors of Police andinstead they should proceed with normal work. 

Madam Speaker,I beg to lay these documents on the Table and I thank you for this opportunity.I ask hon. Lumumba Justine, who has seemingly fled the House, that what was she talking about yesterday?

THE SPEAKER: Honourablemembers, the question was whether there are people who have been arraigned in court and who are still in office.I think now that we have the list, we shall be able to check and see who is still in office and who has been administratively dealt with because that was the issue.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance as you give your ruling. We had an instance where the officials from Kyambogo University were arraigned in courts of law and they still remained serving officers. We raised the issue on the Floor of Parliament and the minister has not taken any necessary steps to ensure that they step aside to allow the investigations to go on.Worse still, one of them has been actually floated to take up a higher job while he is still under query. 

I want to seek your guidance, Madam Speaker, if this could extend to the officials of Kyambogo University who are protected by the honourable minister.

THE SPEAKER: This is a bit difficult for me because I do not have all their names. I cannot give a general instruction without information. If you make your case, tomorrow we can look at it but today it is premature.

Honourable members, join me in welcoming Members of Parliament and staff from the National Assembly of Liberia.They are up in the gallery. They are welcome.They are members of the Public Accounts Committee:

    1. Hon. Edward Dagoseh
    2. Hon. Isaac Nyenabo
    3. Hon. Jonathan Banney
    4. Hon. Fredrick Cherue 
    5. Hon. Geraldine Doe-Sheriff
    6. Hon. George Tengbeh
    7. Hon. Ben A. Fofana
    8. Hon. Adam Bill Corneh
    9. Hon. Edward Karfiah
    10. Hon. Sekou S. Kanneh
    11. Hon. Charles K. Bardyl
    12. Mr George Varkpeh; and 
    13. Mr Edward Davis.

You are welcome to the Uganda National Assembly. (Applause)

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.23
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassaino Wadri): Rt Hon. Speaker and colleagues,I beg to lay on the Table areport and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 for the Uganda Embassy in Tripoli.This is in accordance with Article 163(4) of the Constitution. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 covering the Uganda Embassy in Juba, with other reports and opinion. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 on the Uganda Mission in Geneva. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 on the National Council of Higher Education. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Uganda Police Force for the year ended 30June 2012. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Inspectorate of Government for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay. 

Rt. Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 covering Ministry of Health - Uganda Global Fund to fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria Programmes, and secondly, support for the introduction of highly effective Artemisininbased combination therapy malaria treatment under Grant No. UGD-405-G05-M. I beg to lay.

Rt. Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the National Planning Authority financial statements for the year ended 30June 2012. I beg to lay. 

Rt. Hon. Speaker and colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2012 covering Ministry of Health, Comprehensive Reproductive Health Services Projects - No. UGA741A, UGA7R43A, UGA7R32A and UGA7R21A. I beg to lay.Thank you very much and I beg to move, Rt. Hon. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The reports are sent to the Public Accounts Committee for scrutiny and report back. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.28
THE CHAIRPERSON, LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Jack Sabiti): Rt. Hon. Speaker and colleagues, may I, as directed by rules 30 and 31, lay on the Table the following reports:

Kotido District Local Government (PG UG 10) Comprehensive Reproductive Health Services Projects funded by UNFPA- report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 31December 2012. I beg to lay. 

Mubende District Local Government UNFPA funded Programme Components of Reproductive Health, Population and Development and Gender - report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2012. I beg to lay.

Katakwi District Local Government (PG UG08) Comprehensive Reproductive Health Services Projects (UNFPA funded project UGA7G22A, UGA7G41A and UGA7R32A) Report and Opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2012. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay the Kanungu District Local Government UNFPA funded Government Programme Components and Reproductive Health, Population and Development and Gender Report and Opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2012. 

I beg to lay on the Table Moroto District Local Government (PG UGO9) Reproductive Health, Population and Development and Gender (UNFPA funded project UGA7G22A, UGA7G41A and UGA7R32A) Report and Opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2012. 

Lastly, I beg to lay on the TableKaabong District Local Government (PG UG 11) Reproductive Health, Population and Development and Gender Report and Opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2012. I beg to lay. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair. The reports will be sent to the Local Government Accounts Committee for perusal and report back.

Honourable members, tomorrow there is a mitigation expo on climate change in the CHOGM Gardens near Parliament. The expo will give participants, especially Members of Parliament, experiences on climate change, how it can be mitigated and how misuse of energy can impact negatively on our environment and climate. The programme begins at 8 O’clock in the morning and ends at 5.00p.m. I invite all the members to come early. I will be presiding at the opening of that expo. Thank you very much. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SETORAL COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS ON A PETITION ON THE MISMANAGEMENT OF ST BALIKUDEMBE MARKET

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we received that report. We shall debate it for 30 minutes. Three minutes each.  

4.33
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This report has been read and understood and there are a lot of issues in it but I am going to limit my contribution to two perspectives. 

One, I was brought up by a very poor woman from a rural countryside and these are the women who are similar to our women today in market places trying to survive and raise their families. These women constitute the majority of our people and they continue to suffer to the extent that sometimes when I sit down and think, – and if I were to ask members - I think that in Uganda today it looks like there is a class struggle of the privileged and the under privileged. Therefore, as Members of Parliament, the majority of whom are voted by the under privileged people, we should not look down upon them but we should support them because these are the people who brought us here to speak for them. 

When I look at the list of the Market Stalls Space and Lock-Up Shops Owners Association, the list is full and full of people who are privileged. There are people who are well placed in our society, who are able to feed their families, who are able to make ends meet, who have jobs elsewhere. Some of them do not even buy food from Owino Market; they go to well-placed supermarkets but they go down there to extort money from the poor Ugandans. I want to name some of them.

MrKayongo, who is being named repeatedly, has several stalls in the market together with people associated to him.Moreover, he is a presidential advisor. I wonder how a whole presidential advisor on markets turns round to feast on the very people he is supposed to advise the President about.


Another high profile individual in the market is the Political Commissar of the UPDF, Col. Felix Kulayigye, who owns stall 0061E. You can see the kind of people who are there fighting these poor women in the market. As if that is not enough, the hon. Minister, Rose Namayanja, also owns stall number 8P89H in the same market. Winnie Twine, who is another Presidential Advisor on markets, owns four stalls P1302, 1317, 1214, 1215 in the market. Juma Seiko –(Laughter)- who we all know very well as a UPDF officer and an assistant to one of the top Generals in this country owns stall Y025. Hon. Minister Byandala, who is the Minister of Works, owns two stalls; Y125 and Z125. Madam Speaker, these lists are all here. I am not just cooking stories. 

My appeal to honourable members is that the time has come for us to protect the underprivileged in our society and stand by them against these greedy corrupt officials and individuals who will never get contented. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.  (Applause)

4.38
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like, first of all, to thank the committee for the work they did. However, from the committee report, you can observe that there is a lot of confusion in St Balikuddembe Market. 

From history, I happen to have been one of the councillors and Deputy Mayor, for that matter, in Kampala City Council before it became the Kampala Capital City Authority. The directives of the President to the minister have been abused by the implementers of these directives. If the intentions of the President were to let the poor people take advantage of their places of work so that they can gain, then you can see from the submissions made that this has been abused because many people who are not even vendors in the market are the ones benefiting from this project. 

The ministers are supposed to guide the President on whatever directive. Other markets have been given to individuals. Kisekka Market was given away and the beneficiaries are well known and as you may observe, even for St Balikuddembe Market, Mr Kayongo with a few others are the beneficiaries and not the vendors. If we look at who SSLOA is, you will find that these are a few rich people who are the beneficiaries. Therefore, some of the recommendations that were made by the committee need to be amended.

On the authenticity of the vendors, there is need to verify who the actual vendors are and the exercise of registering St Balikuddembe Market vendors should be done afresh because if you look at the stall owners and the space as it was included, these are people who were put in the space that was passed for St Balikuddembe Market vendors by the Police. The Police left their work and started allocating stalls and spaces –(Member timed out.)

4.42
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI SSEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank everyone in this Parliament who has stood firm on behalf of the poor in this country. A woman in Owino who has capital of Shs 100,000 selling tomatoes, her interest is not to own; her interest is to continue operating in a space that was provided by Government and I want Parliament to review, examine and analyse the initiators of ownership. That is where we will get to the root of this problem. 

I have been to Owino and I represent Owino and the poor people just want Parliament and Government to guarantee their existence to operate and earn a living. We have a few individuals like Kayongo who were beneficiaries of what they are trying to privatise. If someone is entering Kampala, it is very expensive to go to arcades. People start with government-guaranteed cheap spaces like markets and pay say Shs 100,000 and then those who have capital graduate to arcades where they can pay Shs 2 million or Shs 3 million. So, we are trying to close this public good. This market is a public good and private business people are never interested in public goods. It is only Government and Parliament that can guarantee a public good like roads and markets. We can see that a market like Owino cannot be left to the whim of private business people. Parliament needs to intervene. (Applause)

To preserve a character of the public good where someone with Shs 30,000 capital can live in Kampala without stealing - well, we know that vendors were chased away from the streets. Why aren’t they accessing USAFI Market? It is because it is private. It is because USAFI is not government owned. Our people cannot afford to go to private initiatives. The private sector is important but the private sector is still weak and very selfish. Right now, we need to maintain what Government has already done. St Balikuddembe is our market as Ugandans. We invested money to the World Bank, which we are still paying back and a few individuals want us to just give them this World Bank guaranteed loan. 

Madam Speaker, I carry with me the pain of all those people in Owino Market who have spoken to me over the years and are asking us for one simple thing; whether Government has failed to manage Owino Market. Can we tell them that Government has failed to manage Owino? Has KCCA failed to manage Owino? They just want to know. They are ready to continue paying their rent and their dues to Government. They are willing to continue giving KCCA the much needed local revenue which they still earn. Why do we want to deprive Kampala of the only source of revenue that we put by giving it to other people?

I urge colleagues to vote with our hearts on this. I am perturbed as to why the committee, full of people who represent poor Ugandans could recommend a public good to go to private hands. Thank you. (Applause)

4.46
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Madam Speaker, it is very hurting to find that the biggest market we have in Uganda is in such a state. And a market which is supposed to be fully owned by Government to be in such congestion, it is unfortunate. And more so, to find that they do not have appropriate leadership, it is very hurting. Like all of you know, an organisation without leadership can never be straightforward and can never reach anywhere. On this note, I would urge the department which is in charge to take it more seriously and make sure that they go deep into the matter and work on it very fast and ensure that the leadership of Owino Market is in place so that these young mothers have where to run to whenever any issues arise and whenever they need any redress. 

It is very unfortunate that people who are already well off like Mr Kayongo, are the ones not seeing how the unfortunate ones are suffering; and he does not see that they need to be protected. Moreover, he is even a presidential advisor; it is very unfortunate. 

I pray that these people are helped with immediate effect and their plight should be taken more seriously so that everything is sorted out expeditiously and they can go back to their normal duties. Thank you. 

4.48
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs, who went down to Owino Market to follow up on the petition that was brought to this House. I support the issue that was raised in this committee when my sister was raising this matter. And when I hear what hon. Reagan Okumu is saying, I feel perturbed. 

On page 21, in the paragraph that opens that page, the honourable member did mention that it is the policy of the NRM Government to support the underprivileged persons of our society, for which I thank them. But I want to feel sorry that the policy, which is supposed to help the underprivileged persons of our society, is actually helping the privileged. When you talk of a presidential advisor or a minister turning himself into a market vendor, then you fail to understand who the underprivileged persons in this country are. No wonder then, that the Police have been very brutal in handling these vendors in the market and yet nobody seems to be bothered. This is because those of Kulayigye, Seiko, Tamale and Byandala are the ones being called the “vendors” but when the women go to cry out to the people who are supposed to defend them, they mete out brutality and violence against them.

Madam Speaker, I wish to present, and possibly lay on Table, pictures of some of these women who were beaten up by Police just because they presented this petition to this House. I want to ask this Parliament: How are we going to run our affairs when our voters, who come to us to present petitions that touch them are followed up and beaten? Here I have a photo of one woman called Susan Kushaba who was undressed in the market and beaten badly. When she reported the matter, she was instead arrested and beaten again. I beg to lay it on Table. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I will add you two minutes.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Here is yet another woman beaten in the market for escorting those who brought the petition. And by the way, the Police are still hunting for these women for having come to Parliament to bring this petition. I beg to lay it on Table. 

There is a petition of one of the vendors – a gentleman – who was beaten and if he is not lucky, he may lose his eye. I beg to lay it on Table too.

There is another picture of a gentleman who was about to lose his tooth; he was also beaten during the same time of bringing this petition. And these are unprivileged persons that we feel we should protect as a nation – that the NRM good policy is talking about and yet the already privileged are not giving them a chance to also survive and enjoy the benefits of being Ugandans.

During the skirmishes between the vendors and the Police, many vendors lost their property worth millions of shillings. And remember, they are the underprivileged who earn their living from here. This is where they get money to educate their children. Now that most of them have lost their property, nobody seems to be bothered. I just want to lay on Table a list of vendors who have complained to Police and showing the kind of their lost property. 

The list is long but if I am given the opportunity, I can read it together with the property they have lost. But for the purpose of saving time, I beg to submit the vendors’ complaint regarding the property they have lost. It is a list of 60 market vendors. 

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, I wish to recommend –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Make the recommendations.

MS KIIZA: Madam Speaker, like my sister, hon. Nabilah Naggayi, mentioned, the market belongs to Uganda and therefore its ownership should not be left to people who just want to do business at the expense of the others. Let the elections be carried out under the supervision of KCCA, for the real market vendors – not the tycoons in this city.

I wish to propose that KCCA takes charge of the market by law provided through the KCCA Act. And that if need be, a new organisation be put in place for the real market vendors, who will be registered, known and identified, to run their own affairs on behalf of the people of Uganda. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Actually, honourable members, I forgot to say that the vendors are in the Public Gallery, so you can understand the plight that they are experiencing. 

Honourable Members, we have teachers and pupils of Bright Light Day and Boarding Junior School. They are from Budaka represented by hon. Twa-Twa, hon. Mbogo and hon. Kataike. Please stand up for recognition. You are welcome.

4.56
MR VICENT MUJUNI KYAMADIDI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I read through the report of the committee and there are very many things that are coming up. As a member of the Public Accounts Committee, in my memory, there is something like Shs 169 billion in the form of compensation to private individuals who everyone in this country knows still lingers. It is common knowledge that the give-away of St Balikuddembe market, Kisekka market and others led to the loss of Shs 169 billion and some ministers losing their jobs. I always wonder, for how long shall we cry for our beloved country? They seem to have learnt nothing and forgotten nothing like the Bourbons. 

Reading through the history of the French Revolution, conditions must be bad in every society before men in large numbers undertake to overthrow it by violence. You cannot imagine that such mothers and fathers are here. You cannot imagine how much they have lost and for them time is money. They were here yesterday, they were here when they presented the petition and they are here today – [HON. RUHUNDA: “Information, hon. Kyamadidi”] – if it is not going to encroach on my three minutes.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much, honourable, for giving way. I would like us, as a House, to observe and know the type of system we are following. We are under the capitalist system of governance, so it is capitalism that is reigning. Those who have the bigger muscle take it all while those with small muscles lose out. I just want to give you that information.

MR KYAMADIDI: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I am a teacher of Economics and the Economic theory especially laissez faire where you leave everything to God rarely operates in normal circumstances. It is only mixed economy where governments will operate. For capitalism, where you actually assume that man will eat man, will also eat you.

I sit on the Public Accounts Committee and there is this –[HON. LUKYAMUZI: “Information”]– Madam Speaker, if only you could allow that I get that information and then I tell you how I am actually crying inside. These ones are saying it will be suspended and those who are keeping it will actually keep their seats. I will take your information; I don’t care. (Laughter)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give hon. Kyamadidi is that he should not be diverted by hon. Ruhunda because by character inscription, Uganda’s economy, as we speak, is of a mixed nature. That is why you have accommodation of anybody, among others.

THE SPEAKER: You are being very generous with your time. Hon. Member, what do you want me to do? Conclude in half a minute.

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker and colleagues, allow me to finish what I wanted to say. In the Public Accounts Committee today, we received a group of vendors who were conned under the auspices of this gentleman called Kayongo and someone else. The report will come at an appropriate time. Someone from Microfinance comes and says, “Sign here and there” and delivers Shs 100 million and the poor man or woman will not have a voucher where this gentleman will sign. We are now saying, where are we? Leader of Government Business, what kind of business is this we are doing as a country?

5.01
REV. PETER BAKALUBA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the committee for this report and for their recommendations. I also want to thank the vendors, some of who are in the gallery up there, for the spirited fight they have put up for their rights.

As NRM and as Government, we still have a very long way to go. If we cannot even settle and help our people in these markets and they continue operating like this, then we need to go back to the drawing board to be able to sort ourselves out. 

Today, in this country, we have mafias who are operating everywhere. When you look at St Balikudembe Market, there are just mafias hiding behind the Kayongos and stealing everything from this poor man and woman selling tomatoes. This is a shame to this Government.

People are hiding behind presidential directives that the President has directed and mafias go ahead to steal everything. This is very bad. Today, we are here and we want to solve this problem concerning these vendors. We need Kampala Capital City Authority to come up, take over and sort this problem. That is why these people are suffering. They are crying when other people are fighting and eating and these people are not doing any work. Right now they are here but those who are eating are continuing to eat.

Your Excellency the President, we are calling upon you to think about this. One time, he gave Shs 1 billion to a certain market, which is near St Balikudembe Market. Most of the money was embezzled and some other monies went back to State House. We need to sit down and plan once again. Are we helping our people? These are the people who embraced NRM when it came here. They supported this Government but today, they are yawning and crying and they need our support and help. We need to come in as Government and KCCA to construct these markets so that these people can have a peaceful place to stay and do business. I thank you very much.

5.04
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (DP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The biggest problem we have in Kampala is individual people setting up their own private companies, registering them and presenting them as vendors’ associations. Then they begin moving around, masquerading as leaders of the vendors. That is not only happening to Owino market vendors but also to other service providers in Kampala including tax service providers; the likes of UTODA and so many others.

Madam Speaker, what is happening in Owino must not only be an eye opener but also a stern warning to the rest of the conmen around Kampala and the country at large.

Let me now comment on the report by the committee. I want to say the report is elaborate and comprehensive enough. However, I have some observations and recommendations relating to it.

It is evident enough that during all this, Mr Godfrey Kayongo Nkaja, did not only have a State hand, but also connived with some officials at KCCA and Ministry of Local Government together with some officers in the Uganda Police.

The report talks about verifying the authenticity of vendors at Owino Market, fresh registration and fresh election of the market vendors’ leadership. However, it falls short of telling us who is supposed to carry out these activities.
I would like to move that KCCA repossesses the direct management of Owino Market until a free and fair election of all vendors’ representatives and leaders is conducted – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute for you to make a recommendation.

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, SSLOA should be forced to return all the money it collected from the vendors under the pretext of it being an association for all the vendors. It has mortgaged part of Owino market – the report is talking about four plots of land that were put in a bank as security – SSLOA should be made to vomit all it took to the bank.

The list of big shots sharing stalls that would be for the small people in Uganda is endless. I have seen – (Member timed out.)

5.09
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): Madam Speaker, thank you. I also want to commend the committee for coming up with such a good report. But what does this petition demonstrate? It demonstrates that people know their rights.

When you see people taking the courage – (Interjections) – I was saying that this petition demonstrates that people in Uganda know their rights. The courage and “stamina” that some of the petitioners took to bring this matter to Parliament about what has gone wrong over there is evidence to what I am talking about.

It is very unfortunate that the people who are supposed to protect the disadvantaged are the very ones that are trying to oppress them out of the small income they are trying to work out to make ends meet.

On the committee’s recommendations on page 23, I want to say that I have some reservations to a recommendation by the committee that says that ministers should, from time to time, guide and advise the President. Ministers, we have just heard, are part of the group in this market that is oppressing the vendors. What type of advice will they give to the President?

On the same page 5, the committee recommends that KCCA expedites the process. However, I think we need to give KCCA a timeframe within which this process should be executed. But we also need to request the Minister for the Presidency, who is also in charge of KCCA Affairs, to come back with a report to Parliament. This is important because all the other people we are talking about are in the President’s Office. You know that Mr Godfrey Kayongo has been in these market wrangles for a long time. So, unless Parliament gives a timeframe by way of a motion - which I wanted to move now but only stopped because I see many people still interested in contributing to this petition – that KCCA immediately takes over the management of Owino market, these wrangles will never end. (Applause) From what hon. Okumu has said, it is clear that we cannot leave this market in the hands of Government –(Member timed out.)

5.12
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Section 1 of the Markets Act clearly states that “No person or authority other than the administration of a district, municipal council or a town council shall establish and maintain a market.” But a very selfish individual in the name of Godfrey Kayongo went on to create a company, which he used to grab land from the poor vendors in Owino Market. Despite the fact that Mr Kayongo is actually a presidential advisor, he objected to the advice of his boss. He ignored the advice of the President that vendors be given the chance to develop this market.

In addition to that, Mr Kayongo went to put the market land at stake by using its titles to acquire a loan of Shs 5 billion. That means if he fails to service this loan, any rich Ugandan can pay it off at Dfcu and takes over that market as a personal property. What a big loss to the poor women. Yes, I come from a village constituency, but I decided to speak for the women from the city because I know that matter affects the women here just like those I also represent. Tomorrow, this very matter could be affecting women in Otuke.

I would like to say that I am very disappointed that despite the fact that all this was going on, somebody went to court. That court in 2010 wisely ruled that this company called SSLOA should merge with the association formed by the market vendors to form one company that would manage the affairs of the market. Unfortunately, the vendors have been ignored to date. I am tempted to say that if it was not for anything, I would add onto the recommendations of the committee to the effect that this man should actually be indicted or that he should actually be arrested because this is – (Member timed out.)

5.15
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Kampala is a metropolitan area. So, I would like to remind Members that these issues affecting women and men in Owino Market are not only affecting those, they are also affecting people who come from vast areas of this country. I can mention for you names, instantaneously of women and men who come from Agago District, but who vend at Owino Market. So, this mater affects all of us.

Madam Speaker, allow me to start by requesting the paralegals in this Parliament to help us – I meant the legal minds in this Parliament – they should help us come up with the best way to handle this matter. I want to suggest that people called presidential advisors should be vetted by Parliament just like ministers and other officials. This is because these are people who direct the President to give directives according to the law. What Mr Kayongo did was trying to misdirect the President in his directives, which ended up messing up the people who would think the President does not know the law.  

So, I suggest that we amend the last recommendation which I think is very lenient. It should actually recommend that Mr Kayongo be relieved of his duties immediately, until the investigations are completed. 

There are no more street vendors in Kampala. The only place where Ugandans who are poor, with very little capital can vend or sell their small goods is Owino Market and small public markets that are around Kampala. Now, they want to take that away. Where else are they going to place these women and men of Uganda? 

And lastly, I have no problem with honourable ministers, Members of Parliament and the Speaker of Parliament wanting to own a stall in Owino. I have no problem with that but if you own a stall in Owino, pay the dues to KCCA and the dues to the authority and you become an obedient member of the association –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, we are dealing with a very important matter. We are all very passionate about it. But I seek the help of your good chair. We have got a distress call from the vendors. Actually, they have communicated that some kanyamas - the muscle men - have been sent by Mr Kayongo to identify who among them has come for these meetings. So, it seems they are seated in the gallery –(Interjections)– yes, it is important - to intimidate them. There are some people who are not well meaning for the cause of the vendors and I thought I would draw your attention to this so that you probably enlist the help of Government. Given that the vendors have already been beaten and pictures have been presented before this House, you probably could cause the Minister of Internal Affairs to assure the vendors that they will be safe as they go home and as this report is debated. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: The Leader of Government Business, I think Parliament is the final court of appeal for people who have lost hope, who have nowhere else to go, who have complained and no one has listened. So, I will not tolerate anyone intimidating citizens of Uganda who have come here to profess their issues, which the government has not thought about.

So, I want the Minister for Internal Affairs to assure us that the vendors, who are here legitimately to hear the debate, will not be beaten and will not be arrested on their way home. Yes. I want that assurance. I might have to ask the Sergeant-at-Arms to eject the goons if they are here. Can I have the Sergeant-at-Arms to take an interest in those people? Find out the people who are intimidating the vendors, who are also in the gallery. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, at the risk of being accused of being controversial, I rise on a point of procedure. I have an SMS message, which has just been sent to me here, which I want to read verbatim: “No voice on UBC yet it is sensitive. Please, let the Members know because you are not actors.”

THE SPEAKER: Pardon. Can you repeat?

MR ODONGA OTTO: “There is no voice on UBC.” There is a picture but there is no voice on UBC, “yet the issue is sensitive. Please, let the Members know because you are not actors.” I do not have to disclose the number which sent it.

So, the procedural question I am asking is; is there anything we can do to have both the picture and the voice of Members of Parliament on Uganda Broadcasting Corporation Television other than someone switching off the volume so that the people out there who have not come to Parliament cannot know what is going on? So, procedurally, I seek your guidance. This is the second time I am raising this issue in this House. I seek your guidance; if any minister would help respond then I will forward this SMS message, on your request, to the Clerk to Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Can we know from the Minister for Information whether we are in a blackout or we are on the air because - are we on air? Can someone check and let us know? 

COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, can we really debate basing on messages from one individual –(Interjections) – no, if we are going to conduct business in the House in this manner, really –(Interjections)– no.

THE SPEAKER: Can the Minister for Information check and tell us whether we are in a blackout or not. 

5.24
MR LATIF SSEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue of markets in Kampala and also in other areas is of critical concern especially to us as Members of Parliament. The rate of unemployment is very high in our country and markets are the areas where these people go and earn a living. 

Right from the word “go”, the issue of markets being owned by individuals was really uncalled for. Markets should be owned by governments. That is the password. If we are talking about institutions like markets, we should not have anything like organisations taking over the management of markets because they are meant for the poorest of the poor. The moment we come in as business, then we are doing a disservice to the suffering Ugandans.

We have examples here in Kampala. There is a market called Shauriyako- people came together and said that they were going to manage the market on behalf of all the vendors. But what is happening now is that the market belongs to very few; it is in fact owned by not more than seven people. The other vendors were left out.

I believe that what we should do for Owino Market as Parliament is to put in place a technical committee to look into all these technicalities; bank, court and then see what the law says, what is the legal framework and our major objective is ensure that the market goes back to Government under KCCA. That would be the best solution.

I believe that if we do not do that then these wrangles will continue. I was surprised yesterday when the hon. Minister in charge of economic monitoring said, “Yes, there is no need of debating this because we have agreed and we are in conformity with the recommendations here.” I do not think the minister was right and we are very grateful that you gave us this opportunity to air out all these views.

I believe there are some good recommendations that were made by the committee but there other recommendations we need to add –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR SSEBAGALA: These people have come here so that we can really assist them. The recommendation I can add on is to ensure that all the factions in Owino Market cease to exist and then KCCA comes in to conduct fresh elections and also ensure that each and everything is under the management and control of Government through KCCA. Short of that, we will let these markets to be owned by rich people but then we will be doing a disservice to the poorest of the poor - (Member timed out.)

5.25
MR ANTHONY SSEMMULI (NRM, Buwekula County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give to this House right now is that the message I am receiving from Mubende says that the voice is on UBC.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, I have also confirmed that we are alive. There is no problem with the broadcast. We are fine.

MR SSEMMULI: Madam Speaker, considering the issue of our vendors in Owino, according to my observation, there is a lot of privatisation and liberalisation in our sectors. That is why you see there is a lot of capitalism; man-eat-man and I find it disturbing.

Owino is a very big source of employment in Kampala whether we like it or not and these people have been exploited to a level whereby their purchasing power is very low. As a government, there is no way we can advocate for transformation and poverty eradication when our local people are suffering.

To my observation, again our institutions and systems are not that effective. Whether we like it or not, our poor people, not only in Owino, are suffering. People in our markets are being exploited. Under public interest litigation in our Constitution, it is the role of Government to take over all these markets because there are very many people who are being employed.

When I look at the report, there is a source of conflict. There are mafias; people were saying that there were many Kanyama’s giving out threats. This is absolutely criminal. This means that even some of our lives are at risk if that is the case.

Madam Speaker, you have got to come out strongly to protect and defend the interests of our local people, the vendors. What I would like to say is that the nation is watching us seriously. This is corruption of the highest level. Our oversight role, we have got to come up with recommendations that should be executed.

This time, I am calling upon the minister; our recommendations should not stay here in the House. They should be executed.

5.23
MR ALEPER SIMON PETER (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not intend to submit in a direction that may stop Members from further debate on this matter but having listened to Members and following the statement of my sister, hon. Alaso, we are all passionate about this issue. It is true our people, the vendors, have come here for a solution from this House and given the recommendations that are contained in this petition and others that have been added, I would think as hon. Kawoya was moving that we should get concrete solutions.

We may debate this matter endlessly, but for now, I would like to second that we agree on the short term solutions and pronounce ourselves on these recommendations one by one, other than us continuously debating this matter.

The first one that Kawoya made was that; let KCCA from the effect of this debate take over St Balikuddembe Market. Two; let this House pronounce itself strongly on these recommendations just to avoid going round and repeating ourselves and continuously debating this matter.

However, as I said, I do not intend to stop Members from further debate but we must also give our people hope when they go back instead of just ending with debate. So, I would wish to support what hon. Kawoya moved that KCCA effectively takes over the management of the market.

5.34
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand up to associate myself with the concerns of the people from St Balikuddembe Market, especially the suffering and the oppression they have suffered.

This petition came on 1st November 2012 and I think that is eight months ago. So, if you look at the urgency of the prayers of these petitioners, I think a lot of time has passed. They are suffering from the insecurity they presented in November. If this has been going on, then I would like to recommend that this House acts quickly.

Whenever I hear of a fire in Owino Market, the first thing I think of is the disorder, the disagreement and the fights that exist in this market.

Today, in PAC, we heard some insinuations alluding to issues that we are addressing today of oppression, money being collected from the vendors and money being received in their names and money that they never receive. I would like to request that all the recommendations that we have especially to do with Mr Kayongo and the money that was received in their names, the registration and denial of ownership; these recommendations should be acted upon quickly.

Yesterday, we received a complaint from one of the Members who said that the recommendations we make even on some officers to be removed from their offices - some of the officers are still sitting and occupying those offices. So, I am of the view that we keep the act. 

Secondly, the petitioners do not come from Kampala City alone. These people come from all over the country. In fact, we are told that the word “Owino” came from the first entrepreneur in that place and that is how the market came to be called Owino –(Interjections) –  from Tororo, I am told. So, in this House, we represent the whole country and for that matter, all our interests are at stake.

Finally, to the women; we know they are the biggest stall operators and whenever a market is being formed and I would like to disagree with one of the ex-councillors. It is the councillors that allocate that space and they are the ones who give those names that you have heard of important people who own those spaces. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MS BOONA: Thank you very much. One of the recommendations that I would like to make is that this scuffle between owners and operators is not peculiar to KCCA in Kampala only. As the ministry is looking at this petition, can I ask the minister to look beyond Kampala? Where I come from in Mbarara, we have a similar scuffle between the owners and the operators and I pray it does not end up like the Owino case. 

I identify myself with the plight of these people and I ask this Parliament to quickly solve the problem of these petitioners. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.38
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The biggest contribution this Parliament can make is on policy. The day the policy of privatising markets took root in this country is the day we started having problems. 

First, we had Basajjabalaba in these markets and we gave him lots of money for him to get out. Basajjabalaba left and there came Kayongo and when you read this report, Kayongo and his group have paid Shs 4 billion for a lease and so the market has been given to them the same way it was given to Basajjabalaba. 

We will have problems with all the markets because the policy of Government including the directive of the President is that individuals can buy these markets. Majority of the people working in these markets cannot prepare bid documents and so, you open a window for mafias to form companies and start buying public places where ordinary people should be working. In fact, the recommendation should be to reverse that policy that is even against the law because the law as quoted in this report is that individuals or private persons cannot go and own markets but ownership should be by districts and other authorities. 

Actually, when I saw the Minister responsible for Economic Monitoring celebrating and wanting Parliament to pass the recommendations here, I knew there was a problem because all the recommendations in this report are maintaining the status quo; that you can have the Kayongo’s who can call a meeting of his company where there are 156 directors and then, they carry out fresh elections. Certainly, this is Kayongo’s company. If he called for elections in that market, it will be Kayongo re-elected because he was offered the lease and he runs the market.  

That is the first recommendation that the policy of privatisation of markets must stop and then, we must follow the law. 

Secondly, the “war lordism” that is emerging in this country. How can a presidential advisor have access to armed personnel to go and terrorise people in a market with “Kanyamas.” And then, the report says you must investigate Kayongo and the reason to investigate him is to establish his role in beating up vendors and bribing the Police. The Police is an institution of the State and we are saying Kayongo must be investigated but now, by who, if he has been bribing the Police? 

The second recommendation is that once reversed, the policy would be to dismantle the “war lordism” at Owino and other markets where an individual can form a company, bribe the Police, hire “Kanyamas” and subjugate citizens to submit to his ways. 

So, the immediate relief this Parliament can give to the vendors will be to dismantle Kayongo and his mafias in Owino market. If we do not do that and ask Kayongo like many of the recommendations that some of our colleagues want us to pass immediately - because the recommendations are saying we call a meeting, hold elections and pay this - you must dismantle Kayongo and his group immediately.  

Finally, we must be aware as a Parliament and maybe one of the recommendations would be to ask the one who issued the directive that markets can be given to individuals whom he later appointed as advisors to help us fundraise the money and pay the bank and take over the markets - because markets must be publically owned and not privately owned. But once we pass that recommendation, the next stage will be Kayongo to go to court and then you will pay him compensation but in this particular case, maybe the law will be on our side because individuals cannot own markets.  

So, we ask the minister to communicate to the one who issued the directive since Kayongo also worked as a presidential advisor to reign in on Kayongo and since the President has money; he has been giving tractors, he has even been carrying some money in sacks, he can find some money to compensate Kayongo so that we publically repossess that market and allow –(Interruption)

MS NAGGAYI: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. I have information that the Kayongo you are talking about is not a poor man. He has been collecting money in millions from the vendors and other people that are interested in owning a share of Owino for the last four years. So, he has collected billions already and actually, we want to start to bring him to book to account for the money that he has been collecting for the last four years. (Applause)

5.44
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you read this report, you will find that the recommendations do not tally with the findings and for that reason, I would like to propose that Parliament makes an observation that the directives as issued by His Excellency the President, most probably with the advice of his presidential advisor, one Kayongo, have been abused and that Parliament does humbly request His Excellency the President to recall these directives because it is not only in Kampala. It is even in Mukono and Jinja where people have come up with associations belonging to traders and have eventually turned them into private companies and taken over the markets. 

I also propose that it is high time that the minister came up with an instrument to provide for a statutory body to govern markets instead of leaving the governance of markets to associations of vendors, which are eventually taken over by mafias.


I would also wish to ask this of the honourable colleagues; are we sitting tenants in this Parliament? Definitely, we are not. How come the market vendors who go to trade in markets are eventually taken to be sitting tenants and then make a claim to own these markets? I once worked in a market as a vendor and I am not shy to say so. I went to school and I eventually became a Member of Parliament. Had it been that this policy was in place, today I would be one of the people owning a market stall in Mukono and that would be very unfair. Markets are meant for poor people. Once you graduate to another level, you leave the market to another poor person to come so that he can also graduate to another level.

Madam Speaker, I would like to propose that this Parliament takes note of the fact that KCCA entered into contract with SSLOA and as hon. Ssemujju has rightly put it, the recommendations here in a way preserve the status quo, which is mutual improvement. Let us resolve, therefore, that we work out a method of repossessing this market. If we can pay off the Kayongo’s, so be it. They have already worked their way to get status. Let us pay them off and then this market is owned by KCCA on behalf of the public and from today onwards, let it be a policy of Government that markets are public utilities, that all markets should be publicly owned and that –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Nambooze, for giving way. It is not to reinvent the wheel. That is the position of the law, that markets are not owned by an individual or any person but by the local authority within there. That is the information I wanted to give. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MS NAMBOOZE: Finally, Madam Speaker, I propose that having received this report and having taken note of the recommendations and the findings, this Parliament drops the recommendations and they come up with fresh recommendations, which are in line with the law and recommendations, which will benefit the poor people, the poor women who trade in Owino market. I beg to move. 

5.49
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, if Mr Kayongo was moving along the road and was accidentally pierced by a sharp object, his stomach would explode with a lot of corruption and what he has stolen. (Laughter)

Secondly, it is unfortunate that the Minister for the Presidency is not around. He would have helped us to know whether there is no sitting space for this man at State House or Okello House, but before that, I want you to pay attention to this; Kayongo is not a simple man! 

According to the recommendations here, there is an issue dealing with the Police. What we should be assured of from today and we should recommend it now, is that the Inspector General of Police, Gen. Kale Kayihura, must transfer all the policemen in Owino with immediate effect and replace them. That is a fact and on top of that, he should also interest himself in knowing the kanyama’s around there. If they have been carrying out business and causing havoc, they should also be relieved for the time being because when you talk about these people not going back, it is the Police that have been brutalising people under the influence of the presidential advisor. 

Secondly, Kayongo has been in Owino – I do not know whether he was born there but he is always camouflaging or changing companies and he is very fast at changing names of his companies and suppressing these people. Some of you do not know the stress that these people go through to pay for their children’s schools fees. We, who were once head teachers, know these parents. Because of the little income from Owino, he comes with Shs 5,000 when the fees are meant to be Shs 100,000 per term.

I appreciate the committee but these recommendations are very weak and that is why my friend hon. Banyenzaki said what he said. I once asked him as a friend and a fellow man from the same land, “As Minister of Economic Monitoring, have you ever visited Owino market? Do you know where Kalungu District is found,” and the answer was in the negative and he never knew even where Kalungu is situated. All these issues are to do with economic monitoring. They would not have happened –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, the hon. Members of Parliament and you, Madam Speaker, know a lot of the activities that I have been doing and I have been in the press. I was covered extensively when I visited Owino. Actually, the people in Owino said that I was the first minister to have visited Owino. So, is the Member of Parliament for Kalungu in order to say that I have never visited Owino, that I do not know what is happening there, when actually I have been there and I have actually been to Kalungu? Is he in order to misrepresent facts here that I am not doing my job when I am diligently doing my job and can he withdraw that statement?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, unless you can substantiate that the minister has never stepped in Owino and does not know Kalungu, please, withdraw the statement.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, our listening abilities and attention span sometimes is not the same in this House. I have said that at one time, I asked the Minister of Economic Monitoring on a programme where I was with him and he can bear witness if he is a real Catholic. I said, “Really, have you ever monitored Kalungu as Minister of Economic Monitoring? Do you know where Kalungu is situated?” And he failed to give an answer and I am saying that most of these problems are coming as a result of that. If really you are monitoring, why are these problems taking place? Let me give a clear example, Madam Speaker. SSLOA was given money to provide with these people –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, I rose on a point of order and you requested the Member of Parliament to substantiate and what I have been doing is factual. My going to Owino was in good faith. I have been there. I have been to Masaka; I have been to many places. Honourable member, please, withdraw your statement. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, concentrate on the petition or the recommendations.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I would like to emphasise that it was after my complaint that he went to that market and I want to thank him for that. (Laughter) I thank you very much, hon. Banyenzaki, that you always have taken my recommendations in good faith. 

So, as I conclude, Mr Kayongo was given money and there was no politics in St Balikuddembe but it was Mr Kayongo who took politics there, in the wrong spirit. He was given money and he was supposed to help these people get their money because all the money in their SACCOs was taken by him. Now, you are saying that he even took the land title to dfcu bank. Already, this man, according to what we have in PAC, he is not safe and is not – (Member timed out.)

5.55
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for some work done. From a planning point of view, markets are a public good and during planning, they are reserved for the poor and not for the rich. (Interjections) Yes, that is from the planning point of view. So, when you reserve a market for the poor – and actually, I have always heard people talking of developing markets. The reason why Shauriyako is no longer for the poor, or it is in the hands of the few, is because it ceased to be a market. You cannot define Shauriyako as a market. Maybe, it is a shopping mall but not a market. By definition, a market is an open place where people are transacting business. So, Shauriyako is not an open place and it cannot be a market. So, we have always hidden behind this by saying, “Let us get this small group to organise this market because it has no structures.” And people get loans; how will they pay back that money because it is from the wanainchi? 

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether Mr Kayongo still has the moral authority to advise the President in line with the markets – because he no longer qualifies to be a vendor; actually, he is now a tycoon running a market. And his customers are the vendors who pay monthly rent. And as we are looking at these markets, it is not only people from Kampala who are occupying them. Even back in Buvuma, there are fish traders who bring their fish to St Balikuddembe. (Interjections) As the honourable minister is saying, “immature” but at this juncture it does not matter whether it is mature or immature but it is fish. (Laughter) So, my humble –(Interruption)

MS KIIZA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I wish to give to you in regard to what you said that people from Buvuma bring fish to Owino market is that the biggest suppliers of “butunda” in Owino market is Kasese and Mbale districts. Therefore, the people of Kasese are beneficiaries as well as actual vendors in that market. I therefore speak on their behalf. 

MR MIGADDE: Thank you very much for that information. Madam Speaker, my prayer – and actually in line with the prayers of the petitioners - I would concur that KCCA should take over the management of St Balikuddembe market immediately and that Mr Kayongo and group should be prohibited from conducting businesses, especially in line with collecting money. Maybe they should remain in their stalls, if at all they have them. But what I know that even the stalls in their names are already rented out. The only way you can tell that so-and-so operates a stall is when he or she is sitting in it. But you cannot be an operator of a stall in which you do not sit. So, these people no longer qualify to be vendors. We pray that the President hears the voice of the “wanainchi” and relieves Kayongo of his duties. 

5.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (ECONOMIC MONITORING) (Mr Henry Banyenzaki): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee that handled this petition for their report. I also thank all those who have contributed to this debate -

THE SPEAKER: Let us have a point of procedure from hon. Otada.

MR OTADA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure and I request your indulgence that you allow me make a short preamble to first thank this House, and especially hon. Ssemujju who yesterday insisted that we should not allow the minister to say that we should make an omnibus adoption of the recommendations. Thank you. (Applause)

I also want to say that hon. Ssemujju made a very important point that the problems we are trying to solve, arise out of the decisions that were made in a hurry by some leaders. And I am glad that, Madam Speaker, you have stopped this Parliament from joining the group of leaders who are making decisions in a hurry, by allowing us time to speak. 

Now, I thank colleagues who have spoken here but I think we have all invested our energies in the emotional part about how we feel about the prevailing situation, and we have not addressed our mind to the legal issues that we should pick out from this report. When you read this report, for example, pages 15 and 16, the committee says in the second last paragraph that SSLOA accumulated arrears of so much money and they have not paid KCCA. It further says that there was no signed lease agreement between SSLOA and KCCA. The question is: What business is SSLOA doing with KCCA in light of there not being any agreement between the two parties? (Applause) That is my first question. 

It further says that the transactions have not been approved by the Solicitor-General and, therefore, there were no legal binding leases between the two parties. They do not owe each other anything. This is what the report says on pages 15 and 16. So, my question is, What is KCCA transacting in terms of business with SSLOA. Let us turn to page 21: “The committee observed that the award of the sublease was upon the terms, among others, that SSLOA pays a premium of Shs 4 billion and ground rent of Shs 200 million. The committee noted that the premium was paid but the ground rent for the year 2012 remained unpaid.” Under what arrangement was that made if there is no business between these two parties?

There is also a serious matter of law – that a sublease was given to SSLOA. And the committee observes correctly that where there is a sublease, it only follows that there is a lease in place; who had this lease before SSLOA got the sublease? I wanted that to be clarified. I also want us to proceed to page 23, where the recommendations are. One of them says that SSLOA should discharge its obligations and pay the outstanding amounts, which remain unpaid to avoid any adverse consequences arising from the breach on its part. How do you breach a contract which does not exist?

Then No. 6 says: “The Ministry of Lands should expedite processing the amalgamation of the several plots of Owino market land into a single certificate of title, which title deed should be handed over to KCCA to enable a lease agreement to be prepared –”– listen to this; there is no lease agreement – “…to enable a lease agreement to be prepared and forwarded to the Solicitor-General for clearance as required by law and only therefore, there will be some sort of relationship between the two parties.”

There are several issues, for example, on page 17, SSLOA is not filing its returns and it is dormant. Company Act is very clear that, that automatically leads to de-registration of that company. Page 14 of the Market Act is very clear; we have just been going through it. So, we are here struggling to maintain the status quo when we have a whole bunch of illegalities going on and as Parliament, we are trying to say that we should allow this to be prepared so that the Solicitor-General can approve and then a contract is signed. Are we serious?

Regarding the submission by the Minister in charge of the Presidency, the Market Act is clear. Section 1 of the Market Act provides for establishment and control of markets: “No person or authority other than the administration of a district, a municipal council or a town council shall establish or maintain a market.” I think we drive our point home when we read these bits of law. What business is KCCA doing with SSLOA? They are managing incorporated companies illegally but they are not allowed to, under the law. Read that for yourselves; we all have this!

So, Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. Are we moving well, procedurally, because the minister has come to say what he has to say? Are we moving well in light of us not addressing our minds to all these flaws, which are legal in nature and not taking care of them? I want to seek your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my plan was that the minister responds and then we go to the recommendations and seek proposals for amendments. That is how I had planned to do it but we appreciate all that information, it is very important.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me clarify some issues. First of all, concerning what my colleague hon. Otada said, a lease is held by KCCA and that is why KCCA was giving a sublease. The owners of the land are Kampala District Authority so that is in conformity with the law. I had already thanked all those who contributed to this. 

When the President gave a directive - If I could read it as it is a very short one. It has been said it is illegal but it is not. It is dated January 19th 2009 and addressed to the hon. Minister of Local Government: 

“RE: Lease of St Balikudembe Market. 
Reference was made to the subject above. I have received a petition from the association of St Balikudembe Market (Owino) for lease over the market they operate in. As you are aware, it is the NRM policy to support the underprivileged. Therefore, the association deserves all the support because it helps to alleviate poverty from the urban poor who are the majority in the market as opposed to creating another serfdom status; that is having another set of landlords in the market. 

This is, therefore, to direct you to liaise with the Attorney-General to ensure that the association is a proper legal entity and all the people in the market are taken care of and thereafter, a lease for the market is offered to them. 

Y.K Museveni, President.”

A copy was given to Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Attorney-General, His Worship the Mayor, town clerks, St Balikudembe - I lay it on the Table, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: There is some clarification from hon. Namayanja.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the minister. Can you lay on Table the written NRM policy on the underprivileged that you are talking about so that we get to understand this policy?

MR BANYENZAKI: The policy of NRM to help the underprivileged is the Prosperity For All. I think I need some protection so that I make this clear.

THE SPEAKER: There was some information from hon. Tinkasiimire before we go back to the minister.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. In the public eye and when you are addressing a country on a critical matter like this, there are certain times you need to say, “We made a mistake here” and you accept and we proceed in good faith. I want to think that the directive of the President was a popular one but it did not conform to the existing law. 

First of all, it was not in line with the Market Act Section 1 as very many Members have said. This is why we had trouble in the committee. How do we help the President with his popular directive and at the same time save the damage this popular directive has caused to this country? Already, the vendors are in arms so we thought it was necessary to have a middle ground; have the presidential directive implemented where all the vendors are members of SSLOA –(Mr Banyenzaki rose_) - Hold on, why are you panicking?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, he was the chairperson of the committee responsible for drafting this report.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The first person who signed this report is the chairperson.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think we need to listen to each other. There is a big problem and that is why the petition came here. Let us listen and see how we can correct these things.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: That is why we chose to take that part because we had seen past presidential directives causing financial haemorrhage to this country. He directed that markets be withdrawn from Basajjabalaba who run to courts of law and you know how much he got. So, as a committee, we were in this situation where they had already given SSLOA a sublease. If we proceeded and said, “We withdraw this sublease and the market from them” and they run to the courts of law, where they have already deposited - You know they have an interest; they paid Shs 4.5 billion. 

I want to tell you that I was ready to take this decision but I looked at a situation where they run to the courts of law, and the same directive or problems of compensating these people will fall on the government and enrich these people on the front bench because I know they will go and sit with SSLOA and share. (Laughter)

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, this report was written and considered under the chairmanship of hon. Tinkasiimire. Even at the time when it was signed, hon. Tinkasiimire was the chairperson so this whole report is his report. 

On the issue of the directive of the President, I want to say that precisely, the President gave the order for this market to be given to all the vendors and not individuals. In the event that it is found out that any individual wants to benefit out of this market, that will not be allowed, Madam Speaker.

The best thing that this Parliament can do to empower these vendors is to actually wave the Shs 4 billion that KCCA heaped on them. That will help them to take over this market – (Interjections) – Kayongo is a non-issue – Kayongo can go. Just give these poor women and men in this market – who owns land in Kampala? There are very few individuals. This economy is not all inclusive. The reason the President gave the directive that this market goes to the vendors was to enable these poor women and men to own it legally.

So, the only thing that Parliament can do, if you really – 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, point of order from hon. Nabilah Sempala.

MS NAGGAYI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The minister, while knowing what is happening on the ground, is he in order to insinuate that the process that he is defending is going to benefit the poor? Is he in order when he knows that the poor women he is talking about are being harassed and beaten up and so they can no longer work? Is he in order to continue misleading this House by saying that all this is in the interests of the poor?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the reason that petition came here was because the vendors had issues with that company. So, it cannot possibly be their saviour. No, it cannot. That is why they are here.

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the honourable members of Parliament for being considerate because I know that we have a section of vendors in ourselves. However, I would like to seek a procedural point on whether it is right – given what hon. Otada has said together with what is in the report and having heard that the person who was the chairperson then, sort of disowns this report, and in the absence of the Attorney-General – (Mr Bernabas Tinkasiimire rose_) I said seemingly. Please, allow me raise my procedural matter. 

There has been some information from the minister to the effect that we have a scenario where the said Mr Godfrey Kayongo –(Interjections)– I am still seeking a procedural point. So, is it procedurally right for the minister to come here and gives his stand when in reality the information we have got might end up in a legal battle in the absence of the Attorney-General?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what he was going to say. I think let us first listen to him before we can decide whether what he is saying is okay or not.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I need protection from the former chairman, and this is his report –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, allow the minister to first respond to the issues you raised.

MR BANYENZAKI: And you know this is his product – and you know that the Speaker has already ruled.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Yes, I agree with you that that is our report. However, why am I raising a point of procedure?  I am in the House, but a Member of Parliament alleges that I have disowned my own report. In those circumstances, it is not procedurally right for me to just sit back and leave that record on the Hansard unchallenged.

Anyway, what I said is we struck a middle ground to have all the vendors registered such that they could be able to own this market. This was because a mistake had been made in the first case. That is what I said – and it is only that this fact did not finally come out in this report. Otherwise, we had commented that though recommended that the presidential directive was popular, it was not tenable.

MAJ. (Rtd) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I notice that we are moving in a circle yet we have to get a solution to this problem. The letter that was written by the President, from what I heard, was only asking for the indulgence of the Attorney-General, who is supposed to guide us in sorting out this problem. So, how can they say the content of that letter was wrong when it was only seeking the legal opinion and expertise of the Attorney-General?

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, I think the big question here is how we come out with a proper decision to protect these vendors. The process of ensuring the ownership of the land where this market sits is in the hands of the vendors, and it is a very important one. This will help the vendors see whether –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, the honourable member has continued to talk about vendors. But what we have heard from the debate is that the vendors are in quotes. There are vendors who are privileged and those who are under privileged. In my understanding, most Members are standing with the under privileged vendors.

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MR OKUMU: So, can you clarify to the House, which vendors you have continued to refer to? Is it the pro-Kayongo group of vendors or these underprivileged market vendors?

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, to clarify on that, I would like to say that all markets in the country – vendors usually choose leadership. What we can do here is to create a mechanism that will make the vendors themselves – not the rich – to elect their own leadership.  Once we do that – and which the committee has recommended – the leadership within these markets will be in the hands of the vendors –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, can Members allow me make a submission?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, there is something disturbing Members. Yes, hon. Betty Nambooze on point of procedure.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, when this report was presented before this House, the hon. Banyenzaki urged this House to adopt the recommendations without debate. So, I do not know whether we are moving on well when the same minister – (Mr Henry Banyenzaki rose_) – but this is a procedural matter.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, yesterday, I did not say that Parliament should not debate this report. Yesterday, I owned up and I said - (Interjections)- that the Minister in charge of KCCA, the portfolio I am handling, is ready to implement all the recommendations as they have been laid down in the committee report. That is all I said. In essence, I was saying that the parliamentary committee does its business on behalf of Parliament and so, I was saying that we are going to implement the recommendations of Parliament. 

Is it in order for my friend to say that I said that Parliament should not debate this report when actually I only owned up and said we would implement the recommendations of Parliament? Is she in order, Madam Speaker, to insinuate that I said so when I did not say that Parliament should not debate this report?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what he said was that he accepts the recommendations. That he accepts all of them. He did not say, “Do not debate.” He said, “I accept everything that the committee has recommended.“

Now, please, let him finish then we can go to the recommendations - Now you are negotiating?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is just information. Hon. Banyenzaki, who was a good colleague while he was on this side but he also seems to be doing well on the other side - We used to plan how to oppose Government together. The information I wanted to seek from you is that SSLOA is a company. It is created by the Companies Act, which we presuppose should be having the articles and memos of SSLOA. If Kayongo is watching Parliament now, he must be smiling because he has not paid certain dues to KCCA. They have been collecting money from these vendors forcefully; they have put the land titles in the bank and this Parliament is about to resolve that they are thrown away like that. They will run to court tomorrow, get an injunction and they will even apply that they be refunded money. We may not exactly be helping the vendors who are here and are seemingly interested in immediate remedy.

So, the information I wanted to seek from the minister, who used to be my colleague, is that under the Companies Act, there is what we call “lifting the veil.” Is it possible to lift the veil and then we have this SSLOA investigated for irregularities: tax default, beating up people, intimidation, misinterpreting the presidential directive so that using the law after lifting the veil from SSLOA we can now cause it a natural death as opposed to this approach that may tend to benefit the people who have been robbing the vendors? Don’t you think, honourable minister, it is the right time to have the veil of SSLOA, as a company, lifted, which will cause it to die in such a manner as you know in the Companies Act? 

MR BANYENZAKI: The investigations on the activities of SSLOA were on beating up people and they were instigating violence in the market. That is the work of Police and Police can do it. I cannot stop it and I have no problem with that. 

So, Madam Speaker - [Mr Mwiru: “Procedure.”] Why can’t you listen to me, brother?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to move. Let him complete, then we can deal with that idea.

MR BANYENZAKI: And, Madam Speaker, your ruling is final. (Laughter) By the way, the point which hon. Otto had brought, this exact matter that we are deliberating upon as Parliament went as far as court and it was even captured in the report. When the people who brought this petition here went to court, they went under a consent judgement, which I will lay on Table. 

This was in the High Court of Uganda at Kampala Land Division, civil suit No. 947 of 2001. The parties who have brought this petition are:
    1. “JB Kivumbi
    2. Deborah Kyaluzi
    3. NalongoSempewo
    4. YowasiRwenega
    5. FransiscoLugwire
    6. Grace Mawanda
    7. Sam Kawuma
    8. BadruKyazze
    9. Margaret Ireta
    10. K Kandole
    11. Robert Mugenyi
    12. St Balikuddembe (Owino Market) Produce Traders and Vendors Cooperative Society Ltd. 
Vs.
    1. City Council of Kampala (Defendants)
    2. Mugalu Moses
    3. Bukanso Ibrahim
    4. Rumaze James
    5. Godfrey Kayongo (who is mentioned here)
    6. Kanyana Wilson
    7. KayiwaHabib
    8. Zzimula Robert
    9. St Balikuddembe Market Stalls and Lock-ups Shops Owners Association Ltd.”

The consent judgement is very short, should I read it, Madam Speaker? The terms of consent: 

“Judgement is entered and by consent of all the parties and their counsel, it is hereby ordered and decreed as follows:

    1. The 12th plaintiff be and ishereby added as party to the suit.
    2. That the 12th plaintiff,” - these are the petitioners - “(herein referred to as cooperative)and or its individual members merges with St Balikuddembe Market Stalls and Lock-up Shops Owners Association Ltd, within 30 days hereof. 
    3. That St Balikuddembe Market Stalls and Lock-up Shops Owners Association Ltd calls an extraordinary general meeting and amends its memoranda and articles of association, within 30 days hereof to reflect merger with members of the 12th plaintiff inter-alia the following:
    (i) Share capital and share value 
    (ii) Qualification, composition and appointment of board of directors to include members of the 12th plaintiffs
    (iii) Any other matter.

    4. That the 12th defendant adopts a new name to be agreed to at the said general meeting.
    5. That the City Council of Kampala (first defendant) grants a lease in the names of the company referred to in clause 4 above.
    6. That the register of all individual persons operating a stall, lock-up or registered space in St Balikuddembe market be compiled, and filed with KCC and the High Court and further that the said individuals be admitted as members of the company referred to in 4 above within 30 days from the date hereof.
    7. That the first dependant shall pay Shs 15 million as costs to counsel for the plaintiffs.” 

It was approved and signed, Madam Speaker. I lay it on Table. And so, the way forward for this - first of all, when Parliament decides, this consent judgement more or less summarises what we have discussed here and even the contents of that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when was the consent judgement entered? Was it effected? 

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, the committee looked into all that and that is why it came up with the recommendations that it came with. So, I may not divulge this because I may not have time but the committee looked into it and some of the recommendations that the committee has given come from that consent judgement. This consent was entered on the 19th day of February 2010. So, therefore, if I may proceed - (Interjections) - No, Madam Speaker, ruled; unless you want to overturn her ruling.

THE SPEAKER: I think he has a problem with the consent judgement.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I have had the benefit to look at the consent and it seems to talk about the 12 plaintiffs who went to court, yet as Parliament we are talking about the vendors in the market.

This consent intends to admit the 12 into the company yet as Parliament we are looking at all the vendors. So, is it procedurally right for Parliament to proceed to look at the plight of the 12 who are the plaintiffs, yet, for us, we are looking at the entire market?  Parliament should be looking at the document, which admits all vendors so that when we take a decision, it is for the benefit of all vendors other than the 12 who teamed up with Kayongo.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, unless the vendors became members of that company, they are not bound by the consent judgement. If they were not party, then they cannot be bound.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, I will proceed and your guidance is wise. What was the intention of the directive of the President? It was to empower the vendors. I am glad the Member for Mukono is saying that giving the vendors the market is very good.

Putting a mechanism that allows vendors’ list to be displayed so that all the vendors, wheelbarrow pushers and the people operating in Owino can see themselves is a welcome idea. It is in the recommendations and we agree with it.

Redoing the registration, that recommendation that was raised by hon. Namayanja is a very welcome recommendation.

Most of the contributors were talking about choosing the leadership. Madam Speaker, I have been to Jinja, Mbale, Gulu, Lira and these places where we are building markets. These new markets are modern markets to modernise these vendors. The modernisation agenda, Prosperity For All, is espoused by Government of Uganda.

Prosperity For All is for all not only those in the NRM. I led the agenda of the pro-poor when I was still a backbencher; I am still a pro-poor member; I want to make the poor rich. The only way to make them rich is to empower them. How do you empower them? Give them this land which is valuable.

There is a problem in Owino where one person came and took the women’s plot. I made a directive and I liaised with hon. Nantaba to go to the market to make sure that title, which was issued in error, is cancelled and it goes back to the women. So, to empower these people, you should give them this land.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I am forced to raise a point of order, given the fact that hon. Otada had earlier on raised serious issues on legality. Many Members emphasised the point of markets being owned by law by local authorities. Is it in order, therefore, for the minister to continue diverting this sitting that it is right when titles are owned by so and so, it is right when companies are formed, it is right when these things happen and yet, the actual legal position is that these markets must be owned by local authority and in this matter, the Kampala City? Is he in order to continue to mislead this House and divert the attention of Members from the critical issue?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you proposing to amend the Act or you are going to operate within the existing law on the Markets Act? 

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, the issue of reviewing is timely. This Act was enacted in 1949. Progressively, we have had markets owned by individuals. Reference was made to this market, which is on Clock Tower, USAFI. USAFI is owned by an individual; it has been sanctioned and approved by KCCA. So, progressively, if it is in the wisdom of Parliament that these markets where these people are operating from can be owned by the people there, then Parliament can bring an amendment.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but before you amend, what is the existing law? The Members are asking whether you are going to breach the law.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, we do not intend to break the law and in the event that anything to be done is inconsistent with the law, it will not be done. That matter was also considered by the committee. 

The way forward; the issue of protection of the vendors from police brutality –(Interruption)

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: The issue of vendors owning the market against the existing law. If I listened to the honourable minister, the chairperson reading the report and the clarification you sought to guide the House is that actually, the owner of the market is KCCA. However, they can sublease. If somebody is leased out a property, does it mean that you own it?

Now, if it is in the wisdom of Parliament and Government to protect the vendors altogether, would we be in contravention of the law if this market was subleased to them? My understanding is, no, still KCCA owns the land. That is why I am seeking clarification from the chair. These matters need to be understood such that we find a solution and get away from this problem.

MS TAAKA: Madam Speaker, we learnt that there is an existing loan in dfcu and the bank was secured by the following securities, which are listed here on page 19: Kyadondo Block 12, Kibuga plot 12, then Kibuga again Block 12 Plot 1339 and then Kibuga Block 12 Plot 388 but there is one more title, which was supposed to be submitted to the bank from KCCA and they were saying that after some time when it is ready, it will be handed over to go to the bank. 

Now, the point of clarification that I am seeking is to know who are the owners of these three plots of land and who holds the KCCA title otherwise, you may find that these three plots of land are for the vendors and not KCCA. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Oboth was giving some information before the minister winds up.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was actually seeking guidance. The minister, hon. Rwamirama, crosscheck on earlier title, was raising almost similar issues. If a matter of law has been identified, there is no progressive thinking that can amend that law unless you amend it by an Act of Parliament again. I do not know why the President is being dragged into this. He gave a directive and brought in the Ministry of Local Government and the Attorney-General. That was the directive.

There is no any reason any minister or anybody should use the presidential directive in this House to try to solicit for thought for failure of other ministers who did not do their part. When the President makes a directive, that directive needs to be into the context of the law. 

I do not think we have a problem with that directive. The guidance that I am seeking - and hon. Otada raised that issue and I know it as a fact. I have defended the government in my role as a former state-attorney where issues of ownership of markets were in the High Court – Malaba, URA and you know many markets in the east. It is not a matter for progressive thinker.

If you want to help the vendors, you do not help them by owning a market but finding another way. Markets are not subleased. Markets can be tendered out and somebody has a contract and makes collections. 

Madam Speaker, the Minister in charge of Kampala Capital City Authority is doing a great job and making wonderful submissions but don’t you think he needed to do it elsewhere and not here? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, we need to go to the way forward and conclude this matter today. We cannot have the vendors coming back tomorrow.

6.50
MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, on the issue, which has been raised by the honourable member, legal advice was sought from the Attorney-General’s Chambers and the Solicitor-General pronounced himself on that matter, and cleared this matter and it was one of the matters that the committee looked into.  

All these matters were handled by the committee and if you want that legal advice from the Attorney-General and Solicitor-General, I will table it on the Floor.

THE SPEAKER: You know that these days, we take the Attorney-General’s advice with caution. (Laughter) 

MR BANYENZAKI: So, Madam Speaker - 

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I am injuring the Muslims. They need to go and break their fast. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, if I could be given only three minutes, I will have finished - 

THE SPEAKER: But I do not want the vendors to come back tomorrow. I have some proposals. Honourable members, I think that from our debate, we seem to agree on the following:
    1. That, genuine vendors be provided space and security of tenure to do their business in the market. 
    2. The current market arrangement and sublease to SSLOA be cancelled.
    3. The market reverts to KCCA as per the law of the markets. I think we have agreed on that. 
    4. That either the ministry or KCCA registers genuine vendors and weeds out the politicians, advisors and other wealthy people.
    5. The Minister in charge of KCCA should brief us within two months on the progress.

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would have had no problem with the resolutions as read but I am meant to understand that as a result of SSLOA having a sublease, they did create a mortgage on this sublease in billions and so, when we take a decision that this market reverts to KCCA, that means that there is a third party, which is dfcu. What that means is that dfcu will also line up to demand – and, of course, SSLOA and then dfcu will have to go to court. That means that it is us the taxpayers who will take care of that. So, the guidance that I am seeking –

THE SPEAKER: Okay, can I propose, honourable members, that we have a small committee to design the final recommendations so that we look at them. So, can hon. Otada, hon. Mwiru, hon. Oboth, hon. Isiko, hon. Kabahenda and hon. Naggayi work overnight and you give us something soon?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. The Minister for the Presidency can join them but he should not chair the meetings. He should just be a member. Hon. Otada will chair.

MS NAMBOOZE: I thank you for that ruling but I want you to guide us because some of these problems need immediate attention. Madam Speaker, would you, as the committee you have selected move on with its work, also offer some interim directives through this Parliament, give an interim ruling to the traders because we are dealing with mafias as they were properly defined by various Members - that as the committee goes on, there is a tendency in this country for people to pretend that they have not heard from Parliament. So, how will this be communicated to all the stakeholders so that by the time we finish work here, you do not find that the vendors have already been thrown out of Owino Market?

THE SPEAKER: I expect this matter to be handled expeditiously and I expect a report tomorrow. We should finish it tomorrow. I think that 24 hours is not too long. We shall finish it tomorrow.  

MR BIGIRWA: Something small, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: On the same?

MR BIGIRWA: Just an addition to this. Is it possible for this very committee that has been put in place to come up with some additional recommendations? My worry is that we are discussing this matter of Owino and right now, as I am talking, in Hoima District, a modern market is also being constructed and I have been observing that the same problems are going to be coming in. Shall we again debate the same issue if it comes to that direction or could the committee still go ahead and give some guidance, for future reference?

THE SPEAKER: I think let us complete this one. We can borrow for the other markets but let us concentrate on this first because the petition concerns St Balikuddembe. I am delaying the Muslims, honourable members. 

6.56
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. At this juncture, I want to thank all my colleagues for the comprehensive debate. As a committee, we are contented with what we have done and the rest is in the hands of Parliament as a whole. But since the duration we took was too long, I think there are also lessons to learn from that; one is on the management of presidential directives and secondly, respect for law and order so that our work as committees and as Parliament will be made easier. With that, I thank everybody. 

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me the opportunity. I just want to find out how much time Parliament is giving us to do this intricate job so that we can manage their executions. I seek clarification. 

THE SPEAKER: Is 24 hours not sufficient? Can we give you the weekend and then you report on Tuesday and really thrash out all the proposals? Okay, thank you, honourable members. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00p.m. 

(The House rose at 6.57 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 18 July 2013 at 2.00p.m.)
