

Wednesday, 25 July 2018

Parliament met at 10.55 a.m in Parliament House, Kampala 

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

PRAYERS

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

The Uganda National Anthem

The East African Anthem

The Indian National Anthem

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni; Your Excellency, the Prime Minister of the Republic of India, Mr Narendra Modi; Your Excellency, the Vice President of Uganda, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda; the First Lady, Mrs Janet Museveni, Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, honourable ministers, Members of Parliament, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, you are welcome.

Your Excellency Narendra Modi, I warmly welcome you, on behalf of Parliament of Uganda. I would like to thank our President for inviting you to visit our country. Thank you for honouring us with your visit. (Applause)

This is the Tenth Parliament of Uganda; it has 453 Members of Parliament – much smaller than the Lok Sabha. It commenced in 2015 and it is operating under the multi-party system. There are four parties represented in this House, but we also have a large number of independent members of Parliament. (Laughter)

The NRM Party has more than two-thirds of the members of Parliament. (Applause) The official Opposition is the Forum for Democratic Party but we also have the Uganda People’s Congress, the Democratic Party and Members of the Uganda People’s Defense Forces.

Today is a very special day, mainly for two reasons: This is the first time that a serving Indian Prime Minister will address the Parliament of Uganda. (Applause) Secondly, we have been made to understand that from this country, the Prime Minister of India will be making a major address to the whole world from the Floor of this House. (Applause)

Uganda and India enjoy a very close and cordial relation and this goes back before independence. Indian’s freedom struggles inspired many early Ugandan nationalists to fight for independence. In that struggle, we were supported by the then Prime Minister, Mr Jawaharlal Nehru, leading to Uganda’s independence in 1962.  

India established diplomatic relations with Uganda in 1965, but the earliest Indian settlers in East Africa came in the 19th Century and since then, Indians of African origin have lived in peace and harmony with their African brothers.

Indeed, Prime Minister, they have settled so well that within this audience in the gallery, I have two former members of Parliament of Indian extraction - the hon. Sanjay Tana who was in this House for 10 years - (Applause) - and hon. Singh Katongole, who was here for one year. (Laughter)

Mr Prime Minister, the Indian Community has been assimilated in all spheres of life in this country. Of course, we had a dark period during the rule of Idd Amin, when many Asians were expelled from this country and their property confiscated.

However, we thank our President who, in the mid-80s, corrected this injustice and those who were affected were allowed to return and repossess their property. (Applause) 

The Indians of Ugandan origin have continued to participate in social, political and economic activities. We also remember the very early Members of Parliament who included: Cherunbhai Jakabhai, Amin Habib Kassamali (H.K) Jaffer and Narendra Patel, who was the Speaker of the First and Second Parliament. We also remember Sugra Visram, one of the first women in Parliament, C.K Patel and so many others. 

In the economic field, Prime Minister, I believe you are aware of the Madhvani family, the Mehta family, the Mukwano family, the Jaffer family and so many others engaged in trade, agro-processing, banking, real estate, hotel, tourism and ICT. These have made a substantial contribution to our economy. 

In the academic field, we know Prof. Mahmood Mamdani; very famous, the late Prof. Joseph Carrasco, Mr Rajat Neogy and the late Peter Nazareth who have made contribution to our education. 

We, therefore, commend the Government of India for the support extended to the institutions of higher learning, where hundreds of Ugandan professionals have been trained in various disciplines over the years in India.

India is one of the largest destinations for medical tourism and this has been attributed to the abundance of specialist doctors and other medical practitioners, the availability of the latest medical technology, growing compliance to international quality standards and therefore, they reduce costs of medical treatment in India. 

Patients from Uganda and Africa have benefited from that expertise. We commend the Government of India for providing a suitable policy framework and environment in that respect.
 
Our relations continue to be good and I just would like to say that we have also benefited from the support of the former Ugandans in the UK. For instance, in the House of Lords, we have seven former Ugandans who serve there. One of them is Lord Dolar Popat. He is the UK Prime Minister’s Trade Envoy to Rwanda and Uganda. 

We also have Lord IItaf Sheikh, Lord Rumi Verjee, Lord Jitesh Gadhia, Lord Shailesh Vara, Hon. Priti Patel and Hon. Shriti Vadera. These are in the House of Commons. They continue to come to Uganda regularly and they have built bridges between the two countries. 

Your Excellency and the Prime Minister, in the House of Commons in Canada, we have Hon. Mobina Jaffer of the Jaffer family, who up to today manages Fairway Hotel and they keep coming back to this country. 

We also have many Ugandans who are Honorary Consuls of Uganda, especially in Canada, and they are doing quite a good job. We also have Ambassador Nimisha Madhvani and Ambassador Mumtaz Kassam. They are all serving Uganda in the foreign countries. 

Prime Minister, I would also like to inform you that within the House, we have a caucus of India-Uganda which is just waiting to sign a Memorandum of Understanding, so that our Parliament and the Lok Sabha work together. 

The Members are:
 Hon. Robert Kafeero (Chairperson) 
Hon. Helen Kahunde (Vice-Chairperson) 
Hon. Christine Achen 
Hon. Maxwell Akora 
Hon. Paul Amoru 
Hon. Esther Anyakun 
Hon. Justine Ayebazibwe 
Hon. Judith Babirye 
Hon. Fred Baseke 
Hon. Janepher Nantume Egunyu 
Hon. Veronica Isala 
Hon. Rose Kabagyenyi 
Hon. Innocent Kamusiime 
Hon. Ibrahim Kasozi 
Hon. Winfred Kiiza
Hon. Florence Wamala 
Hon. Daniel Muheirwe 
Hon. Robina Mukisa 
Hon. Julie Mukoda 
Hon. Ronnie Mutebi 
Hon. Jacob Oboth 
Hon. Mourine Osoru 
Hon. Simon Oyet 
Hon. Sylvia Rwabwogo 
Hon. Ibanda Rwemulikya 
Hon. Simeo Nsubuga 
Hon. Juliet Suubi 
Hon. Robina Rwakoojo
Ms Marilyn Kabugo (not MP) 

Prime Minister, in closing, I would like to also inform you that we have a monument at the edge of the River Nile, where the late Mahatma Gandhi’s ashes were interred. It is a place we would like to encourage the Indian people to come and visit and pay respect to Mahatma Gandhi. 

However, we also think that it would be good if the Indian Government were to assist us construct a convention centre there and a hotel so that people can come and visit. 

There are also other religious sites which we would like to interest you in: Muchwini for our late Archbishop, Namugongo for the Uganda Martyrs, Kyando for the first Archbishop, Bishop Hannington who was murdered there, Mugonza, one of the other martyrs, in Kyebando, the site of Matia Mulumba. 

To that end, Prime Minister, I believe if Air India again took to the skies of Uganda, as it did in the past, this will give confidence to the people of India to visit this country much more. 

I would like to commend your work at the Bharatiya Janata Party and the work you have done, which has made a very big difference in the population in terms of service delivery and others. Therefore, we would like to thank you so much and we look forward to stronger and better improved relations. Thank you very much. 

I now would like to invite His Excellency, the President, to invite our guest. Thank you very much.  

INVITATION BY THE RT HON. SPEAKER TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA TO ADDRESS PARLIAMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 10(4)(A) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE, WHO WILL IN TURN INVITE THE PRIME MINISTER OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDIA, HIS EXCELLENCY NARENDRA DAMODARDAS MODI TO ADDRESS THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

11.11
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Gen. (Rtd) Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): The Prime Minister of the Republic of India, His Excellency Narendra Modi, His Excellency the Vice-President of Uganda, the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Ministers, Honourable ministers, Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition, Honourable Members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen; on behalf of all the Ugandans, I welcome the Rt Hon. Narendra Modi, Member of Parliament and Prime Minister of India. (Applause) 

The people of Uganda welcome you with a lot of enthusiasm to Uganda on your second visit to our country; first as Chief Minister of the Gujarat State and now as Prime Minister of the whole of India. 

I have also had the honour of meeting you in India when I came for the Africa Religious Summit in 2015 and more recently, in the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) at Buckingham Palace and within the Castle. 

As I said last night, when we were meeting the Indian community in Uganda, India’s earliest interaction with East Africa is mentioned in the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea written by an anonymous author around the first century AD. It says in one of the portions that, “Indian merchants had been flying their trains through the Indian Ocean since the days of Ancient Babylon and had even established trading posts along the coast of East Africa.”

Unfortunately, the people of India were subjected to invasions by foreigners that included the Mongolians, the Turkish, the Persians, the Portuguese, the Spanish, the French and the English, among others. 

Just like in Africa, these traumas inflicted on us by invaders caused pain and humiliation but also woke us up. Those foreigners, where they succeeded in conquering us, were mainly in account of internal weaknesses. 

Fortunately for India, your last coloniser, the British, ruled the Indian sub-continent together. India was invaded by so many invaders that the last one - the British ruled the Indian subcontinent as one unity. This eventually was an advantage for the Indian people. 

Although the British eventually spoilt this contribution by maneuvering with the secessionists as Indian independence was approaching, nevertheless, the portion of the Indian subcontinent that remained as India was big enough in terms of land size and population to guarantee the future of the Indian people in a greedy world order. With a land area of one million square miles and a population of 1.25 billion people, present day India has the critical parameters to strategically guarantee the safety, prosperity and future of the Indian people.

Africa on the other hand did not have the good fortune of sufficient political integration before or during colonialism. Before colonialism, a myriad small despotic and myopic chiefs or kings ruled us. The few empires that emerged from time to time did not last. Moreover, on account of the tropical diseases, the population of Africa remained small, the fact that Africa is the origin of man, notwithstanding. These cumulative disadvantages led to the horrors of slave trade and the humiliation of colonisation.

As already said, during colonialism, we did not have the good fortune of being governed together. Instead, by 1938, Africa was divided into 53 or so colonies belonging to the French, the English, the Portuguese, Spanish or the United Nation mandated territories. These were apart from Ethiopia, Egypt and Liberia that were independent by that time. 

Africans, however, are a tough race of four linguistic groups- the Niger-Congo, the Nile-Saharans, the Afro-Asiatic and the Khoisans. These are groups that are either similar or linked. They are a nation of four linguistic groups; genetically, they are tough - they do not die easily. That is how they survived the horrors of slave trade, colonialism and inter-tribal wars fomented by the myopic chiefs.

With the success of the anti-colonial struggle, which we shared with the Indian freedom fighters such as Gandhi and Nehru, the African faced 10 strategic bottlenecks that they have been battling with. These are:

i. 	Ideological disorientation.
ii. 	Weak states especially weak armies that cannot guard the borders.
iii. 	Underdeveloped infrastructure like the lack of railways, electricity, roads, telephones, etcetera. 
iv. 	Underdevelopment of the human resource.
v. 	Lack of education and poor health.
vi. 	Interfering with the private sector either by policy or by corruption like the case of Idi Amini who uprooted the Indian private sector in 1972.
vii. 	A fragmented African market on account of colonialism; India is a market of 1.2 billion people under one political authority. In Africa, we are 1.25 billion now but we are fragmented into 54 countries or something like that.
viii. 	Exporting unprocessed raw materials and therefore getting little money and losing jobs and the lack of industrialization.
ix. 	The underdevelopment of the services sector for example hotels, banking, transport, insurance, tourism.
x. 	The underdevelopment of agriculture and the attack on democracy. 

These are the bottlenecks, which we faced when we got independence.

I am saying this because Africa is very confusing to people who do not live here. The problem is how can such a rich continent be poor? People cannot easily understand this. They may not tell you but they wonder when they look at you - but these people, the country is so rich, why are they poor? The issue is that these Africans had to battle with so many problems.

Now, the good point is that fortunately, like your Movement, the Movement you started after independence which eventually got rid of Indians - the Congress Party of Nehru, we also started a political movement here called the National Resistance Movement (NRM). This House is full of those people plus a few friendly forces –(Laughter)

Therefore, I do not want to give an essay because I have written about this - I will give you these documents. The good thing is that we know these bottlenecks because they were also not easy to identify at first. People did not know and they were saying this and that but eventually after a long analysis, we identified the bottlenecks. 

Therefore, our friends in the world should know that the long night of Africa’s subjugation and marginalisation is over. (Applause) Why is it over? It is over because we have identified these bottlenecks. We have not solved all of them but we are dealing with them one by one. For instance, if you take the issue of the fragmented African market - what was our solution? With the signing of the Continental Free Trade Area Agreement (AFCFTA) in Kigali recently and the Abuja Treaty of 1991, Africans are now conscious that Africa must act as one as far as market is concerned.

Our 1.25 billion people will be 2.5 billion by 2050. Africa is 12 times the size of India in land area and four times the size of China. With economic integration, Africa will be one of the powerhouses of the world economy, henceforth. Some parts of Africa even aim at political integration to form more capable political units that can guarantee the future of the African people.

Therefore, Your Excellency, be assured that India and our other friends in the world have reliable partners in the rising Africa, the fact that we have to deal with more problems notwithstanding. 

I thank you, Your Excellency, for visiting us and I invite you to address us. (Applause)

11.24
THE PRIME MINISTER OF INDIA (Mr Narendra Modi): Your Excellency President Yoweri Museveni; Your Excellency the Vice-President; Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, Speaker of the Ugandan Parliament; honourable ministers, honourable Members of Parliament, excellencies, brothers and sisters, Namaskar. Mbalamusiza (Applause)

I am deeply honoured by the invitation to address this august House. (Applause) I have had similar privilege in other parliaments. This is, however, special. (Applause) This honour has come to a Prime Minister of India for the first time. It is a great honour for the 1.25 billion people of India. I carry their greetings and warm wishes of friendship with me to this House and to all the people of Uganda. 

Your presence, Madam Speaker, reminds me of my Lok Sabha, which also has a lady Speaker. I also see a large number of young Members of Parliament here. (Applause) This is good news for democracy.  

Every time I come to Uganda, I am enchanted by this Pearl of Africa. It is a land of immense beauty, great wealth of resources and rich heritage. Its rivers and lakes have nurtured civilisation across this large region. I am conscious of the history that brings us to this point, when the Prime Minister of the largest democracy is speaking to elected Members of the Parliament of another sovereign nation. (Applause) 

Our ancient maritime links, the dark ages of colonial rule, the shared struggle for freedom, the uncertain paths as independent countries in a divided world, the dawn of the new opportunities and renewed unity of aspirations of our young population; all of these connect us.

Mr President, our people are among the many threads that connect Uganda and India together. Over a century ago, the heroic labour connected Uganda to the shores of the Indian Ocean through railways. Your gracious presence today speaks of the precious bonds of friendship and solidarity between our people. You have brought peace and stability to your nation and the region. (Applause) You have put it on the path of growth and progress, overcoming many challenges. You have empowered women and made your nation more inclusive. Your visionary leadership has enabled Ugandan people of Indian origin to return to their cherished home, regain their lives and help rebuild the nation that they deeply love. 

In opening the State House to the celebration of Deepavali, you have lit up the many strands of ties that connect India and Uganda. Among these, the most sacred is the site at Jinja, at the source of River Nile, where a portion of the ashes of Mahatma Gandhi were immersed. In his life and beyond, he is one with Africa and Africans. At the sacred site in Jinja, where a statue of Gandhiji now stands, we will build a Gandhi Heritage Centre. (Applause) As we approach the 150th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi, there can be no better homage than a centre to remind us of Africa’s role in shaping his mission that even inspired Africa to freedom and justice, and the universal and timeless values of his life and message.

Excellencies, the story of India’s own freedom struggle is closely linked to Africa. It is not just the 21 years that Gandhiji spent in Africa, or the first Non-Cooperation Movement he led. For India, the moral principles of the independence movement or the peaceful means to pursue it were not just confined to the boundaries of India or to the future of Indians. It was a universal quest for liberty, dignity, equality and opportunity for every human being. Nowhere did it apply more than in Africa. 

Twenty years before our independence, the leaders of our National Movement had linked India’s freedom struggle to the fight against colonial rule around the world, especially Africa. Even as India stood on the threshold of independence, the fate of Africa was not far from our minds. Mahatma Gandhi firmly believed that India’s freedom would remain incomplete so long as Africa remained in bondage. 

A free India did not forget her words; India pursued Afro-Asian solidarity in Bandung. We stood firm in opposition to apartheid in South Africa. We took leading and bold positions in former Rhodesia, which is now known as Zimbabwe, in Guinea Bissau, Angola and Namibia. Gandhiji’s peaceful resistance inspired leaders like Nelson Mandela, Desmond Tutu, Albert Luthuli, Julius Nyerere and Kwame Nkrumah. 

History is witness to the success of the ancient wisdom of India and Africa and the enduring strength of peaceful resistance. Some of the most profound changes in Africa came through Gandhian methods. India's principled support to Africa's liberation movements often came at a cost to our nation’s trade, but nothing mattered in comparison to Africa's freedom.

Excellences, our economic and international partnerships over the past seven decades have been promoted as much by economic impulse as by the moral principles and emotional bonds. We sought a fair and equitable access to markets and resources. We fought together to make development the foundation of global trade. We worked to diversify economic partnership between countries of the South. Our doctors and teachers went to Africa not just to seek professional opportunities but in solidarity with a common cause of development as free nations. (Applause) As President Museveni said at the 3rd India Africa Forum Summit in Delhi in 2015, “We fought against colonial rule together. Let us fight for mutual prosperity together.” (Applause) 

Excellences, today India and Africa stand on the threshold of a future of great promise, as confident, secure, youthful, innovative and dynamic people. Uganda is an example of Africa on the move. (Applause) It is witnessing increasing gender parity, rising educational and health standards, and expanding infrastructure and connectivity. It is a region with growing trade and investment. We are seeing a surge of innovation. We in India rejoice in every African success because of our deep bonds of friendships.

India is proud to be Africa’s partner. Uganda is central to our commitment to the continent. Yesterday, I announced two lines of credit for Uganda; the first, of US$ 141 million for electricity lines and the second of US$ 64 million for agriculture and dairy production. (Applause) As in the past, we will continue to support the aspirations of the people of Uganda in agriculture and healthcare, education and training, infrastructure and energy, capacity building in Government and training in defence. I compliment President Museveni and this House on the decision to join the International Solar Alliance.

As with Uganda, we have deepened our partnership and engagement across the vast expanse of Africa. In the past four years, our President, Vice-President and I have collectively visited no less than 25 countries in Africa. (Applause) Our ministers have covered virtually all African nations. We were honoured to host all 54 countries - over 40 at Heads of State and Government level - at the third Africa-India Forum Summit in October 2015. We were also privileged to host many African leaders for the inaugural summit of the International Solar Alliance. 

Other than all these, 32 Heads of State or Government from Africa have visited India in the last four years. (Applause) My home state, Gujarat, was proud to be the host of the first ever meeting of the African Development Bank in India last year. We are also opening 18 new embassies in Africa. (Applause) 

Excellences, our development partnership currently includes implementation of 180 lines of credit worth about US$ 11 billion in over 40 African countries. At the last India-Africa Forum Summit, we had committed a concessional line of credit of US$ 10 billion and US$ 600 million in grant assistance. (Applause) Every year, over 8000 African youth are trained in a diverse set of programmes. As always, our efforts will be driven by your priorities. 

Indian companies have invested over US$ 54 billion in Africa. Our trade with Africa is now over US$ 62 billion. This is over 21 per cent more than in the previous year. Africa's exports to India are growing and our economic ties are now increasingly driven by new partnerships of innovation in the digital economy. The Pan Africa E-Network links 48 African countries to India, and to one another. It can become the new backbone for digital innovation in Africa. With several coastal nations, our partnership now increasingly seeks to harness the benefits of Blue Economy in a sustainable manner. India’s medicines turned the tide on diseases that were once a threat to Africa’s future. They also continue to make healthcare affordable and accessible to many.

As we work together for prosperity, we have stood together for peace. Indian soldiers have served in blue helmets so that Africa’s children can look to a future of peace. (Applause) We are proud of the work of Indian peacekeepers in over a dozen UN peacekeeping missions in Africa, since our first mission in Congo in 1960. In all the UN peacekeeping missions in the world, 163 Indians have made the supreme sacrifice. This is among the highest number for any country. 

Almost 70 per cent of these embraced martyrdom just in Africa. Today, over 6,000 Indians serve in five peacekeeping operations in Africa. Indian women established a landmark with the first all-female police unit of the United Nations in Liberia. Our defence and security cooperation is growing with nations in Africa, as we work together to counter terrorism and piracy and keep our seas secure.

Excellences, India's engagement with Africa will continue to be guided by 10 principles:

1. 	Africa will be at the top of our priorities. We will continue to intensify and deepen our engagement with Africa. As we have shown, it will be sustained and regular.

2. 	Our development partnership will be guided by your priorities. It will be on terms that will be comfortable for you, that will liberate your potential and not constrain your future. We will rely on African talent and skills. We will build as much local capacity and create as many local opportunities as possible. (Applause)

3. 	We will keep our markets open and make it easier and more attractive to trade with India. We will support our industry to invest in Africa. 

4. 	We will harness India’s experience with digital revolution to support Africa’s development; improve delivery of public services; extend education and health; spread digital literacy; expand financial inclusion; and mainstream the marginalised. This will not just be our partnership to advance the UN Sustainable Development Goals but also to equip the youth of Africa for their place in the digital age.

5. 	Africa has 60 per cent of the world’s arable land but produces just 10 per cent of the global output. We will work with you to improve Africa’s agriculture.

6. 	Our partnership will address the challenges of climate change. We will work with Africa to ensure a just international climate order, to preserve our biodiversity, and adopt clean and efficient energy sources.

7. 	We will strengthen our cooperation and mutual capabilities in combating terrorism and extremism, keeping our cyberspace safe and secure and supporting the United Nations in advancing and keeping peace.

8. 	We will work with African nations to keep the oceans open and free for the benefit of all nations. The world needs cooperation and not competition in the eastern shores of Africa and the eastern Indian Ocean. That is why India’s vision of Indian Ocean security is cooperative and inclusive, rooted in security and growth for all in the region.

9. 	This is especially important to me: As global engagement in Africa increases, we must all work together to ensure that Africa does not once again turn into a theatre of rival ambitions, but becomes a nursery for the aspirations of Africa’s youth. 

10. 	Just as India and Africa fought colonial rule together, we will work together for a just, representative and democratic global order that has a voice and a role for the one-third of humanity that lives in Africa and India. India's own quest for reforms in global institutions is incomplete without an equal place for Africa. That will be a key purpose of our foreign policy.

Excellences, if this is to be a century of nations rising together in freedom and equality; if this is to be an age when the light of opportunity dawns on all humans; if this is a time when our planet has a more hopeful future, then all of this magnificent continent of Africa must walk in step with the rest of the world. India will work with you and for you. Our partnership will build instruments of empowerment in Africa. We will stand in solidarity with your endeavours, in transparency, with respect and on the principle of equality. We will speak for you and with you. (Applause) 

Two-thirds of India and two-thirds of Africa is under the age of 35 years. If the future belongs to the youth, then this century is ours to shape and build. Let us be guided by the Ugandan saying that is “Anayejitahidi hufaidi”, which means “one who makes the extra effort will benefit”. (Applause) India has made that extra effort for Africa and will always do so for Africa's benefit.

Thank you very much. Asante sana. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, His Excellency the President has some closing remarks.

10.54
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Gen. (Rtd) Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank His Excellency the Prime Minister for his statement and for the 10 principles of India’s relationship with Africa. However, in particular I would like to thank him for three points: 

One, building a Mahatma Ghandi heritage centre at the Source of the Nile. (Applause) This idea came from India. In fact, before the Prime Minister of India came, they sent advance information that they would like to give a grant to build a convention centre for Uganda. When we got into a more detailed discussion, we found that some people who work with the Malaysians were already developing a convention centre somewhere else in Kampala. 

When I met the Prime Minister, he said, “By the way, this holy city of Jinja, why don’t we look at it?” This is where the ashes of Mahatma Gandhi were immersed and we put up a statue of Ghandi. I said, “Yes, this is the right thing to do” - Let us construct something, which we shall plan in detail together with the Indian Government, on that side of the Nile which has not been developed. I thank him very much. (Applause)

You also heard about healthcare. Many Ugandans go to India for healthcare. If the Indian groups can invest here to deal with some of those issues that take people to India, it would be very big support. (Applause)

Finally, I agreed with the Prime Minister that part of the Indian line of credit, which he talked about, should be used to purchase factory machines from India that would add value to our numerous products here like grains, fruits, leather etcetera. Therefore, our business people should take this up. I will also follow it up with him. This would solve many of our problems. You know how much unprocessed maize, leather, coffee and other products we export and yet many of them could be processed. This is another important area we could invest in. 

I thank the Prime Minister and I thank you all. (Applause)

The Indian National Anthem

The Uganda National Anthem

 THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House is adjourned to 2 o’clock 

(The House rose at 12.03 p.m. and adjourned to 2.00 p.m.) 
