Thursday, 10 July 2014

Parliament met at 3.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I want to call on the Government Chief Whip, the Opposition Chief Whip and the coordinator of the Independents to sit together and harmonise the composition of the Committee on Natural Resources. It remains oversubscribed so they are not able to conduct business. I want to really appeal to you so that we can approve it next week. The policy statements are coming in and we should know who is attending the meeting and who is not attending. I want to ask you to sit and harmonise and report back to this House on Tuesday. 

Secondly, honourable members, I did indicate that I would give a ruling on the issue of the supplementary request from the Ministry of Finance and I want to do so now, and I will start by giving a brief background. On 8 July 2014, this House received a report from the Committee on Budget on a supplementary expenditure request under Schedule No.2 in the financial year 2013/14. During the course of the debate, an issue arose as to why a supplementary request was being presented to pay for debts or obligations which accrued without prior parliamentary approval as provided for under Article 159(3) of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

Honourable members, the law on supplementary appropriation is contained in the 1995 Constitution, the Budget Act, the Public Finance and Accountability Act, and the Public Finance and Accountability Regulations. Article 156(2) and (3) of the Constitution provide as follows, in relation to the Appropriation Bill:
“(2) If in respect of any financial year, it is found-
(a) that the amount appropriated for any purpose under the Appropriation Act is insufficient or that a need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by the Act; or

(b) that any monies have been expended for any purpose in excess of the amount appropriated for that purpose or for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act, 
a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid down before Parliament and in the case of excess expenditure, within four months after the money is spent. 

(3) Where, in respect of any financial year, a supplementary estimate or supplementary estimates have been approved by Parliament in accordance with clause (2) of this article, a Supplementary Appropriation Bill shall be introduced into Parliament in the financial year next following that financial year to which the estimates relate, providing for the appropriation of the sums so approved for the purposes specified in those estimates.”

I also want to draw your attention to Section 12 of the Budget Act, 2001, which provides as follows: 

“(1) The total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is appropriated by Parliament shall not exceed three percent of the total approved budget for that financial year without prior approval of Parliament. 

(2) Where funds are expended under subsection (1) supplementary estimates showing the sums spent shall be laid before Parliament within four months after the money is spent. 
(3) Any reallocation of funds shall be made in consultation with all affected ministries, departments, institutions or organisations.”

I also draw your attention to the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 which provides also for supplementary expenditure in Section 16 as follows: 
“(1) Where in respect of any financial year, it is found that the amount appropriated by an Appropriation Act is insufficient, or that a need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act, a supplementary estimate, showing the amount required shall be laid before Parliament, and the expenditure votes shall be included in a Supplementary Appropriation Bill to be introduced in Parliament to provide for their appropriation. 

(2) A supplementary estimate prepared under subsection (1) shall indicate any effect on the financing requirements of Government submitted under paragraph (a) of subsection (1) of section 15 and any expected changes to the statement provided under subparagraph (iii) of paragraph (c) of subsection(1) of section 15.”

The Public Finance and Accountability Act has been augmented by the Public Finance and Accountability Regulations, 2003. I draw your attention to regulation 38, which provides as follows: 
“(1)Where any future disbursements are required in respect of a service which-
(a) could not have been foreseen;
(b) may not be postponed without detriment to the public interest;
(c) cannot appropriately be charged to an existing item of estimates; or
(d) would cause an excess on the estimates, 
prior approval for authority to incur such expenditure shall be sought. 

(2)Where an expenditure cannot be met by virements within the vote from items of savings, then provisions for supplementary funds shall be sought,in which case an application for supplementary funds may be made to the Secretary to the Treasury.

(3)Applications for supplementary provisions shall be reviewed by the Secretary to the Treasury and submitted to the Minister for consideration and if after examination, and where necessary consultation with the accounting officer concerned, the need for supplementary provision is agreed, the amount for such provision shall be included by the Minister in supplementary estimates to be submitted to Parliament for appropriation by a Supplementary Appropriation Act. 

(4) Notwithstanding that supplementary estimates may have been submitted to Parliament for approval, no action shall be taken by any accounting officer which creates a commitment on public funds before parliamentary approval is obtained”. 

Honourable members, all those provisions were passed by the Parliament of Uganda under the authority conferred upon it. They were enacted by the proper organ of this House and therefore, they are binding on everybody. 

Honourable members, I have observed that with the requests against which we received a report on the 8th of July, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has continued to flout the very elaborate provisions of the law, which I have highlighted above. As a result, this House has been constrained to deal with supplementary expenditure requests that have not complied with the laws of the land. This cannot be permitted to continue. (Applause)

I have, therefore, chosen to exercise my powers conferred under rule 7 (2) and (3) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to guide this House on how we shall handle requests in future. Upon presenting a request to this House for supplementary expenditure, the Minister of Finance will be required to do the following: The Minister will have to satisfy the House-

1. 	That Government has endeavoured to get resources from the Contingency Fund provided for under Article 154 of the Constitution and Section 10 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act to meet expenditures that are foreseen before presenting supplementary requests in Parliament.

2. 	That the amount appropriated for any purpose under the Appropriation Act is insufficient. They will have to satisfy us that the money is insufficient.

3. 	That a need has arisen for expenditures for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by the Appropriation Act.

4. 	The minister will have to satisfy us that the monies have been expended for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by the Appropriation Act.

5. 	That total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what was appropriated by Parliament does not exceed three percent of the total approved budget of that financial year.

6. 	That the supplementary request addresses the effect it has on the financial requirements of Government for that particular financial year, and that the further disbursements are required in respect of services which- 
(a) could not have been foreseen;
(b) may not be postponed without detriment to the public interest;
(c) cannot be appropriately charged to an existing item of the estimates; or
(d) would cause an excess on the estimates

7. 	That the sought expenditure cannot be met by virements within the votes from items with savings.
	
	In addition, where the total supplementary expenditure does not exceed three percent of the total approved budget for the financial year, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development shall lay before Parliament the supplementary estimates showing the sum spent within four months.The total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources overthe three percent of the total approved budget of that financial year shall require parliamentary approval before being incurred.

All the above requirements are from the existing laws, which provide for supplementaries. We also expect that when the budget committee reports to this House, they will address all those requirements. They will be expected to state all those conditions as having been fulfilled in relation to every item that comes before this House. (Applause)

Upon considering and approving any such supplementary expenditure requests, the House shall expect the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, as demanded by Article 156 (3) of the Constitution, to introduce into Parliament a Supplementary Appropriation Bill in the year following that financial year to which estimates relate, providing for the appropriation of the sum so approved for purposes specified in those estimates.

Honourablemembers, that is how we shall now proceed in future. (Applause)Thank you very much.

3.19
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance in relation to the scandals at the National Social Security Fund.

Madam Speaker, I have four important concerns to bring to your attention and to that of this House, which are causing anxiety within that organisation and the country at large.First, interviews were conducted by a qualified organisation for the replacement of the top management of NSSF – the MD, thedeputy MD and the corporationsecretary.The interview results were compiled by the NSSF board and a consultancy firm called PricewaterhouseCoopers. Those results have been made public and I have a copy of them here with me. I will lay a copy on the Table at an appropriate moment. 

The results show that the best candidate for the MD job was Mr Edgar Agaba;deputy MD, was Mr Patrick Ayota; and the best candidate for corporation secretary was Mr Richard Wabwire.However, Madam Speaker, up to today, there is a lot of anxiety at the NSSF. There are a lot of underhand dealings to the extent that the people who passed the interviews for the three jobs have not been formally appointed to those respective jobs.

Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence and that of this House that we should stop wasting time of Ugandans, asking them to go and do interviews,they pass them highly and yet we have already made up our minds on who should be in those positions. This is a very bad practice that seems to be happening in this country.

Madam Speaker, I will formally lay the results for the candidates who sat for job interviews on the Table. However, interesting to this House is the fact that this House resolved on issues related to Umeme but the leadership of NSSF still went ahead to remove Shs 69 billion to buy shares in Umeme contrary to the legal advice of the Solicitor-General.

This institution resolved on an issue, the Solicitor-General advised that NSSF should not procure shares in Umeme but some individuals at the NSSF, specifically the Ag MD, Ms Geraldine Ssali, and the chairman of the board, went on single-handedly, without the approval of the board, to procure shares worth Shs 69billion in Umeme. I think this is a matter of grave concern for all those who have their monies in that fund.

Lastly, several workers have complained to the IGG about the corruption at NSSF. However, the IGG has turned a blind eye to this issue. Instead, the daughter of the IGG has been appointed by the NSSF board without any formal interviews being conducted. So, all the petitioners are running to the IGG but the Inspectorate of Government is in “bed” with those people that Ugandans are complaining about –(Interruptions)

MR PETER OGWANG: Madam Speaker, first of all, let me thank hon. OdongaOtto for bringing up this matter. I would like to inform the House that I also have a complaint written by some members within NSSF. About 16 workers of NSSF were sacked from their jobs last week without any cause. They have complained to the IGG but nothing has taken place. 

I also have a document here with me about corruption within the NSSF; for example, land was procured at Namirembe Road for Shs 750 million but surprisingly – I donot know according to them land instead depreciates – three years down the road, this same piece of land was sold at Shs 630million. They bought it at Shs 750million but sold it at Shs 630million.Remember we are talking about land located on Namirembe Road. How can you convince any Ugandan that land located along Namirembe Road can depreciate from Shs 750million to Shs 630 million?

To prove that there is a problem at the NSSF, my colleague was talking about the dealings with Umeme. It is so painful when you talk about Umeme. Let us talk about workers’ savings. There are employers are that not remitting their employees’ NSSF contributions to NSSF. Now, top managers talk to these employers, “eat” the money and the workers’ money is not reflected. 

I want to request the workers’ MPs here – I have documents here which I will pass on. Before hon. OdongaOtto makes his prayer to this House, I want to say that we have whistle-blowers, persons who are ready to give information because they have been to the IGG and nothing seems to be coming about. They are being laid off, there isnothing going on, the managers who are meant to be brought on board are not yet in offices.

THE SPEAKER: Honourablemember, you know we are making allegations against people who cannot come here. They cannot come here to refute. 

MR ODONG AOTTO: Madam Speaker, as I lay this document on the Table, I would beg for your indulgence because if these people go to the IGG, no one will help them. The only institution remaining in this country that can solve all these issues is Parliament.

MR MUSINGUZI: Madam Speaker, I would like to make something clear to this House. The Member is talking about the Shs 69 billion which was used to purchase shares from Umeme by NSSF; they went against the ruling that you made here that NSSF should not buy any other shares from Umeme. This was done on Monday and you made the ruling last month about us discarding Umeme. If they went ahead and bought shares worth Shs 35 billion to add on top of what they had bought the other time, that means that there is insubordination of this Parliament byNSSF under the leadership of Ssali.

I would like to add more information on conflict of interest by the IGG herself-

THE SPEAKER: Honourablemembers, those matters need to be investigated. The IGG cannot come here. We cannot resolve that issue. We can ask the Minister to come and explain or we can do something else but we cannot just continue like this. Conclude your request

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I just wish to lay this document on the Table. My prayer is that a committee of Parliament should formally investigate all these issues. That would give an opportunity for those people to come and defend themselves.

I wish to lay on the Table a copy of the final report of the interviews of NSSF carried out by PricewaterhouseCoopers, dated 12 June 2014. I wish to lay on the Table two letters from the Solicitor-General instructing NSSF not to buy shares in Umeme, saying that it would be against a resolution of this Parliament. The lettersare referenced ADM 190/01 and ADM 190/02.

I wish to lay on the Table a copy of the complaint of the board members of NSSF that they were not consulted by the board chairman and the MD when they were buying shares in Umeme. They did it on their own volition and not on behalf of the NSSF. 

I wish to lay on the Table a copy of the letter about a contract given to the daughter of the IGG, Ms Nabakoza Elizabeth.She was offered a contract without any advert or any interview so that investigations by the IGG may not be done. The letter is dated 5 June 2014.
I wish to lay on the Table a copy of a formal report from the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Authority instructing the IGG that there is graft in NSSF. The IGG did nothing because she was already happy with what is happening in NSSF.

I wish to lay on the Table a copy of fuel vouchers. The chairman of the board of NSSF was the MD of Shell; so, they pushed NSSF to buy shares in Umeme because Umeme had a bill of Shs 22 billion to pay to Shell where the chairperson was also the MD.

I pray that this matter be investigated and those who the passedthe interview be awarded the jobs so that we stop anxiety about public funds lying at NSSF.I beg for your indulgence that a committee of Parliament looks into this matter.

MR AMOS OKOT: Madam Speaker, the matter that has been raised by hon. Otto is very grave and I think as Parliament we need to do it formally. I would like to beg that hon. Otto moves a formal motion such that the motion can be referred to the committee.

THE SPEAKER: What do the Workers Representative say?

3.31
MS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to remind this House that one time I presented a petition regarding the purchase of shares by NSSF from Umeme.Unfortunately, it has not been handled up to now. That is why now they are doing all these kinds of things; they have never heard anything serious coming from us. 

There is a petition that I laid on the Table regarding the same. Could it be handled together with this so that we can dig out what is going on in NSSF? Thank you.

3.32
MR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers representative): Madam Speaker, this matter is very urgent. Right now, we have a very serious situation where the chairman of the board seemingly connives with the minister to ignore all decisions of the board and continue to make very serious decisions.

We have complained before; we had a very big contention to the extent that after Parliament intervened, we agreed to raise the number of representatives of workers to five and they had veto power. What usually happens, however, is that even though the board takes decisions, the chairman of the board works with the minister to disregard the decisions of the board.

There are a lot of issues there.First of all, there is a contention in terms of the management, and every time we do not have clear management in that place a lot of money is lost on a daily basis.We think this is a very urgent matter. This issue of waiting for another day and all that is a waste of time.
What has been moved is a motion and I second that motion so that we go ahead and investigate. As you were saying, the hon. Minister should come and make a statement.However, I think that it should be more than a statement; we need a serious investigation so that we can come up with a conclusion on this matter without any delay.

3.34
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Otto for bringing this issue on the Floor of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I used to sit on the board of NSSF and I saw this as a potential problem. The chairman was Mr Ssekono then, who was running NSSF very well, but the minister deliberately removed Mr Ssekono without any excuse and appointed Kyayonka.Everybody was surprised because NSSF was stabilising, moving on very well and the management was working. She changed the chairman and immediately they started a process of buying sharesin Umeme. It was a very clear move and we saw it. We complained but they did not listen. They bought shares and everybody complained, including the Solicitor-General, but they kept quiet. 

The second time, after a resolution of Parliament to cancel the contract of Umeme, they went ahead and bought shares. When they tabled this issue in the board, the board refused to approve it. Kyayonka went ahead with Geraldine the acting MD, on the assurance that she was going to retain her job, and approved the payment of the shares and the money went.

Madam Speaker, recently-

THE SPEAKER: Honourablemembers, now you bring evidence and there is nobody-Let us agree as to whether we want an investigation and then those who have information can take the matter to the committee. 

MR ARINAITWE: Okay. I propose, Madam Speaker, that a select committee be formed to investigate this matter. I thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is it the view of this House that we should have a select committee? 

HON MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, because we are going through the budget process, we need to decide how we shall compose the committee. So I will give directions on Tuesday on the composition.

3.36
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to register my appreciation for the guidance and clarification that you have given regarding the way this House is going to be handling the supplementary budgets and requests from Government. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to remind the Minister of Finance that contingencies form part of the supplementary requests that we have been receiving.Earlier in this House, we had agreed that the minister comes with a Bill to handle contingency funds. I think your position will be strengthened if we have a law that handles contingency funds in this country, and that commitment was made by the Minister of Finance two years ago. I think we need to remind him that we are still waiting for it and it should come. Only then will that grey area be corrected. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member.

3.38
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker, for this opportunity to raise a matter of national importance affecting the status of this House. I do not intend to comment on matters that are sub judicebut to give an overview of what transpired this morning. 

The Supreme Court of this land hasgranted a permanent injunction restraining the orders of the Constitutional Court and the decree extracted that we vacate our seats and fresh elections be held in the constituencies of hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, hon. Mohammed Nsereko and hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire and myself. (Applause) This shall await the disposal of our appeal against the judgement of the Constitutional Court and its subsequent orders through a decree. 

Having said that, we want to register our appreciation to the entire House - Members of Parliament - who have stood with us through all this. We are also grateful to all people in this country with whom we have been in court and those who sympathised with us in these trying moments.

Without necessarily appearing to be extolling the virtues of the Rt Hon. Speaker, my colleagues and I wish, in the same voice, to register our appreciation for the farsightedness, the virtues, and the understanding of the Speaker of this House. (Applause)I would wish to quote informally that the Speaker appealed for restraint. She reasoned that the vacancy of an MP is such aweighty vacancy that requires restraint and urged all stakeholders to abide by that.

Rt Hon. Speaker, you have been absolved for now and on that point, you have the blessings of this country. (Applause) You have the support of the entire Parliament and virtually all the people of Uganda look up to you for your stewardship of this honourable House. (Applause)

Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable members, the battle is still on but the Supreme Court has said we should retain our seats, there is no hurry, we continue representing our people as the appeal is sorted out, which we are sure must go one way or the other. For that, Rt Hon. Speaker, allow us to end on this high note. We are extremely happy. (Applause) To you, the sky is the limit and we pray that you live to actualise your aspirations in this country, Rt Hon. Speaker. Thank you once again.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We welcome you and wish you well. We hope that you will now be more stable in doing your work while you await the final judgement. You arewelcome. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES BILL, 2014

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND CULTURE (Ms Rukia Nakadama Isanga): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled,“The Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2014” be read for the first time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Does it have the necessary certificate? Is it accompanied by the certificate, honourable minister?

MRS ISANGA: Madam Speaker, I did not carry a copy but I think I will have to bring it.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, so you will lay it before the House on Tuesday together with the certificate.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.44
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker and Members of Parliament. Last Saturday, the 5th of this month, this country witnessed a very tragic and sad event that led to the death of at least 90 Ugandans in the district of Bundibugyo.I beg to move, Madam Speaker, before I proceed with the statement, that Parliament rises to observe a minute of silence in respect of these deceased Ugandans. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourablemembers, let us rise.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

DR KIYONGA: Colleagues,I have been informed that this statement has been sent on your iPads and so, I do hope that you will follow what I am going to say.

The characteristics of the events that unfolded show that some people in our society still hold firm beliefs in witchcraft, can easily be duped into criminality and can be very callous in causing the death of their brothers and sisters. 

The attacks took place on Saturday, 5th July as I have said in the three districts between 2.00 p.m. and 4.00 p.m. The main targets were the Police and the Army positions, Wananichi in the case of Kasese, the palace of the Obundingya wa Bwamba - the new cultural leader there - and Stanbic Bank in Bundibugyo town.The attackers were mainly armed with spears, pangas, sticks and some guns.Their objective was mainly to get guns and money.

The places attacked in each of the affected districts are outlined in Paragraph 3.1. In the case of Bundibugyo, they attacked – 
    • the barracks of Kanyamirima, which is about five kilometres from the town of Bundibugyo;
    • Bundibugyo town, where the Stanbic Bank and the palace of the cultural leader in Bamba were key targets;
    • the Kirindi Shrine belonging to the ObusingabwaRwenzururu; and 
    • the villages of Ntandi and Katumba.

In the district of Ntoroko, the attacks were at the trading centre of Karugutu Town Council and at the junction heading to Kibuuku and on to Bundibugyo.While in Kasese, the first attack was at a weighbridge opposite the factory of Kasese Cobalt Company Limited, just a kilometre from the centre of town on the highway to Bushenyi; and then in the villages of Bigando and Ibuga close to Hima in the constituency of my brother, hon. William Nzoghu.

Madam Speaker, in the case of Bundibugyo, the deaths were – here I had put 78 but there was some confusion between the people who were killed in Ntoroko and Bundibugyo because some of them were at the junction. However, most of the deaths took place in Bundibugyo. You can take five away from the 78 which will leave 73 because the others were killed in Ntoroko, but the total remains the same.

In Bundibugyo, there were four policemen, three soldiers and three wananichiwho were killed; and the majority of those killed were the attackers, numbering over 60, who died within Bundibugyo. In Ntoroko, the total of those killed were seven including two soldiers, one wananichi and four attackers. In Kasese, 13 people were killed and these included one policeman, one soldier and 11 wanainchi whose detailsI will give later on.

In total, when you add up those killed from the three districts, at least 92 people died. I am saying “at least” because this was the count as of Tuesday morning. Some of the people who are now retreating after they were repulsed must have gone with wounds and I believe that some more of the attackers must have died on their way trying to go back to the place they came from.

Secondly, what we know in the country is that whenever insurgents attack somewhere and the wananichi recognise them, they tend to take the law in their own hands. So, also some people may have died in the villages but with time, we shall get more facts. 

Under paragraph 5, I outlined the names of the people who died as a result of this attack. I think that for the purpose of record, I will go through them. Let me begin with Police officers:

    • Mugume Bataka Wilson, who was an Assistant Superintendent of Police; he was killed in a village called Bumadu. 

He was the officer incharge of thepolice station. When he heard that people were coming to attack the police station, he decided to go ahead to where the trouble was being reported. So, he sat on a bodaboda, called one of his constables and on the way, someone stopped them and they thought he was giving them information. No sooner had they stopped than other people came from the bush and killed them there and then and took their guns. He was a young man who had just finished training, after university; the country has lost him. 

Others included: Aliga Swaibu, Wipondi Herbert, Dan Turyahabwe and Muhindo Jacob who were Police Constables. On the side of the Army, there was Mumbere Juma, Abibu Mohammed, Kakuru Abel, Ochula Obama Michael and Nabimanya Grace.
 
Corporal Nabimanya Gracewas killed in Bigando in Kasese with his four children in the crudest manner. He was on leave and not armed. He was in one house and his children were in another house -both houses belonged to him. On the list, these children are No. 12, Talindeka Josephine; No. 13, Kwankunda Rosette; No. 14, Karungi Apofia; and No. 15, Inshanga Enid. Those figures I have putagainst the children are their ages. So, the first was 13, the second was six, the fourth was four and the other one was five years old. The children were locked in their house and burnt by these attackers. The soldier was first stabled and killed and then put in his house and set on fire. That is how callous these attackers were. 

Apart from the children whose names I have read, other civilians who died included the following:
    • Kyojo Grace 
    • Kakunda Alice 
    • Bariho Monica 
    • Mr Mutotro 
    • Rwamigamba Patrick 
    • Risama Gamba 
    • Yowasi Rose 
    • Mustafa Muraki;
    • Yasin. 

These were 14 civilians killed in that very crude manner in the villages of Ibuga and Bigando, close to Hima in the constituency of hon. William Nzoghu.

What has been the response to this attack by the Government? 

1. 	First, early on Sunday the 6th, the Inspector General of Police and the Commander of Land Forces of the UPDF moved into the area starting with Bundibugyo.

2. 	The battalion commanding officers in Bundibugyo were joined by their brigade commander, who is located in Kasese but moved to this area which was the centre of the problem. 

3. 	I left Kampala on Sunday evening heading to Bundibugyo. My colleague, the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs,was in Acholi Sub-region following up on the ID registration exercise. 

4. The President and Commander-in-Chief is kept briefed about the events and as honourable members are aware, he has issued a preliminary statement on the situation. 

5. 	I returned to Kampala on Tuesday night and yesterday morning I briefed the Cabinet.More than half of the time in Cabinet yesterday was spent discussing this tragic event and laying out strategies on how to prevent such tragedies in future. 

6. 	The deployments in the affected areas have been stepped up both by the Police and the Army. 

7. 	The Inspector General of Police’s attention is now fully focused on the region and up to yesterday, he was still in Fort Portal, Kasese and Bundibugyo overseeing the operations there. 

8. 	Intensive investigations are on-going to find the basis of the attack and the leaders of this heinous plan. 

While in Bundibugyo, Madam Speaker, I held a number of meetings and interviews which give insight into the nature of this problem. I met the leadership of the Army including the Commander of Land Forces and the leadership of the Police. I made a courtesy call on the cultural leader of the Bamba and I interviewed the Deputy Prime Minister of the ObusingaBwaRwenzururu, who had been taken in by the Police regarding the need for him to give some help in understanding these issues. I called for him and I talked to him. 

I also talked to one woman aged about 35 years who was described by the soldiers as one of the commanders of this attack, particularly on the barracks. I had a discussion with the political leaders of the district of Bundibugyo led by the district chairperson. I also met 10 leaders of the Bakonzo people resident in Bundibugyo. 

I would like to briefly describe my interview and the outcome thereof with this woman commander because it gives some characteristics of this situation. When they brought her to me, I took the line of putting her at ease. I started by asking her name, where she came from, whether she knows how to shoot. She told me she knows how to use a gun. I asked, “How did you know?” She said that in 1997 when ADF attacked Bundibugyo, she answered the call of UPDF. Normally, when we have insurgencies, UPDF calls people for muchaka muchaka; so she was then taken up as an LDU for one year. That explains her skills in using the gun. 

One year after, they were told to go home because the situation had cooled. In her case, while she was working as an LDU, she got a friend in the army, a young man hailing from Mbale. They lived together and got a child in 2000. Soon after, the soldier was transferred to Gulu and so she moved along. When things heated up in Gulu in 2003, the soldier decided to defect and went home to Mbale with his wife. When she reached Mbale, she found there was another wife with four children and it became a bit difficult for her to stay. So she left in 2006 and went to live with her father back home. 

On the Friday preceding the attacks, people came and found her leaving her garden and asked, “You, why are you leaving the struggle to us alone? Let us go.” So she went with them. They took her at 4.00 p.m. They went through other villages and collected another six people and then headed to a place shedescribed as the camp where they arrived at 10.00 p.m.

According to her, in that camp, there were about 150 people. They were given a briefing in the camp; one, that there was to be a struggle by the Bakonjo people against the oppression of the Bamba; two, that tomorrow, Saturday, there was a mission to go and get guns, mainly from Kanyamirima; and also money from the Stanbic Bank. 

The soldiers had told me that the bodies of the attackers had certain characteristics - the attackers who had been killed. They had creeper leaves on their arms and around their heads. They also had cuts on the skin and these had been done by a witchdoctor. So I asked her, “Did you go to the witchdoctor?” She said, “No”. I asked,“Why and yet you were participating in the attack?” She said, “For me I had seen in Gulu that that does not work, so I knew even here it would not work.” 

I asked, “Did you believe in the basis of the struggle?” She answered, “Yes”. I asked her why and she said, “You know, here if a Mwamba is arrested together with a Mukonjo, a Mwamba gets out of prison quickly. The Mukonjo would either have to pay money or wait for a long time.” So, although she did not believe that bullets would not work, she nevertheless believed in the struggle. I asked herhow then she would be protected. She said, “I tried to escape before we entered town. I hid somewhere and after sometime, I wanted to go to my sister’s place but some people got me and took me to the Police”.

I asked her who her father was and she told me. I asked her if she had other relatives and she said she has sisters. I asked her if her father had a cellphone and she said he had. I asked, “Can I ring him?” and she said, “The soldiers have taken my phone.” So I called for the phone. The battery had run out so I asked for it to be recharged and then I rang the father. 

I said, “Mzee, I am so and so and your daughter is here.” He said, “I thought she had died because people told me that they saw her being arrested. I have already lost one son who was in that attack.”I read the list of the other people she knew who were in the attack and had died. I read it back to the old man and he said, “Yes, that first one is my son, and these others ones are from this village.” 

So, these were all young people clearly duped through witchcraft. They believed that they could enter a barracks, take guns and go away. Indeed, what happened at the barracks is that they just came by surprise; the soldiers did not know what was going on. They headed for the armoury at Kanyamirima. They attacked and killed two soldiers there and then a fight ensued and at that time, 45 of the attackers died at the armoury. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, I had already described the situation in the Busongora North where these 11 civilians were killed - this is where the children were – and I donot need to go through that again.  I am talking about those five children and other civilians in that area. So, I will skip paragraph 8 and go straight to point No.9. 

What do we think are the underlying factors? We have not yet connected the issues; we are still investigating. However, what are the issues in that area that could relate to these coordinated attacks because they took place in three districts more or less about the same time, between 2.00 p.m and 4.00 p.m.?

As I have clearly stated, investigations are going on and many people, including the attackers who were captured alive, are being interrogated. Thirty-two of the attackers were taken alive and they are now assisting the Police with investigations.

At this stage, let me now give the underlying factors operative in the Rwenzori Region that will throw some light on the causation of this tragedy:

First, there is the matter of the cultural institutions in that area. After the ObusingabwaRwenzururu was recognised by Government, the other ethnic groups in the area also called for recognition. Accordingly, Government recognised the cultural institution of the Bamba, the Obudingiyabwa Bwamba. In the meantime, the Basongora and the Banyabindi in Kasese have also been calling for similar treatment. 

This has however not gone down well with the Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu. As the articles in the newspapers have shown, the President has asked the Omusinga wa Rwenzururu to have a dialogue with the other ethnic groups within his kingdom. So, there is that tension relating to cultural institutions.

Secondly, there is the issue of the economy and land, mainly in Kasese District. This has been a longstanding matter, which Government has been grappling with. Of recent, Madam Speaker, Parliament, as you are aware, appointed a select committee to follow up this issue. I was told that a report on this matter will soon be presented on the Floor of the House.

The Basongora and the Banyabindi in Kasese District have persistently talked about being marginalised while the Bakonzo in Bundibugyo have also claimed the same by the leadership of the district. Government, Madam Speaker and honourable members, is aware of these grievances and is studying the matter carefully.

In conclusion, therefore, I would like to state as follows:

1. 	The tragic events of last weekend deserve the condemnation of all right-minded people;

2. 	In handling this tragedy, it is important that we separate issues; in particular, I have in mind the criminally-minded people who hatched this plan and they should take responsibility for the deaths that occurred. There is also the persisting belief in witchcraft on the part of some of our people in the country. To have a situation in the country where people still think that witchcraft can protect them from bullets and that they can therefore daringly tack an army barracks is a clear indication of the long road we still have to travel to achieve socio-economic transformation.

3. 	As I have said, Government strongly condemns the attacks that took place in the Rwenzori Region. Government is taking every step possible to calm the situation and thoroughly have the matter investigated with a view to brining culprits to book in accordance with the law of the land.

4. 	The intelligence failures that occurred in this particular situation are also being rectified.In meantime, Government is carefully studying the grievances as outlined in this statement. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, for listening to me.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Minister of Defence. Let us first listen to hon. Hassan Kaps Fungaroo. I will later let Members with information vital for the minister to also speak to this statement.

4.11
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First, on my own behalf and on behalf of the people of Obongi who I represent here, I would like to send condolences to the bereaved families, the people of Kasese, Bundibugyo, Ntoroko districts and the country at large.

Talking about the tragedy that the Minister of Defence has talked about in the Rwenzori Region, I would like to draw your attention to the east. I am a member of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and also as the Shadow Minister of Defence and Security, in my work I have established there is similar disturbance in the east. Districts like Namayingo and Bugiri, from around May to date, have been mentioned. There was a youth who was killed; there was also an officer in charge of some police station who was killed and two guns were taken from that very police station and another taken from a private security guard. These occurred in Namayingo and Bugiri. 

The other areas that have been mentioned include Mubende, where three weeks ago a police officer was called by people as if they needed his help and he just survived falling into an ambush when he applied his military abilities. There was also a similar incidentin Kyegegwa.

Madam Speaker, with all these occurrences, whereas I donot rule out the hypothesisgiven by the Minister of Defence that the issues in Kasese, Bundibugyo and Ntoroko occurred as a result of the problem the Bakonzo and the Bamba and other issues related to rivalry between cultural institutions, I would like us not to close our eyes to the occurrences in the other areas. This means we should bring in another hypothesis explaining the other occurrences in other parts of Uganda if we retain the hypothesis by the Minister of Defence.

Madam Speaker, in the interest of time, I would like to urge Members to lay the foundation on how to move on this matter. One, if there is a threat of a security nature like this one, security people are required to do four things: One is to detect the threat. They failed to do this. The President, as Commander-in-Chief, has also acknowledged that failure already.

Two, to deny access of the threats - They also failed to do this because the attacks occurred more than once. Three is to delay progress. At least they must be congratulated for having delayed the progress of these treats because if they hadnot done that, the attacks would have moved on to other parts of the country.

Four, destroy the threats. The threats have never been destroyed. What I know is that there is a crippling feeling of insecurity even in Parliament. You can see that the security at Parliament has been heightened. The Members will bear witness given the way they are checked, which is very unusual. What that means is that the security institution is aware of a danger within Parliament.

What is all this? There are issues in Parliament, in Kasese, Namayingo, Mubende and so forth. What this means is that we must introduce another question: Honourable minister, did you get any communication from the people who were involved in these attacks? In acts of terrorism, rebellion or whatever struggles around the world, the people who get involved usually leave a message that they have done that because of certain reasons. Even if they were terrorists or religious extremists, they would have spoken by now.

We have an alternative that works; my team here is capable only if we could be given room to give you the alternatives. Otherwise we stand together with all of you, the people of Uganda, the people of Kasese and all other areas to examine all the potentials including questions of governance because we have history of rebellions in this country. Is this a new rebellion or not? This needs to be examined, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want information that will help support the minister. I will get mainly from the region first. I think it is important that the region gives information.

4.16
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to join my friends who have spoken before to pass my condolences to those who have lost their dear ones in this act. I also want to thank the minister for giving light on what has happened and he has clearly pointed out in his statement that there could be some local issues that are unattended to and could have precipitated these. In relation to that, I want to give more information to the minister and the government and I will be specific to Kasese.

One, the minister has talked about land issues in Kasese and indeed there are several issues in Kasese over land. Court has taken judgements but Government has been adamant at executing this. I want to point out areas of Ngoko. When our brothers, the Basongora, came from Congo, they came and settled in Queen Elizabeth National Park. Government took a deliberate decision to settle them within Government land and in Kasese there was the Ivuga prison land and the Army land where they were supposed to settle these landless people and they did. But in doing this, even those who were staying within the vicinity were chased away beyond the boundaries of the government land. In Ngoko, over 604 acres of land which is outside the boundaries of this land, was given to the cattle keepers and the people who were displaced from this land have not been resettled. This caused discontent to some of these people who are now moving and roaming around for over five years with no land.

Secondly, there is also an association of people who had even secured an offer of land. An association had secured it but they were also evicted. The Prime Minister went ahead when they complained before him and wrote to the Minister of Lands and the Attorney-General that there is trespass on this matter and therefore, people must be compensated. I have already brought it to the attention of Attorney-General but he has also been quiet about this. This portion of the people is also landless. 

The other issue is that when government programmes are taking place - we want to upgrade Kasese Airport - they decided to compensate those people who were in areas that are covered by the airport but to our surprise, they were giving them between Shs 90,000 to Shs 150,000 per plot. People presented this before Government and said they were not comfortable with it and Government said they will handle it but up to now, these people are outside of their land and they could not use the Shs 100,000 to procure another piece of land; they are landless.

But even at the distribution of land, the Bakonjo who were squatters on government land went out and when they came back, they were given land and I think this also caused discontent. They would give three acres to a cattle keeper and one acre to a cultivator. All these people were landless. I imagine some of these issues could have caused discontent and people who were disgruntled could have been led to these acts.

While I condemn the act of killing people but the history of that region shows that we have had so many fighting forces. We had the Rwenzururu struggle where people were militarily trained; we had the ADF; we had NRA, and we have had NALU and these other groups. My question is; where are these people that have been trained? Government shall say we have repulsed them but have we got them to our side? Where are they and where are their machineries? Somebody with a subversive motive could have used the disgruntled people with a target of Government. I would therefore implore Government to look at these different forces that have been in Rwenzori since 1960 up to today. 

With due respect, the Rt Hon. Moses Ali had a force and we know where he is; Gen. Bamwoze had a force, you know where he is. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let me first get submissions from the Rwenzori region. Hon. Members, I want you to join me in welcoming a delegation from Butansi Sub-county, Kamuli District - (Applause) - represented by hon. Asuman and I. That is where I get 100 percent. They are led by Councillor Monica Mukasa. They are from all the Parishes.

4.23
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have a lot of information about this incident because I am a survivor; I also survived narrowly because they directly attacked me when I was at a function. This incident happened when I was in the district and I was on the ground. The Chairman of the Rwenzururu Veterans incited violence on Friday night on Ngeya Radio of UBC. I had been invited by the Banyabindi who were celebrating their memorial cultural ceremony of their late brothers who were killed by the Rwenzururu at the time.
A group of youth - in fact, what I want to rule out is the issue of or the sentiments of saying it is the ADF or the NALU rebels. The fact is that they were Rwenzururu youth called //Eshamango kya Rwenzururu plus a combined effort of Rwenzururu veterans. I was at the function and they came and attacked us. It was good that we had enough security. Before they attacked us, they found a policeman who was guarding the weighbridge at KCCL. They shot and disarmed him. There was also another policeman. As I was still at the function, they called me saying, hon. Kafuda - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are trying to listen so that we can find a solution.

MR KAFUDA: They called me saying, “Hon. Kafuda, you are going to be attacked at the function. So please, can you prepare yourself?” I said, “No, I have enough security and the function must go ahead.” We continued with the function but before its end at around 3.30 p.m., I received a call that my relative called Yowasi Bwozi had been killed in Ibuga. This was after they had killed the policeman. So, I just left the function.

Madam Speaker, it is a long story. We tried to rescue these people in Ibuga. I called the DPC and the brigade commander. We tried to deploy but it was too late and they were still killing people. We generally tried to help these people in time because the Police that was deployed at Ibuga Police Post were very few and we were looking for reinforcement.

It was getting late and we were afraid of the area; so, we decided to go back early in the morning. We went there with the DPC, collected the dead bodies and assembled them in one place and as we tried to investigate, we realised that this issue was tribal and political. This is because the centre of command was the Rwenzururu Kingdom because there are some top officials of the Rwenzururu leader –(Interruption)– wait for your time.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I presented a statement here and there are certain issues, which I said needed to be clarified -

THE SPEAKER: You are far from the microphone and please stand up. (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, there are certain issues which I said should be clarified and I also emphasised that actually the Bakonzo are peaceful people to the extent that the voters in Busongora South in Kasese - the constituency which hon. Kafuda represents, are more than 50,000 and the people from hon. Kafuda’s tribe are not more than 2,000 but he managed to go through. The point of order I would like to raise is that the institution of Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu even campaigned for hon. Kafuda whom they know is not who he purports to be. Is it therefore in order for the hon. Member to drag the institution of Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu into a matter that is not actually backed by evidence?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I also do not have the evidence but since we are informing the minister, he should go and investigate and tell us who was at the centre of command. Please conclude.

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am informing the House that I was on the ground. Madam Speaker, as we were trying to gather information, on the political side before this incident happened, hon. Nzoghu had met that group led by the Chairman LC I. The killers or culprits are already in cells; we got them and we have got all the information. I am telling you that I have been on the ground and I am the one who helped in rescuing those people.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member. Now you are going into very slippery areas. Let us leave that for the minister to investigate and tell us.

MR KAFUDA: We need to give the hon. Minister information. Before the attack, hon. Nzoghu had met the Chairman LC I called Kibolerya inciting violent attacks on those people. It happened in his constituency. The Chairman LC III went and pleaded with this group saying, “Please, chairman LCI, do not do that; do not follow the word of the honourable MP. What you can do…” – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you will give that information to the minister. Let us hear from Fort Portal Municipality. Hon. Members, if you go on like this, I will have to stop the debate because I cannot judge. Let us see how we can help solve the issue. Order, please.

4.32
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Madam Speaker, 14 years before I joined Parliament, I spent time working in Rwenzori and my time was dedicated to uniting the people of Rwenzori. I worked very hard as a citizen of Uganda who loved my country and as I speak, I feel so hurt because all these efforts, which we have worked so hard for have come to waste and it is a pity.

Madam Speaker, these are not small issues we are talking about. The few indicators which we are seeing manifested through the tribal and political wing are just small issues. There are very many deep rooted issues, which the country would need to concentrate on to find a solution for Rwenzori.

We have come up with a study of the conflict in Rwenzori entitled, “Stuck in the mist” and when you go into the details of this study, you will find that the mistakes which are being done by Government, by ourselves as leaders and the people of Rwenzori - I would like to make it very clear that the people of Rwenzori have no big problems amongst themselves apart from the leaders and the elite. The problem is a struggle within us the elite trying to fight and using our local people. This is the biggest problem that we have in Rwenzori.

Right now in Kasese, there are so many unemployed youth. The mountainous population has increased in number so much that they do not even know where to put these young people. And Madam Speaker, these young people are vulnerable to being used by anyone who wants to settle a score and this is a fact that is on the ground and you will find these youth all over the country. This even poses a much bigger security threat for the country as a whole. So, we cannot just come here and begin pointing fingers. I want to conclude –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, just a minute to conclude.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you for your indulgence, Madam Speaker. The issue of cultural institutions – this Article 246 that was brought through an angle I do not know and whoever was there just brought this Article without understanding its implications to Ugandans. (Applause) And as I speak, these kingdoms are stuck because you cannot have cultural leaders who do not know what to tell their people. They do not even have resources and they do not know how to deal with this animal of cultural institutions. But this is a fundamental problem and now they have become avenues of mobilising insecurity for this country and all of us and the future generation are going to suffer because of making this fundamental mistake. Madam Speaker, I appeal that this country must go and reflect on this problem. 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. 

4.37
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My condolences to the neighbours of Kasese, Bundibugyo and Ntoroko. My first point is about our intelligence system -

THE SPEAKER: Order, hon. Members please.

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Hon. Minister, it is really very shameful for people to organise not just in a day or two and take us by surprise. I really believe that these are not very sophisticated people like the Al-Shabaab. When people enter Bundibugyo and they do the same in Kasese and in Ntoroko without the intelligence detecting, then there is a problem in this country –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Information from the member for Aruu.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you. I sit on the Committee on Presidential Affairs and the problem is not intelligence but the problem is fighting for intelligence money between Police and the CMI, between ISO and Police. As of now, all the intelligence money other than salary is going to the Police and so, when you see attacks in Mubende or Makindye, each group is trying to show the other group that you are failing in intelligence. So, the CMI is just sitting without any money and the Police have taken over the intelligence budget and that is where the problem is. 

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Thank you my colleague, hon. Odonga Otto. Actually, it comes to the same thing that I am talking about that there is a problem in the intelligence system. Whether resources or something else, the minister needs to know that there is a problem and it is really very shameful. 
I believe, hon. Minister, before we even take action on the attackers, we should take action on the people who are supposed to oversee the security of this country and who did not do their work. 

Madam Speaker, the other issue that hon. Alex Ruhunda has just alluded to is about the monarchism in this country. Actually, it is very unfortunate that it has turned political like hon. Kafuda said. We are giving these kingdoms and chiefdoms basing on politics which is not correct for this country. Someone stands tonight and says, “I have a cultural institution here” and the government comes up just to recognise. Really hon. Minister, for me I come from Tooro where the kingdom is very old and it was there but now in this era – hon. Minister, someone will pitch camp in a banana plantation and will say that they want to form a kingdom because it is the policy in the country.

As I conclude, we need to look into this thing. You remember what happened here in Buganda – I do not want to repeat it - the Kayunga issue and now it is Bundibugyo. Hon. Minister, there is a lot to be desired.

Lastly, about the leaders, you cannot tell us that up to now you are just arresting these people called attackers without investigating the real perpetuators. I strongly believe that some strong people in this country are behind these things. These local people cannot just organise themselves and when you say we just got five or 20 people, hon. Minister, you are not being honest to yourself. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the member for Katerera and then we go to the chief pigmy. (Laughter)

4.41
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I grew up with Bakonzo and I testify that it is difficult to get a good person like a Mukonzo. Similarly, the Basongora are also good. I think we should take keen interest in investigating whoever is instigating violence among the Bakonzo and Basongora. For example, in my constituency, we live with Bakonzo, Bakiga, Baganda, Bamba but we have never had any single day where someone is fighting another and I do not believe anyone telling me that it is the Bakonzo who started this violence. We should take keen interest in investigating – maybe I can buy what Odonga Otto has said but I do not believe that a Mukonzo can kill someone.

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether things are happening here in Uganda alone because if you go to other countries and talk of such things, you can even get ashamed –(Interjections)– you have travelled to many countries and you are asking? You have been to Saudi Arabia, Dubai and the UK; have you ever heard of someone killing another because of cheap politics? 

So, if something happens here in Uganda that cannot happen in any other country, then we need to check ourselves but I do not believe that it is the Bakonzo or the Basongora instigating this violence. We should investigate and reach the bottom of the matter. 

I am telling you, Madam Speaker, if you met a Mukonzo and even if they are having a small meal, he or she will share it with you. I do not see any Mukonzo or Musongora instigating violence. There is someone behind these issues and we should investigate as Ugandans and get to the bottom of the matter. I thank you.

4.43
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. I want to take this opportunity to thank the minister for the statement. I am going to comment on it in many ways and capacities. First of all, as a Member of Parliament from Bundibugyo; secondly, as a born of Bundibugyo who studied there, married there and will die there. I am a Mwamba by tribe but married to a Mukonzo. So, the tribes that are clashing, I am caught in the middle.

It is a constitutional mandate of every tribe – those who want anyway, to have a cultural leader. There is a very big problem that we have not settled as Government, to differentiate between a king and a cultural leader. Most of these people we call kings are cultural leaders. The problem is that they are being called kings yet kings have demarcations, cabinets and so on, which the cultural leaders have also copied. A cultural leader is supposed to only lead his culture and not ruling everywhere. 

Secondly, the issue going on is that people have died; but this was a planned move. The coordination and the time when the attacks took place was almost the same in Kasese, Bundibugyo and Ntoroko and the purpose was to take guns for their use at the end of it. Now, the reason people are associating it with the ADF is because the Rwenzururu Movement, the NALU and the Mai Mai were all sighted among the attackers who were killed. The attackers were Bakonzo and those who were killed were Bakonzo. Nobody else is complaining of deaths apart from the Bakonzo and the Bakonzo are subjects of Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu. That is the reason why they are associating the attacks to the Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu.

Secondly, the people who have been implicated and arrested and investigated upon are all from the kingdom leadership of the Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu. For your information, the Prime Minister of the Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu is now under custody, still under investigation.

Madam Speaker, I want the Members of Parliament here to give time to Government to sort out individuals, whether in the Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu or in the Obusinga bwa Bamba who were inciting violence; those who mobilised and caused these deaths to be dealt with individually. If it is an institution that sent them to do it, the institution should be mentioned by those people after being interrogated by Government. I do not want us to get emotional with our tribal sentiments and make claims. Let government investigators do their work. These people have been holding meetings, the reports have been taken to the intelligence but they have not bothered to follow them up until people died. So, let Government do its work now that we cannot help it. 

The other request I want to make to the minister is that there are many people who were wounded and they are in the mountains. They are calling me to take drugs for them but I am not Government. You must take care of the situation; the people are dying in the mountains; please help those people because they are dying. The wounded are very many in the monutains; they are not in Bwamba County but in Bugendera County of my colleague, hon. Matte. 

So, let us find means, either through our security or through negotiations with them and we get them out and treat them in the hospitals. These are people who have been misled and are dying innocently because of our own political gain. And some of the leaders want political capital; they want loyalists because of culture –(Member timed out.)

4.50
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to deliver my condolences to the people of Ntoroko, Bundibugyo and Kasese for the lives lost. Through the statement made by the minister and the news we read in the papers and the information we get from the residents in Kasese and Bundibugyo, there are two important things. 

First, this Parliament is here to make laws that protect the lives of the people and make sure that whatever law we make brings peace, unity and comfort to every Ugandan. So, the provisions of the Constitution talking about kingdoms need to be revisited and studied very well and where amendments are needed, they should be made so that peace can prevail everywhere. 

Secondly, I realise that Ugandans still believe in small gods beside the big God whom we have. It is unfortunate; but I thank God because I know most Members here believe in God and not the small gods. It is unfortunate that our people believed in a witchdoctor and went with all their energy to defeat a bullet. They even went to a bank to steal money using witchcraft. Similarly, the provisions of the Constitution that talk about the rights of these witchdoctors need to be analysed. There are other cases which have not come on the Floor of this House where witchdoctors have misled people and they end up dying; they die in shrines and other such funny places –(Interruption) 

MS SSENTONGO: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. Right now, the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development is handling the issue of child sacrifice and we are interfacing with witchdoctors, traditional healers and all those herbalists. So just rest your case, we will give you an answer soon. 

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much for the information but I wanted to give a way forward on that issue that similarly, the provision of the Constitution that gives a right to these witchdoctors to perform their duties the way they want needs to be studied and amended so that a witchdoctor who cannot give evidence that they can really heal somebody should be removed. 

4.53
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to use this opportunity as the Member of Parliament representing Kyegegwa to extend my condolences to the bereaved families in Kyegegwa District because on the night of 27th June 2014, we got an attack of a brutal nature where we lost three people. Consequently, another three people of the attackers have also died. 

Madam Speaker, we got the Army from Bundibugyo to come and address the issues in Kyegegwa; unfortunately, a week after, Bundibugyo also was attacked. I want to appreciate Government for the address they made and the Kyegegwa case is now subsiding. But Madam Speaker, I stand here to blame it on the intelligence system and the security installations in our districts. We know that the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda instituted RDCs with their descriptions. The Government of Uganda requires that the RDCs are chairpersons of security in their jurisdictions. The RDCs we are talking about are insecure themselves; they are not equipped with security skills. They cannot detect or do intelligence. The issue of Kyegegwa was actually organised for three years and the communities kept telling the security organs about the indiscipline elements in the area but they took it for granted. They were so relaxed until it fell on us and people died. 

Madam Speaker, the Muzizi corridor that affects Kyenjojo, Kyegegwa, Kibale and Mubende has become a problem to us. At one time, it even harboured the ADF. Mubende had just been attacked and after a week, it was Kyegegwa and only to find the culprit in Kyenjojo. So, you can imagine that the Muzizi belt is a problem to us; it is prone to insecurity and thus the RDCs that are deployed in those districts must be combatant RDCs that are going to use their skills because if we are going to deploy business as usual, we may not be able to curb this insecurity.

Madam Speaker, when doing deployments that are going to have implications on security, the Minister for Security must be involved so that it does not happen as usual deployment. It should be about mapping this country into places that have insecurity vulnerabilities and such deployments are made to prevent further escalation of insecurities that are going to come to those areas. Madam Speaker – (Member timed out.)

4.56
MS FLORENCE KINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My condolences go to the people of Kasese, Bundibugyo, Ntoroko and the country at large on what happened. I would like to implore the Minister of Defence and Parliament to take note of some of these issues. These organised attacks occurred on the same day and at the same time in three districts. There had been purchases of equipment from shops in Kasese like pangas and others that went unnoticed. The assembling of more than 200 persons with this equipment without the security knowing should also be taken note of. The dress code of the attackers was sportswear – there were canvas shoes and tracksuits. Surely, this shows this was an organised move, hon. Minister.

I am also aware that in every district, we have security operatives like the DISOs, GISOs and PISOs – (Interjections) – the PISOs are the Parish Internal Security Officers –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that analysis is really good. So, please listen to her.

MS KINTU: Madam Speaker, at every parish there is a PISO, a GISO at every Gombolola, a DISO at every district and at the regional level, there is a RISO. All these security officers kept quiet because –

THE SPEAKER: Order, members, please this information is important.

MS KINTU: Madam Speaker, if these security organs had been active and if they were really being paid by this government to do their work, there is no way such an attack would have taken place without their knowledge. Why am I giving this information to the Minister of Defence who is supposed to defend this country? In 1980, a similar attack took place in his district, Kasese, where one tribe chased away the Batoro and they gave them a few hours to vacate the district. It was very painful and he was a parliamentary candidate; he is aware of this.

In 1987, an attack of a similar nature happened in Bundibugyo District. It also caught people unawares. Security was there and they were caught off-guard. On 5th July 2014, I received a call from one of my relatives in Bundibugyo – I have relatives in Kasese and Ntoroko – that they had been attacked. When I called the Minister of Internal Affairs, he wasn’t aware of anything. He was in Gulu and just said, “Let me find out”, meaning that chain was completely inactive.

As I wind up, I would like to say that this tribal element – I don’t know why they should rile because first of all the Bamba, the Bakonzo, the Babwisi, and the Basongora have been living together until today. The fears of the Omudhinja versus the Omusinga shouldn’t be there because these two sons are children of three people – Isaiah Mukarani Mumbere, Kawamara and Mupalya. There is no way they can have a conflict.

The protection that Government is giving them right now, hon. Minister of Defence, there is no way the forces can remain in Kasese, Bundibugyo and Ntoroko forever. So, I want to suggest that you identify the promoters of this barbaric behaviour and have them punished. I also want to suggest that the political leaders who are inciting these tribes be brought to book. I further suggest that the veterans who have not been paid, be paid because they have been part of this act. (Applause)

Further, I suggest that the youth leaders who incited the youth – because when they came from Kasese, there were some people who went to Bundibugyo and gave out bursaries to pupils and students who were suffering with the pretext of bringing them to Kampala for studies only to find them in Bundibugyo and some have been killed. 

I also want to say that the two brothers – the Omusinga and the Omudhinja come together for dialogue to discuss and move around in that region talking to their subjects because as brothers, they can change the situation at hand. Thank you very much. (Applause)

5.01
MR YONA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to put this on record – I am no longer proud to be a Ugandan when I see Ugandans’ blood being shed by individuals whom we are seated with; I am no longer proud to be a Ugandan.

Madam Speaker, if these incidences continue to happen, I will hang myself here –(Interruptions)

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are all in this House because we are Ugandans. Hon. Yona Musinguzi is a Ugandan because he was voted by Ugandans into this House; is he therefore in order to denounce his being Ugandan before this august House yet we know that his sitting is on behalf of other Ugandans? Is he in order to say that he is no longer proud to be Ugandan? I request that his voters if possible – anyway, Madam Speaker, is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think my concern was him saying that the Ugandans are sitting here. I wonder whether this Ugandan from Busoga is also part of that problem.

MR MUSINGUZI: Madam Speaker, thank you for your wise ruling. What I meant is that the attackers are seated in Uganda. The only thing that our government has been proud of was security for all Ugandans. We have said all over and everyone in this world knows that we have been happy with the security of Uganda. But are we still secure? Are we still proud of that?

Today, I was reading stories in the newspapers. People are rushing to give amnesty to the attackers but why? What interests do they have? Have they done any investigations and failed? Have they looked for the attackers and failed so as to entice them to come out voluntarily? Who has issued that statement that we are giving amnesty to attackers before they face the law? That person must be having personal interests and he should be investigated.

If I moved a motion here that we abolish kingdoms because those kings have turned themselves into gods and have caused problems to this nation, then everyone here would rise up –(Interruption)

MR SSEGONA: These matters of security are very sensitive. We have established that Government is investigating this matter and I can take the government word by face value irrespective of the history. When I hear a Member jumping to blind and ill-informed conclusions that certain kingdoms or that kingdoms are behind this thereby inciting violence against institutions like kingdoms, which are constitutional institutions; is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you cannot make sweeping statements against all the kingdoms in Uganda without substantiating. He is out of order.

MR MUSINGUZI: Madam Speaker, looking at what kingdoms have done from way back before I was born –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, leave the general issue about kingdoms. Focus on Ntoroko, Kasese and Bundibugyo. 

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In matters like this, it is advisable to exercise a level of restraint and I have exercised it up to a certain extent. In this country, we have a ministry responsible for defence; we have a ministry responsible for internal affairs; and we have a minister responsible for security in the President’s Office. At the beginning, I suffered the temptation of thinking that this was actually a defence matter. From all we are hearing from colleagues, it is more to do with intelligence which is a matter for security and security have been co-opted as part of the President’s Office. 

My brother, hon. Kiyonga, the Minister for Defence has no control over intelligence gathering but it is a matter for the Ministry for Security and Internal Affairs; it is a matter of our soldiers –

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of procedure?

MR SSEGONA: The procedural point I am raising, Madam Speaker, is whether we are dealing with the right person and not the wrong minister?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are dealing with the Government.

5.09
MR STEVEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The mother kingdom of Bunyoro condemned in the strongest terms the atrocities against our people in Rwenzori aware that Bunyoro kingdom traversed to northern Tanzania up to the DRC and I want to confirm that the mother kingdom is not tribal; it was a nation state and multi-tribal. Those who are trying to insinuate tribalism in our kingdoms and cultural institutions should actually stand warned.

As a leader, I have been under maximum restraint from the community of Bugungu from those negative forces who want to create another cultural institution for Bugungu. As leaders, we must have maximum restraint as much as possible after all you may find that it may not even be your kingdom which has marginalised you. My problem is the colonial state and those who have come after the colonial state. I also happen to be a neighbour. We share a boundary with Ntoroko and Congo and any problem in Ntoroko can actually end up in Buliisa. Therefore, we are very concerned that what happened in Ntoroko can happen in Buliisa. 

We need to also know that reference to tribe is a sign for backwardness; it is a sign for under development. It tells us as Parliament and as Government that we need to transform our people into professionals who look at the market of a Mukonzo, of a Mwamba and a Munyabindi and therefore can share services and industries. That is a challenge to all of us as leaders. But let me also request leaders to be gifted by a virtue of discernment. 

In 2004, and hon. Kiyonga will bear me witness, the people of Bunyoro kingdom - the Banyoro, the Bagungu and our people in the West Nile - the Alur were in conflict, allegedly tribal and sometimes it was with the Bakiga. We actually lost more people than the current incident. People lost property; thousands of homes were burnt and it was alleged that the Banyoro are chasing the Alur’s and the West Nilers. Hon. Grace Kwiyucwiny was the chairperson of the Nebbi community and actually made an intervention to the President and hon. Kiyonga was sent down. At the end, what was supposedly a tribal conflict between Bunyoro and West Nilers was actually a fight for resources because the region had discovered oil. Indeed, it was not the Banyoro who were taking the land where the Bagungu and Alurs lived but the cows. 

The land boards of Masindi and Hoima had applications for the whole region and after 18 months, oil companies were coming to that area. It has been very difficult to reconcile the people of the Alur community and the Banyoro for what they did not know. So, if as a leader you cannot discern, you can think that you are fighting a tribal war when actually you are fighting something you do not understand. Can I therefore appeal to my leaders in the Rwenzori region that please, our people need each other; whatever political reasons, whatever resource reasons, whatever personal gain, whatever foreign interest - because even our neighbours in Congo - the Bahema and the Lendu - have been used by foreign interests for such conflicts and you are aware of the war across there.

5.14
MS DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My name is Dorothy Nshaija Kabaraitsya but Mbabazi is my sister and most of the Members and the staff normally mistake our names one for the other.

What I want to talk about that has happened to our region and out of the statement that has been given by the Minister of Defence is that this is a region that has many youths who are not employed. It is not only in the Rwenzori region but all over the country. This is a region where the narcotic plant commonly known as “Mairungi” is grown. Very often, it is like a business where one may have a plantation of tea or coffee. Every morning, motorcycles and vehicles are transporting narcotic plants to dispatch all over those areas in Rwenzori Region and even bringing some to Kampala, to be enjoyed mostly by people in Kisenyi.

I feel that idle unemployed youths have been used to cause problems in our region. I call upon the government to know that this has been a war zone for a long time. ADF came from that area and some of them were killed in my district. The NRA also used the same route. 

I would like to call upon Government and my fellow Members of Parliament that we should not rule out the cause of this insurgency being rebels. They may take this opportunity because in East Africa, you know what is taking place in Congo, Sudan and Kenya. Uganda is not exceptional. Those people who have been leaving in this country may use this opportunity. The same people who used this route to overtake the government at the time, may use our idle youth in those areas –(Member timed out.)

5.17
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Our condolences to the bereaved families. Madam Speaker, I will restrict myself to the statement made by the minister. My biggest concerns are issues raised in his address to Parliament. He said the attack happened on 5th and he is making a statement after five days. He also cannot account for the number of people who have died. I have a very big question regarding the functionality of this government. If you read the statement, especially the catalogue of the table, he is specifying unidentified persons. After five days?

The other issue I want to raise is about the persons who have been arrested. Maybe, I want to play the role of the devil’s advocate. Have you produced them in court? You know the provisions of the Constitution of this land. You are here making a statement saying these people broke the law of the land but you are at the helm of breaking it by not producing them in court. How many have you produced in court? Tell us, hon. Minister.

You have told the House that there was a total lapse of the intelligence system. What measures are you putting in place to assure Ugandans that we are safe or that your security is going to work?

When you acknowledge that there was a lapse on the side of Government, we should be seeing the Minister for Defence and Minister for Security resigning. Who has been reprimanded for that total failure? It is then that we can say there is a government concerned about our people. 

We are here with my colleagues because we took on a fight for the people of Uganda and that is why we are asking you, hon. Minister, to account for where our people are. What compensations are you giving after acknowledging that it was your negligence? What compensations are you giving to the families that have lost their dear ones? Let us not gloss over these issues. We want an accountable Government –(Member timed out_)

5.21
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to point out that this is a matter of severe magnitude but we had to wait for five days to get a statement and yet there is not much technicality in the statement the minister has brought. They are plain words and yet, we are the people’s representatives. My concern is that we should not look at this matter as a Kasese, Bundibugyo, Ntoroko affair. This is a national tragedy. We came here on Tuesday expecting a statement so that we can calm down the tempers but look at where we are now.

I want to address bullet number 2.4 of the minister’s statement. He stated that the objectives of the attackers were to acquire guns and money and he left it at that. We are not children. Guns for what? If a Mwamba is attacking a Mukonjo, he needs a machete. So, tell us that there are wider ramifications that need state agencies to be coordinated.

My colleagues have talked about the training of the RDCs saying that they are not trained in these areas. I want to defer. Hon. Pius Mujuzi is a retired lieutenant and he is very knowledgeable about security and he was partly shot. The RDC for Kasese, Major James Mwesigye Kyaana comes from Lwemiyaga. He is conscious about all this. So, do not give us surface matters. Tell us where the problem is so that we get together as a country.

I know –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, hon. Colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that when Garden City was attacked, some of us Members of Parliament complained of plain-clothed security personnel going to the scene with guns. We complained in this House and we were told that is the nature of security operations. 

So, the information I am giving is that this RDC carried AK47 without a uniform and that is how he became a victim of the activities we are complaining about. Can we have those who conduct such civil operations putting on uniforms or having some identification coats because it is an embarrassment to see a whole resident district commissioner being shot –(Gen. Katumba Wamala rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Point of order from the Commander of the Land Forces –(Laughter)

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Madam Speaker, I am the Chief of the Defence Forces. I rise on a point of order. Is the hon. Member of Parliament in order to misinform the House that the RDC actually had a gun? He was not armed and it was a mistaken identity; he was not armed. (Interjections) He was shot by a police officer. He was not armed. He has a gun but he was not armed at the time of the shooting –(Interjections)– no, no unless you are telling me one of you was at the site. So, is he in order to misinform the House?

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I am not sure what happened. Can you substantiate? Do you have evidence that he had a gun? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, now that the CDF has spoken, I withdraw my earlier submission. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I have heard Members talking about the underlying factors like land. I think Government can easily sort out this problem, only that it is not limited to Kasese. Everywhere in this country, land is going to spark a problem. Big people in this country are grabbing people’s land and we are speaking and speaking endlessly. People even disregard parliamentary directives but that is point for another day.

My concern really is that as Government, we should be accountable. We cannot bolster our presence all the way to Somalia, Sudan and Central African Republic and yet, beneath us we are not in charge of our own country. There is no explanation you can give for this – and really the President – because you minister are now lucky that you are taking the President for granted. None of you has resigned. In those times, we would fire many of you seated here. (Laughter) You are lucky and that is why you have him protecting you instead of putting you to task as to why you are doing this.

Now, if the President could go to Bududa over landslides and in Kasese, he is apparently not present - (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.  

MR SSEKIKUBO: In Kasese his presence is not felt. He sits and gives a press statement and yet, this is the peoples’ representatives’ House on which such matters can be handled. I know we should really pull back as a country. Once we have such a tragedy, Members, I think the enemies of this country are taking advantage. We are much more involved with sole candidacy, we are much involved in “kisanja” and yet, we are leaving the basics out – the lives of Ugandans! Whether it is this Government or another Government to come, we need Ugandans first. (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, in any district of Uganda, the representative of the President is the RDC and once an RDC is shot – clearly, if the President was available, he could have been the one being shot at that time. (Laughter) But the minister cannot even in a statement talk about the RDC who was shot but The Daily Monitor – I was in Mwanza and I read The Daily Monitor; the UPDF mambas were surrounding the RDC wrapped with toilet paper around his leg and there was no care. The policeman whom they say shot the RDC is not known. I was there for 10 years, by the way, and I can tell you that security is not at its best now as things are running out of hand.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Lastly, Madam Speaker, I have been watching some of these suspects being tied “kandooya” on TV. I have watched and for those who have handled insurgency in the North, they know that it is always the backlash after such an incident that causes more fire and sends more anger and causes more rebellion. 

I want to thank the Commander of the Second Division whom I saw on TV last night. He said, “You people, do not take the law in your own hands. Stop the vengeance and let the law take its course.” I would like to urge Government to halt the backlash –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mujungu, hon. Baryayanga, hon. Kiiza, hon. Nzoghu, hon. Matte and then maybe, I will look at the other Ugandans. (Laughter) Let us hear from Rwenzori first and then I will get a few other Ugandans.

5.30
MS JENNIFER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I convey my condolence message to the bereaved families in Ntoroko District, Kasese, Bundibugyo and the entire country.

I also condemn, in the strongest terms, the barbaric and inhumane acts committed by the ruthless and insensible people in the three districts; it was really unfortunate.

I also thank the hon. Minister for that comprehensive statement and wish to concur with him on the findings of this attack. That is exactly what happened especially in my district of Ntoroko. 

I also want to inform this august House that it is not an entire tribe or cultural institution that caused this attack. It is just a section of people especially the youth. These youth are very disgruntled, very poor, unemployed and most of them are not educated. So, they are always used by a particular group of people to do certain bad activities. 

I also want to inform this august House that all these cultural and tribal clashes are accelerated by local politicians, particularly, in my district. A district like Ntoroko has got many tribes: we have the Bakonjo who pay allegiance to the King of Rwenzururu, we have the Batooro and Batuku who pay allegiance to the King of Tooro. With the new cultural institution of the Bamba, who have just got their king – Madam Speaker, originally, the Bamba and the Bakonjo had that friction and that friction was caused by the Bamba who did not want to pay allegiance to the King of Rwenzururu and with the wise leadership of H.E the President, looking at that friction, he opted to give the Bamba a king so that –(Laughter)– the friction between the Rwenzururu and the Bamba –(Interruption)

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, the hon. Member has made a very interesting statement and I would like her to repeat it for the attention of this House. Did I hear properly that the President, having realised the friction between the Bamba and the Rwenzururu, decided to give a king to the Bamba? Did I hear that? 

Thank you very much.

MS MUJUNGU: Madam Speaker, whether a cultural leader or a king, it is now a cultural institution being headed by someone. This was intended to lessen the friction. 

So, at the moment, the local political leaders look at which tribe to ally with and they incite that very tribe against the other. In the long run, a conflict comes out. I will give a brief example. 

At the moment, the Batuku pay allegiance to the King of Tooro but because of the local politics on the ground, I want to inform the hon. Minister and entire intelligence to follow up what I am going to say; we have two notorious people, one; is Kasoma and the other is Steady. These people have been trading bad sentiments among people of Ntoroko to reject the King of Tooro. 

Last year, when the King of Tooro was visiting Ntoroko, Gen. Kayihura had to deploy very heavily because people were refusing him to access his people - (Member timed out.)


5.35
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the rest of Ugandans in sending my condolences to the families of those who lost their lives in this conflict. 

I want to take you into an understanding of security. In a scenario where the attackers were ADF, how far do you think they would have reached? If they were able to reach all those districts with “pangas”, how much more would a serious rebel group do? 

So, you can see there is a lot of laxity in the security. I also want to tell you that last year in November, the Minister of Finance rejected the ISO and ESO supplementary. Now, how do you expect them to do their work? Every month, a district security officer gets Shs 500,000. That money is for him to fuel his car, buy stationery and give the GISOs some airtime and fuel for their motorbikes – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Information from the Vice-Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs.

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Baryayanga for raising that point. But let us first ask ourselves, how much does a PISO – Parish Intelligence –(Interjections)– I am talking about structures of intelligence in Government.
  
THE SPEAKER: Please, hon. Members, do not heckle him. He is giving important information from the committee in charge. 

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I want this to go on record. If we talk about a parish intelligence officer, how much does he earn; how much does the Gombolola Intelligence Officer earn? How much does the DISO earn? Let us come to the real issue. Do they have the facilities to take them around their areas of jurisdiction? They do not have it. Do they have motorcycles? They do not have. So, those are the issues we have to bring in the budget. 

I want to appeal to Members of Parliament and Government; I am happy that we are getting to the budget time. How much have you allocated to these people? It is not there. 

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you, hon. Member, for the information but I want to tell you that since November, they have not been facilitated. And you will come in only to blame them for not knowing what is happening. So, if Uganda has decided to start using suffocation instead of prevention, then we are taking the wrong direction. 

You remember what happened the other time when the Mumbere was going to Bundibugyo; Police stopped him from accessing his people. Another time, it was the Kabaka going to Kayunga; but when the Kabaka finally reached Kayunga, the people were happy to receive him. Maybe, when the Mumbere gets to the other side, the people will be happy to receive him. 

So, let us facilitate these arms of Government and make sure they do their work. I do not know since the Minister of Finance refused the budget of ISO and GISOs to be brought, whether it also does the same work for security. We should differentiate where we can work and where we cannot work. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kiiza. I will give her five minutes because she is the mother of the district. 

5.40
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to take this opportunity to convey my condolences to the families of the people who died in this barbaric act that took place from the 5th to the 7th of this month. We may not be sure whether the attacks have stopped. 

Like everybody else, I wish to condemn, in the strongest terms, the perpetrators of these attacks and pray that Government brings to book these perpetrators. I also wish to request that these attacks should not be used to witch-hunt individuals that are not in good books with Government and other institutions. 

I am glad that every Ugandan appreciates that the country is facing political and security challenges. It is unfortunate that some of the top leaders of this country had wanted to trivialise this matter and referred to it as a tribal matter. But in the statement of the Minister of Defence, I was perturbed because he made it clear that the attackers who were welding “pangas” moved past the quarter-guard and went directly to the armoury. 

My question is, where were the people who are supposed to be at the quarter-guard? How did these civilians know where the armoury was? This is not a simple matter and I do not want anybody to tribalise it. This is a security concern for this country. 

Madam Speaker, it is a known fact and security has been warning the people of Uganda that the ADF are regrouping, terrorists are all over. Like other honourable members have mentioned, when these people come to an area, they first of all use the weaknesses within the system. If they went to Rwenzori, they would quickly pick the sentiments of the people there. 

If I may talk on the issue of Bundibugyo. When the IGP was in Kasese at the burial of the Basongora, he referred to the issue as tribal and he called it genocide. When my sister Ntabazi was appearing on television, she said, “You know, these are tribal matters and the Bakonzo were targeting the Bamba”. How could a mere tribe rush to an army barracks as if all the Bambas are army men? How could a tribe run to a police headquarter as if all Bamba’s are police officers –(Interruption?)

MS NTABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Kiiza is my in-law and I have always respected her, but she is telling lies openly in the daylight. When I was on TV – TV is watched widely and by everyone - I never said that the Bakonzo were rushing to kill the Bamba. That is out. For a person who has been a Chief Whip of the Opposition and now, a chairperson of a very important committee of this Parliament to stand up at her age and tell lies –(Laughter)– an age where you are supposed to be intellectual; really, is she in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, unfortunately, I did not listen to the programme. So, I do not know what she said. 

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. These matters call us to be calm. We should stop quarrelling and also admit mistakes where we have committed them. 

Madam Speaker, there are other issues that are causing this matter to get out of proportion in the Rwenzori Region. The hon. James Mbahimba alluded to the fact that some of the discomfort that has happened in Kasese is arising from the way people’s land was forcefully grabbed from them where people were forced to sell their land to Government. Right now, people who even won a case in court, the land they were supposed occupy is guarded by police, supervising the cattle keepers to feed their animas on that land and the owners cannot access it.

Madam Speaker, I wish to present documents from Government, which if had been followed – (Interruption)

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order against my colleague, my woman Member of Parliament, who is very conversant with the issues of Kasese. Government never gave the Basongora any land as it has been claimed. Government just returned their land that had been taken by the institutions of Government – the Prisons Service.

The issue of land is totally out of this because if it were the issue of land, then the people who are affected would have gone to court. Does it mean to murder people? So, is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I allowed this debate to enable the Minister of Defence to get information. Let us receive the information and it will be investigated. If it is found not to be true, we shall know that she has told lies. 

MS KIIZA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your protection. The documents I am laying on Table are documents containing statements of ministers of this Government, statements of the RDCs, statements of the district chairperson, statements from the Office of the Prime Minister talking about the distribution of land and telling Government that the people whose land had been taken away forcefully should be compensated. These are not lies. The documents also contain the petition of the people who suffered underpayment during the –(Member timed out _)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to conclude.

MS KIIZA: Madam Speaker, contained in these documents is a ministerial statement on the resettlement of the Basongora by the hon. Eng. Hillary Onek dated 19 September 2006. 

Further, there is a report by the Government technical team dated 15 October 2007. But there is also a final report in resettling landless people in Kasese; there is a report of the Nkoko residents and their problems to the district NRM Chairperson; there is a letter from the Minister of Lands and Housing to the district chairperson; there is a letter from the leadership of the district to the Prime Minister; there is a letter from the RDC to the Minister of State for Agriculture and Dr Wesonga, who was heading the technical team; there is a letter of the district land board secretariat reporting about the Nkoko matter to the district chairperson; there is a district land board secretarial statement that gave the district chairperson a status of the land in Bigando where the matter happened; and  there is a report from the district chairperson talking about how land that belonged to the population was also mistakenly given away instead of giving away land that belonged to Government.

Other document in here is a petition for underpayment as the process for upgrading Kasese Airport was being made. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay. There are not lies but facts and whoever thinks I am lying can read and understand for purposes of enhancing debate.

Madam Speaker, if you could give me one more minute  - In addition, the delays in either facilitating Government – because in 2012 when the Omusinga was stopped from travelling to Bundibugyo, Government put in place a committee that was supposed to coordinate a dialogue between the Bamba and the Bakonzo to ensure they harmonise their positions and quell the conflicts. However, I think this committee was not facilitated and so, the dialogue, like hon. Kintu said, did not took place. Instead of dialoguing, we saw a king being crowned, which contributed to the accumulation of the tension. These are some of the reasons, however much we hide, that we cannot run away from.

So, I would like to request Government to look into these matters so that they get an amicable solution of ensuring the people settle in harmony. We have lived in harmony for a long time with the Basongora, the Bamba and the Banyabindi until these issues of land came up. 

I can assure the people of Uganda that like the hon. Katoto said, the Bakonzo are peace-loving people. We have lived with the Basongora in peace. The Basongora are cattle-keepers and most of the Bakonzo are cultivators and it is these Bakonzo who have been feeding the Basongora as they fed them with milk and we have co-existed in harmony until the issue of land came up. 

Madam Speaker, if these issues are followed to the dot and expeditiously handled, we will continue to live in harmony; the people of the Rwenzori Region will live in peace.

Thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. I call upon my brother, the Minister of Defence, to take care because the security of this country is at stake. As a people, we need to sit down and find the best ways to protect our people. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we will now listen to hon. Matte. But before that, hon. Members, I have a problem. I invited the Muslim community to have Iftar dinner here and I am now getting signals that it is almost time. So, three minutes hon. Matte and three minutes to hon. Nzoghu.

5.54
MR JOSEPH MATTE (Independent, Bughendera County, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will concentrate on the issues in Bundibugyo and in particular in my place called Bughendera. So much has been said and I do not believe in repeating what has already been said.

I want to tell you the problem of Bughendera. I am the one who lost majority of people. They came from my constituency. Bughendera is hard to reach and hard to stay. We have no roads and hardly any schools or any other facilities one can talk about. This is a problem that started – I have been tracing it - from the colonial days. The colonialists did not want to do anything for the people of Bughendera. We had the Tooro Government but it also did not do much. 

In 1974, we got a district status, which was dominated by the Bamba. Some helped, some did not help. I can give you an example. I am grateful to the Government of Uganda and the President in particular. Government gave us four seed schools in Bundibugyo. In Bundibugyo we have two counties, but all the four seed schools are in Bwamba. (Interjections) Now, I need your protection because it is the Government of Museveni, which gave me this. I started with the colonial Government, I have gone to the district at Bundibugyo and I am still moving on. If you want me to retire, on what basis do you want me to retire?

I am very grateful that the Government of NRM has been assisting us to solve this problem of marginalisation and living in hard- to-reach and hard-to-stay areas. In 2000, they gave us a constituency status but some people from our area decided to sabotage it. So, when we came to Parliament, we were not allowed to vote until 2006 when I came in as the first area MP.

Our people have been marginalised for a long time. (Interjections) I am coming to the real issues. You have to listen carefully to what I am saying. The pressure has been building on from the colonial days up to the time I am talking today. I am just giving you an example which is the very latest.

I have so many young idle people who are actually smoking and drinking and when such a situation happens, with very little help you find that people can be manipulated. I do not rule out external manipulation –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to conclude.

MR MATTE: Hon. Members, I hope you are honourable enough because some people are honourable but they are not. It is high time we looked seriously into the causes of these problems, manipulations so that we can solve these problems once and for all.

We have been systematically trying to help. There is no country that can develop without good infrastructure and electricity. Government has given us these and systematically they are trying to solve this problem. Therefore, I would like to recommend that the cultural institutions - To agree with some of my people who have spoken, we need to look at Article 246 with a view of mapping out how to create these kingdoms such that they do not live in the shadow of the old colonial kingdoms and the post-independence kingdoms –(Member timed out.)

5.51
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I send my message of condolence to the people of Kasese, Bundibugyo and Ntoroko.

I was reading the information by one of the security experts who worked as an ESO coordinator, Mr David Pulkol. He was trying to analyse some statements that have been made by the different leaders in this country since the attacks in Bundibugyo, Kasese and Ntoroko happened. He said that the challenge that is cropping up in these areas is that people are being arrested before the intelligence is done. He termed it as “arrests before intelligence”. Arrests that would be effective are those arrests, which should be done after intelligence has been done. 

At the moment, the Prime Minister of Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu was arrested in the morning together with one of the senior members of Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu. The issue that I want to bring to the attention of this House is that in our approach to issues - In 2012 I presented a matter of national importance to this House and I was asking Government to go and investigate the tensions that were developing in Kasese, Bundibugyo and Ntoroko when the King was stopped from going to Bundibugyo.

Madam Speaker, your ruling was that the Committee on Defence and Security goes to Bundibugyo and Kasese to investigate this matter. Up to today, this report has never seen the light of day on the Floor of Parliament. Some of these issues could have even been ironed out before because I emphasised that there were tensions that were coming up because I saw what happened when they stopped the King.

Secondly, we have Rwenzori Mountain National Park. Originally, the Bakonzo were staying in the mountains and when Rwenzori Mountain National Park was gazetted, all the Bakonzo who were staying in the mountains were chased from the gazetted Rwenzori Mountains. They found themselves without land. To the north, you have Rwenzori Mountains National Park, which stretches from Kasese up to Bundibugyo where the Bakonzo were living. In the lower lands, there is Queen Elizabeth National Park. In the centre of Kasese - that stretch that is left - there are many areas, which are gazetted as forest land, prisons and the army barracks. You find that when you add there installations like the airport and the factories that are there, there are serious issues to address in Kasese.

I would love that in the circumstances that we are in right now, we should not use it to score our political gains. We should use this to redeem our people from the circumstances that have actually engulfed us since the 5th of this month. (Applause) I want to emphasise – (Interruption)

MS SEMPALA: Thank you, hon. Member, for allowing me to give you information. I would like to give information about simple things such as the root causes of conflicts. We know land is the chief cause of conflict throughout the world. So, for us to downplay it from the government side, I think it is very unfair. 

I would also like to talk about the issue of profiling. Internationally, profiling is harassment and when people are profiled by tribe for arrests, that shows concern for fear and these people feel threatened. 

MR NZOGHU: As I conclude, in Kasese, when the ADF came, the government tried to bring on board the vigilantes and home guards and they were selected from across the entire region. I think Government has no track record of these people. They were trained, given arms to fight the ADF but when you ask Government, “Where are these people? Where are these home guards? Where are these vigilantes that you trained?” I think they do not have any record of them. Therefore, it implies - (Interruption)

MR MBAHIMBA: Thank you, hon. Nzoghu. Madam Speaker, last month, I presented a petition of the former local prison officers, who were discharged and who have never handed in the equipment that they used. I presented it before this Parliament. In their petition, they stated they have the attire and other equipment they were using to execute their work.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, you can see that there is a crisis, which Government must get down and try to look into more carefully instead of pointing fingers at people who are innocent and not party to any of this injustice that is being administered on our people.

There is no normal person who would love his tribesmen to be killed in hundreds. That person would be mad. I want to emphasise that as people from the Rwenzori, we need to come together and see where the gaps are and address them as people of Rwenzori instead of trying to think that there are those who are prevailing over and above other people. Trying to position ourselves as intelligence people, when we are not even professionals in intelligence work is also misplaced. I would think - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude the very last sentence.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I would believe that as leaders and as Members of Parliament, we have our Rules of Procedure that guide us. In addition, every time a petition is brought here, you have always guided Members to put petitions in parliamentary language. That is why I want to ask the leadership from Rwenzori, across the churches, the political and cultural divide that we should know that all of us have a stake in our region. 

Two, hon. Kiyonga comes from Kasese and he also doubles as a Minister for Defence. That means we even have contacts whether we are with leadership or not. As such, he has the advantage of gathering information concerning issues, which are coming up in Kasese. We believe that we should use our privileged position and also our charisma to make sure that we do not incite more violence because once you incite more violence, more people will die.

We should also distance our dear institutions, the Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu, from this crisis because the office of the prime minister and the office of Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu has put it clearly that they are not party to this and that they are interested in peace. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, our rules provide that a statement from the minister will be debated for only 15 minutes but because of the emotions around this matter and the need to understand the problem, we have taken two hours. 

I have also informed you that I have invited the Muslim community for Iftar and Prince Nakibinge is waiting in the VIP Room. It is not proper for me to sit here while he is waiting there. So, I want to say that we end this debate for now. Hon. Minister, you have received information and we direct you to come back to us within a month and report on progress of that investigation. 

House adjourned to Tuesday. Other matters will be deferred up to Tuesday 2.00 O’clock. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.09 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 15 July 2014 at 2.00 p.m.) 

