Tuesday, 23 July 2013

Parliament met at 2.24 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourablemembers, welcome to this sitting. Today we are supposed to start the debate on the State of the Nation Address; the motion was moved about two weeks ago but we still have other matters that we need to finish. I am advised that we were not able to finish with the National Population Council Bill although we had moved some steps ahead. So, we need to see if we can handle that and finish and then we start with the debate on the State of the Nation Address motion.

Honourablemembers, I have received a list of names of the people going to participate in that debate as had been decided by the Business Committee in its meeting, which was conducted about three weeks ago. The direction was that in order to improve on the quality of our debate and focus on the issues on the State of the Nation Address, the different interests in this House should submit to the Speaker’s office a list of the people going to make contributions. 

I have now received a list of contributors with the time allocated to them from the Independent Members of Parliament. I have also received a list from the NRM and each Member will be speaking for five minutes, according to what they have agreed. However, I have not yet received the list from the other parties in the House. I would like to ask them to submit this list so that it guides us in the debate. If we should start the debate now, I will have to proceed with the lists that are available. That is how the business of the House will be conducted in relation to that item. 

Honourablemembers, in the VIP gallery this afternoon we have a delegation of 40 Kenyan members of Baringo County Assembly, led by the Speaker, hon. William Kamket. They are here on a benchmarking tour of the Parliament of Uganda. Please, join me in welcoming them to the House. You are very welcome. (Applause) Thank you.

2.28
MR PETER MUGEMA (NRM, Iganga Municipality, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of national emergency. Yesterday, while at my constituency, I realised that the hospital is in a dilapidated state; the water system is down and has been down for the last one week. As I speak now, even the pump which has been pumping water internally is also down. Yesterday, people resorted to getting water from the nearby places, more so from the boreholes. We think that maybe the government has decided to neglect us because of its own reasons. 

It is risky for people to run out of water because we are at the highway. Now most of the premature babies are being referred to Jinja and yet between Jinja and Iganga, it takes about 30 to 40 minutes and hence by the time these babies arrive, they are already dead. The hospital administration cannot even afford to fuel the few ambulances they have. As an individual, I have failed to raise enough money to keep fuelling those ambulances; I have been doing it up to now but I can no longer do it.

Mr Speaker, I am now seeking for your intervention so that maybe the government can come to our rescue.We are also part of this country and we voted this Government into power. Thank you. If we do not get a response from the concerned authorities, especially the Ministry of Health, Mr Speaker, I will come to your office to seek the next option.Perhaps I will go on a hunger strike so that I will die and be part of those being neglected by this Government. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is there any response to the issue in Iganga Hospital? The hospital is in a crisis because of the water supply. Can we have a statement from Government on this?

2.30
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND 	MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I sympathise with the people of Iganga as they experience the shortage of water. Water is life and if you cannot have it, it means you really have a problem. This matter has been taken care of and will be passed to the appropriate minister as soon as possible and I am sure remedial action will be taken. Thank you.

MR MUGEMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since he has also realised that it is an emergency, I am proud of his statement. However, let him give us a timeframe; is it tomorrow or after tomorrow,because it is an emergency as you have realised? Should we expect you tomorrow so that I go back now?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we hear from the Leader of Government Business.There is a supplementary issue there; just hold on.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This matter of water shortage has been happening in several hospitals. The other time we raised the problem about Itojo and Kitagata.So there are other hospitals with a similar problem but they have not been mentioned. I do not know whether it should take a Member of Parliament to first raise it. Why shouldn’t Government come and give us a comprehensive statement on all those affected so that we can handle them holistically. 

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the Minister or the Leader of Government Business that we also identified this problem in a hospital in Moyo where we were two days ago; they also had a problem of water. So I would like to suggest that while we are looking at the problem as brought forward by the honourable with regard to Iganga, we also look at the general problem of lack of water in all hospitals.Water is indeed a very essential item and yet many hospitals have this problem. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KAJURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The situation as described by the three honourable members is very much appreciated. I can assure you that I will take off some time from here to go and inform the appropriate minister - I think she is not very far from here - so that action can be taken to address the problem. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Right Honourable, there is a suggestion, especially from the committee, that the situation in Iganga Hospital is urgent but the other hospitals also suffer similar situations. They are requesting for a comprehensive report to the House on this subject.

2.35
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Justine Lumumba): Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable members, I thank the Members who have raised this issue and I have taken note of it. I am going to request for space on the Order Paper so that the Minister of Health comes to give us a comprehensive statement on Thursday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the meantime something has got to be done.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Yes, I am going to inform him so that they take action, but on Thursday he will come and inform the country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. So we wait for a response on Thursday and we will also get an update on what has happened in Iganga Hospital.

Honourable members, in the gallery this afternoon we have students and teachers of Light College Katikamu represented by hon. Rosemary Nansubuga and the honourable Prof. Gilbert Bukenya. They have come to observe the business of the House.Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome.

We also have students and teachers of Kagando Primary School represented by hon. Bwambale Bihande and hon. Winifred Kiiza. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House.Please join me also in welcoming them to the House. You are very welcome.Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not see the chairperson and vice-chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee in the House. These papers are supposed to go to the Public Accounts Committee. Is any Member ready to lay these reports before the House?

2.37
MR VINCENT KYAMADIDI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay the annual report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2012, Volume 1 – Performance Report. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR KYAMADIDI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the annual report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2012, Volume 2 – Central Government. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR KYAMADIDI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the annual report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2012, Volume 5 – Value for Money Audits.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR KYAMADIDI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Population Secretariat – population and development linkages, reproductive health and gender and rights – UNFPA funded projects UGA7U101, UGA7U606 and UGA7U505  new report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR KYAMADIDI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the Ministry of Water and Environment Farm Income Enhancement and Forest Conservation Project, project ID No. P-UG-AAC-001, ADF loan No. 2100150008296, ADF grant No. 2100155003172 and NDP credit No. 441 accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR KYAMADIDI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Uganda Heart Institute financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR KYAMADIDI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Justice Law and Order Sector (JLOS) SWAP Development Fund for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.Item 3 (viii) is for the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises. 

2.41
MR JOHN BOSCO MUBITO (NRM, Budiope West County, Buyende): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Uganda Development Bank Limited (UDB) financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

MR MUBITO: Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Databank for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MUBITO: Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the National Forestry Authority Second Environment Capacity Building Project (EMCBP II) IDA credit No.45040-UG report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MUBITO: Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Uganda Wildlife Training Institute for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MUBITO: Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Uganda Investment Authority (UIA) financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MUBITO: Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MUBITO: Mr Speaker, I also beg to lay the annual report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2012, Volume 4 – Statutory Corporations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

2.44
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON,COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Ms Florence Namayanja): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Report of the Auditor-General for the financial year ended 30 June 2012, Volume 3 – Local Government Authorities. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you very much, honourable members. The items laid under item 3(I) to (VII) stand committed to the Committee on Public Accounts for expeditious handling and reporting to the House.

Item No. 3 (VIII) to (XIV) stand referred to the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for expeditious handling and report to the House. While item 3 (XV) is hereby committed to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for expeditious handling and report to the House. Thank you very much.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL POPULATION COUNCIL BILL, 2011

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I have been briefed that you stood over clauses 2 and 4 and that you were able to handle up to clause 9 of the Bill.Was a decision taken on clause 9?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, we stood over clause 4 and the new clause on the tenure of the board; it is in the report. That is it.Although the Hansard captured clause 5 to have been stood over, that clause was passed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, the report I have is that clauses 2 and 4 were stood over.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Clauses 2 and 4?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, that is what I have on record.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Clause 2 is about interpretation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes. It was stood over together with clause 4.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, clause 2 was actually stood over; it wasnot debated at all. However, we deliberated on clause 4 although we didnot conclude it.We were trying to come up with a new formulation on the tenure of the board. Clause 5 was passed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, that is what I reported.I reported that clauses 2 and 4 were stood over while other clauses were passed up to clause 9.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, what you didnot mention is the new clause on the tenure of the board.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Was there a new clause that was debated but not passed?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, we will come back to that later because I think it is in line with clause 4. Did we take a vote on clause 9, chairman of the committee?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, yes we took a vote on clause 9. We actually created a sub clause in there –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, you took a vote on clause 9, as amended. So, you we now can talk about clause 10.

Clause 10

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, just allow me a second to put my papers together. Clause 10 is on the functions of the secretariat and we are proposing to delete the entire clause. The justification is that the secretariat is the implementing organ of the council, and its proposed functions have been merged with the overall functions of the council under clause 5.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the committee’s proposal is that we delete the clause on the functions of the Population Secretariat basing on the justification that the committee’s chairperson has just put forward.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, can I pray that we stand over this?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no, we cannot just stand it over. A proposal has been made, we have not heard any response from you and yet you want to have it stood over!

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, I am asking for that time because this Bill was handled by my colleague who is not here. So, I need to do some consultations before I can say “yes” or “no”. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I stand to oppose the proposal fronted by the chairperson of the committee. We have a council, and to me it is very easy for Parliament to go through this. The council doesnot sit every day, but we are talking about a secretariat that does work on a daily basis. It, therefore, must have terms of reference. It must have clearly spelt out functions. It must be guided by the law on how it will perform its functions in regard to the population council.

In my view, Mr Chairman and honourable minister, there is no reason for us to delete the functions of the secretariat, which hasbeen put in place in the Bill itself, which shall become a law of Parliament. When you look at the functions that have been stipulated here, you realise that they are just daily duties of a secretariat. Thank you very much.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I stand to agree with the understanding of hon. Vincent Ssempijja. Clause 5 mentions the functions of the council and this relates to formulation of policies. Now, clause 9, in contradistinction, cannot be likened to clause 5 because clause 9 is giving the benchmarks and parameters under which the policy will be implemented. 

Although I would agree with the chairperson that generally, the work of the secretariat can be subsumed in the administrative functioning and regulation of the council, giving these guidelines, to me, is key. In any case, there is an omnibus paragraph in clause 10, which is,“to undertake any other relevant activities”. That covers it, and there is no harm in having this provision in the Bill.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, because we had adopted the amended clause on the functions of the council, unless we are looking for a recommittal we might have a problem. What was done, like it is done for many other agencies that have been formed by Government, is that we established the functions of the organisation. 

The council we have in here is like a governing body.The council membership - the composition we talked about - is like a governing body; it is not an executive organ of the council. It sets the agenda and that agenda is implemented by the secretariat. As such, whatever they direct is implemented by the secretariat. We, therefore, strongly felt that once we have spelt out the functions of the council, we would be basically talking about the functions of the secretariat. We do not want to create two operational entities in one because the council is the body corporate to which we assign certain functions. 

The council, which we were calling the board previously, will provide policy direction and the secretariat still implements those same functions for which the council has given policy direction. That was the thinking. When we adopt the proposal by the Attorney-General to have two separate organs within the same entity, I think there will be a serious problem of governance in this organisation. I am not yet in a position to concede.

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. When the learned Attorney-General gives us advice and it is in line with what other Members think, the chairman of the committee should concede.There is no reason why you establish a secretariat which is going to have members on it without stipulation of their functions. So, we beg that unless there is really a serious reason, you should concede. Thank you.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Chairman, I want to give more support to what the Attorney-General told us.If you tamper with clause 10 then you are going to damage the flow that we are going to have under clauses 11, 12, 13 and others. The secretariat is headed by a very powerful person whose functions and duties are going to also be stipulated by this same law. If you do not mention the functions of the secretariat then why do you mention the functions of the director-general? Certainly, you are going to cause damage to the whole process, to the entire Bill that we are discussing. So, chairman, I pray that you concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let me just see if I can guide. Clause 4 has been stood over, and the initial intention of this Bill was to have that composition of the council which would then give the operational activities of this particular sector to the secretariat. That was the original thinking of the Bill. Are there any reasons being supplied as to why the structure of the Bill is being altered substantially to change the composition of the council in clause 4? If the council in clause 4 is now looking very different from what it should be, maybe there would be justification for looking at the amendment of this clause. However, if the intention of this Bill is to have a council constituted as it is in clause 4, which has been stood over, then the amendment would not be proper. 

The deletion would not be proper because you are not going to have permanent secretaries of all these ministries running the operations of the population issues like is being proposed- guide and coordinate implementation of the National Population Policy. All those things are executive functions. We need to understand that. I did not follow that earlier debate and that is why I also need to understand what I am going into.  

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, the council is the overall body. Its main function is to lay down policies and guidelines. That council requires a secretariat, which will put into effect what the council will have decided to do. 

It is most appropriate that the secretariat will also define what they intend to do to avoid what somebody was saying, that there may be a conflict between the secretariat and the council. If the duties are not fully clarified, actually the chances of the two bodies or the two arms- let us use the word “arms”- conflicting are enhanced. So, I will pray for the chairman to concede and let us leave these functions as enumerated down here. Somebody can amend them if they so think, but we should maintain clause 10. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Was clause 5 amended?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, clause 5 was significantly amended.We merged the functions in clause 5 with the functions of the secretariat and these became the functions of the council as the body corporate.

Mr Chairman, if you look at existing Acts of other agencies, we define the functions of those agencies and not the functions of individual departments or units within the organisation.That is what we normally do.If you open all those Acts,  that is what you will find. You do not go inside there to start prescribing the functions of a department. If the secretariat is implementing the policies and programmes of the council as a body corporate, then I do not see why we have to separate this.     

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, we need to assist the chairperson of the committee to move away from the thinking he had when he was making these amendments. At the beginning, the committee had recommended that we have a board and then a council, which will be a body corporate.When we came to the House we said “no, let us revert to the original thinking of the Bill and have a council that will work as a board and then the secretariat to support it.” 

So, it is like you have a board and you also have an authority, if you are establishing an authority, and it has always been the position that we specify the functions of the board and also the functions of the authority.In this case, we have the council on top and we have a secretariat that supports the council. So it is important that we specify the functions of the council at the same time the functions of the secretariat.

If we in any case erred to amend clause 5, then we can recommit it but we continue with the flow of the Bill.I want to encourage the chairperson to move away from the original thinking of the committee and come back and move with the House. Thank you.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Chair.I want to draw the attention of the committee chair to the functions which were redrafted for clause 5. I want to suggest that we seem to have actually made a mistake in clause 5when we gave the council operational functions which we should have left to the secretariat. I believe that it will be very hard for us to hold the secretariat accountable yet we have shifted all their functions and given them to the council.For that reason,I would also support the idea that we continue and state the functions of the secretariat but we shall need to redraft the functions of the board.

When you look at the functionsin clause 5, paragraph (i) says, “To co-ordinate and monitor population programmes in the country”.Paragraph (k) says,“To build capacity at central and local government levels for the implementation of population programmes”.You can read the others too. I believe some of these functions should actually have been for the secretariat. For this reason, Mr Chairman,I suggest that we move as proposed by the Attorney-General - we state the functions of the secretariat and we go and redraft clause 5.

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Mr Chair.I stand to oppose the deletion and the grounds have been made clear.The problem I seeis that the chairman thinks that the council is the day-to-day implementer. However, the norm of the day, where there is a council and there is a secretariat, is that the functions of the secretariat are clearly spelt out and also the functions of the council are spelt out.

I support the proposal from the honourable Member from Ndorwa that we recommit clause 5 so that the functions of the council and the functions of the secretariat are clearly spelt out. This would allay the fears about conflict of interest.At the same time, where there is a council, which is a governing body, it cannot become an implementer. I, therefore, call upon the chairperson of the committee to concede that the functions of the secretariat are a must. I want to call upon the chair to concede and we move on.

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Chairman,I want to add on to the judgement. Clause 10 as it stands is very clear. It clearly subordinates the secretariat to the council. Sub clause (1) says, “The Population Secretariat shall be responsible for the implementation of the policy decisions of the Council.”It then goes down and gives specific duties. 

If we attempt to proceed as the chairperson is trying to propose, we are going to have a lot of confusion in this organisation. The council will start doing the day-to-day running and they will be mandated because you have not harmonised the running of the secretariat. You will find the council trying to do some things and they say that it is covered in the law.

I would think that the way the Bill had been structured is the way we have been structuring other Bills related to this situation.So, I do not see any reason why the chairman is now proposing that new approach, which I do not think is going to assist us; it will really worsen the situation.My request is that the chairperson of the committee should concede and then we go back to the original formulation. We can make some amendments in clause 5, but this formulation is the best as it is. 

MR AWONGO: Mr Chairman, deletion of the functions of the secretariat, in my view,is tantamount to deletion of the whole secretariat. You cannot have a secretariat without functions. So,I would really want to appeal to the chairman to concede and we proceed.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.I am a member of the committee. First of all,I think we need to differentiate between the two. The council is for policy formulation and guidance and then the secretariat is for management and implementing the policies.

When you look at the amendment that was made in clause 5, which is now on page 8, you will notice that some of the functions are overlapping with the functions of the secretariat. When you go to page 7, for example, you look at function (k) and function (i); they are functions of the population secretariat but to me mobilisation of resources to support the population programmes should actually be a function of the council.

If we are to have clause 10, then we need to look at the individual functions one by one because some of these are functions of the council and that means they overlap.It would be better if we look at function by function and spell out the functions of the secretariat, for management purposes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we already have a population secretariat and it has been doing work all these years.What this Bill intends to do, from my understanding, is to create a supervisory body on top of it without removing the initial functions of the population secretariat. That is what I am reading from this.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Chairman, you asked a question on clause 4, which we amended -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Clause 4 is not yet passed.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: On the composition of the council -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It was stood over.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Yes, but it forms a background of what we were discussing on the functions of the secretariat and that is why I was referring to it.Although it was stood over, it has an implication on the other clauses.

Initially, when you look at the composition, these are offices - the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance and the rest. So, without a secretariat which has been given functions to make sure that the population council performs and we achieve the objectives of the Bill and you expect these offices to carry out all the functions as stipulated in 10, we shall not achieve the objective of the Bill. 

I want to persuade the chairperson of the committee.If they did not go back to sit and consider - There were amendments which they were supposed to move and what they are proposing, as hon. Bahati says, is based on the fact that they had deleted the word “council” and moved ahead with the establishment of the board. So they were consequential amendments and I expected the chair to go back and consult with the committee to make those consequential amendments; otherwise, we shall be derailed and we shall not achieve what we wanted to achieve.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. Chairman, why don’t you let the members contribute then you come in? I will have the member for Kalungu East and then for Rwampara.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Chairman, I wantto help the chair on what you really want to know about the spirit in which we deferred or stood over clause 4. We extensively discussed that these are civil servants, and we wantedto include other people who are generally affected by the law like women, people with disabilities, NITA-Uganda and UBOS. We asked the chairman to go back and organise the council in that line. 

We had discussed the issue of the board and we reverted to using “council”and not “board”. So, we went on to say that we include one third of the women on council, people with disabilities and others. Some people even wanted to include the youth and those who are generally affected by the population policy and the law. 

There is not much departure. What we are discussing here as the council flows well with what everybody is saying.There is no problem with having a secretariat to serve the council. Some of us who have been part of this know very well that the Population Secretariat is really a very powerful body. 

Population and development issues are not a small thing; that is why we are making the law. We are not going to just create a secretariat which has no functions. Indeed, some people were discussing ahead of us about the title of the head of that secretariat, and it was a very big struggle here with some people saying that we donot remove the word “director-general”. To some people, the word “general” is very strong. (Laughter) Thank you very much.

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. The other day when we were deleting the board to have the council, the spirit was that all these other organs or ministries would be incorporated.The background is that we have the council as a governing body. 

The role of the Population Secretariat, Mr Chairman and members, is to do administrative work.You will agree with me that this is actually an administrative function- carrying out day-to-day activities of the population secretariat - but on behalf of the council. For you to say that these functions that would be meant for the council would be carried out by the secretariat ideally would mean that the secretariat is doing work which would ordinarily be the work of the council and the secretariat is doing it on behalf of the council. So, I still feel, like the Attorney-General has said, that the functions of the population secretariat should be clearly stipulated like it is here. 

I want to also inform my colleague from Ibanda that even the role of mobilising resources to support operation programmes is an administrative function, which can be done by the secretariat. I think it is time to move out of the box and realise that the secretariat is an administrative function of the population council. I thank you.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, given the direction of the debate, I would like to concede but we have to recommit clause 5.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is okay. We shall deal with that at the right time as it is understandable. We will deal with that at the right stage and when we come to the right time. Honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 10 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, clause 11 sub clause (2) and (3) are amended to read as follows: “(1) There shall be a Director-General appointed by the Minister on the advice of the Council on such terms and conditions as may be specified in his or her instrument of appointment.

(2)	The Director-General shall be the secretary to the Council and the accounting officer of the Council.”

The other amendment is to rephrase paragraph (b) of subclause (4) to read as follows: “(b) he or she is removed from office by the Minister on the recommendation of the Council for-
(i)	inability to perform the functions of his or her office arising out of physical or mental incapacity; 
(ii)	gross misconduct; or
(iii)	incompetence.”

We are also proposing to delete paragraph (b) of subclause (5) and replace it with the following: “he or she is convicted of an offence involving abuse of office, fraud or moral turpitude.” 

Justification: we believe that the council is competent to advise the minister on the appointment of the director-general.Two, fraud and moral turpitude are in the same class of offences as abuse of office.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. There are several amendments proposed. I think let us take them one by one so that we can focus the discussion on the key issues.

Honourablemembers, the first amendment is in sub clause (1) as proposed by the committee: “There shall be a Director-General appointed by the Minister on the advice of the Council on such terms and conditions as may be specified in his or her instrument of appointment.” In other words, the proposal will take away the President, so that the appointment of the executive director shall no longer be by the President. That is what the committee is proposing. 

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I remember last time when we discussed this, we had a problem with the word or the title “director-general” and members advanced a number of options which we did not actually conclude on. So, before we proceed with the amendments, I would like to ask if we agreethat this person will be called a director-general, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, what is the name given to the current head of the executive of the Uganda Population Secretariat? What title does he or she carry?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, he is called the Executive Director, but I have no quarrel if this honourable House would like to change the title, if we think that the title “director-general” carries more weight.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But that is your proposal, honourable minister. 

MR KASAIJA: I would like us to keep the title “director-general”.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, Shakespeare says, “What is in a name? A rose by whatever name called, smells as good.” What matters is the substance - the functions, the limitations of this particular office. It is not so much about the name. Otherwise, I may also want to take away the word “general” from my title because it seems they are worried about the word “general” to connote something else. I am worried that mine is also about to be amended. (Laughter) Mr Chairman, I think we should retain it as it is. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much. Mr Chairman, the chairperson of the committee did not give justification as to why they are deleting “appointment by the President and approval by the minister”. The justification was not given.

I had thought the spirit within which they had included the President is to attach value and power to this office. It is the spirit within which the director-general was to be appointed by the President. So, I want to oppose the chairman’s proposal to delete the President and make it the minister. I propose that we maintain “the President on the advice of the minister”. I thank you. 

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The other day I was moving for “director-general” because I attach much importance to the word “general”.We had agreed that the committee would go back and look at the nomenclature - why is it director-general and not executive director or commissioner-general. Is it because under him or her there will be very many directorates? We had agreed that the committee would come back and explain and justify why they would want the title “director-general”now. 

We had agreed that even the title “director-general” would maybe carry some other meaning in terms of pay. We have seen this happen. In some areas, the director-general earns more than the executive director.The commissioner-general will not earn the same as the Auditor-General; or the Auditor-General may not earn like the Attorney-General. So, it would now mean that we are creating – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, by even suggesting that those are similar – (Laughter)

MR KYAMADIDI: They are not similar, Mr Chairman. It is not true and they also bear witness. The Attorney-General does not earn as the Auditor-General and so is a commissioner-general. 

That notwithstanding, I stand to support the idea of the President appointing the director-generalor whichever name we shall use. We have seen this conflict happen and it even happened when we were handling the petroleum Bills. Most of these appointments should be done by the President. It carries a lot of weight.We have seen a lot of these ministers in total conflict with executive directors and directors-general, but when it is the duty of the President, especially on the advice of the minister, more often than not the conflict that would occur is reduced. Thank you. 

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, chairperson. I stand to support the inclusion of the minister. When this director-general is appointed by the President, he will not be loyal to the minister and yet the minister is the person he reports to directly.

Also, if he is appointed by the President and approved by the minister, you are leaving the council out and yet the council is the direct supervisor. You are doing the work of the council. So, I would like to support the idea of appointment by the minister, but I would like to add, “approved by the council” so that the council has a say in this. In case a director misbehaves, the council can say, “sorry we are disapproving him”. Thank you very much.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. My position is not far from what the MP from Rwampara has stated. I just needto give a practical example. 

We went to URA offices in Nakawa and we all knew that Madam Kagina is theCommissioner of URA. So, when we reached, we said we had come to see the Commissioner and they asked us,“which commissioner?” and we were lost. We said we wanted to see Madam Kagina and they said “oh, that is the Commissioner-General”. 

If we assign a title, it must presuppose something. If we say “general” or “director-general”, it would imply that we are going to have so many directorates headed by directors. That is true, and the resource envelope therein is also attached to it. It doesnot come for nothing. So, I think the chairperson should really convince us as to why we should use the title,“director-general”. 

Two, on the issue of whether it is the President or the minister who should be concerned with appointing the director-general or whatever title we choose, I have no problem because even the power which is excisable by the minister is good enough as the power of the President; it is good enough as the power of the chief executive. 

I, therefore, agree that that power should be given directly to the President.If we give it to the minister, we do not want a situation where the interests of the minister may be conflicting with the interests of the President and then we see a whole alignment of clickism, where members of the council will try to get over to the minister and so on. There would be a lot of struggle. So, to hit the last nail on the coffin, the President should be the one in charge of appointing the director-general or whatever he or she will be called. Thank you. 

MS ASAMO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to give an experience. I used to be a member of the National Council for Higher Education. When we were appointing the director, it would be the council members first to apply – those who wished to be executive director of the council –and then the personnel committee of the council would propose two or three names to the Minister of Education. The Minister would then go through those names, together with other people and considering other issues, before giving us back the name of the approved person. 

What am I saying? I think the powers should be given to the minister.Since the minister sits in Cabinet, which is chaired by the President, by the time the minister receives these names there will be consultation. I feel that the power to appoint should be given to the minister because he or she is going to be the supervisor of the council, whose role it is to appoint a director or directors. That is something I beg the House to adopt. 

On the other issue of the director-general, last week we had asked the committee chairperson and the minister who was here to explain to us the title because in the Bill we did not see any directorates. When we call this person a director-general, who are the other directors? So, we felt “executive director” would have been a better title like it is the case with other councils. That was the proposal we had last week, but if the committee chairperson can convince us that they have other directorates, then it would be okay. Thank you.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to call the House’s attention to Article 99 of the Constitution, which vests the executive authority of Uganda in the President and it shall be exercised. I would also like to further call your attention to clause (4) of the same Article: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the functions conferred on the President by clause (1) of this article may be exercised by the President either directly or through officers subordinate to the President.”

Therefore, the appointment of these directors and commissioners-general is vested in the executive authority of the President. We should, therefore, maintain the constitutional obligation of the President; he can do it directly or through the officers subordinate to him, who are the ministers. Thank you.

MS NSHAIJA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Hon. Mwesigye is directing us to Article 99(4) of the Constitution, which I think is very clear. In this case, the minister is subordinate to the President.So we can say that the appointment should be done by the minister in consultation with the President but approved by the council. Thank you.

MR TANNA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We are in this august House as its members but we are neither the first nor the last occupants. There are precedents that have been set. The Hansard rolls from the early 1960s to-date uninterrupted. I take offence when some of our colleagues, including the most respected Attorney-General, casually says that it does not make a difference whether it is director-general or executive director. The two are clearly and explicitly explained in the Oxford Dictionary, which if somebody has access to the internet they can clearly see the differences between the two.

Some of my colleagues have laboured to explain that if there are directorates below the director-general then it is okay to have the director-general, but under the executive director we also have directors. If we looked at what we have been doing as a Parliament, not me as an occupant in this House or you as its chair but our predecessors, and we take time and read the Hansard and understand the spirit of creating these bodies or councils, we will have examples. We have UNBS, which we debated extensively; we also have NITA-U, which we recently set up and several other historical councils we have put together as Parliament of Uganda. The reason for naming them “executive director” originated from the appointing authority and, therefore, he who appoints shall dictate the title.

Secondly, the roles; if somebody is answerable to a council above then you cannot be a director-general.The Commissioner-General, for example, is answerable to the minister; there is no board. So we must seek proper explanation –(Interruption)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Thank you, hon. Tanna, for giving way. Mr Chairman, we have a fully-fledged board for Uganda Revenue Authority. Recently, it was headed by hon. Sendaula who you all know very well. So that statement is not correct.

MR TANNA: I thank my honourable colleague, but I would like the Attorney-General to further expound. This House gave the committee chairperson a task, in the past debate that we had, to explain why the minister is proposing “director-general” instead of “executive director”.We have not received that explanation. 

What is the rationale of changing something that has existed for some time and yet it has been operating, like you rightly directed us? We are not satisfied and therefore we should not be swayed by saying, “a rose by any other name would smell the same”. In my opinion, the Attorney-General ought to guide us in a precise manner as to why the title should be changed from the executive director to the director-general.

The second issue that has been on the Floor is about the appointment.Again, why are we trying to reinvent the wheel yet this authority has been in existence? Mr Chairman, you have rightly guided us that this authority has been performing all along and all we are trying to do is to insert the council to govern its management. Why the debate that now it ceases to be the President appointing and it is the minister instead or vice versa? Why the change? 

These two issues where given to the committee chairperson to go and come back with the rationale, but we have not received that as a House. So I beg my colleagues to consider that position before we decide on the matter. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Learned Attorney-General, when you come up, there are two issues to deal with. One is about the title of the head of this secretariat and secondly, who should appoint that person. Those are the only issues for now -

MR RUHINDI: How can Dr Lyomoki seek clarification before I begin talking? (Laughter)

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would also want the Attorney-General to guide us on whether it should be Parliament to decide on the naming or if the appointment should be done by the minister or by the President, or is there a standard format by Government. When some boards are appointed by ministers and others by the President, there may be a bit of superiority where some boards will think they are more powerful than others because they are appointed by the President. Isn’t there a format, so that we know that for this nature of board, or for all of them, appointment is done by the ministers and approval by the council? If we just come here and we look at case by case, we might end up making some boards seem more powerful than others. 

I just want to find out whether there is particular guidance within Government in terms of the appointment of boards. I seek clarification to that effect.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. As I said, I worked at the Population Secretariat for six years and the Director of Population Secretariat was appointed by the President. That is very important. We also had district population offices across the country and directorates headed by a director. The head of the institution was a director and we also had directors of different departments.

This institution is a very serious one and it is one that needs a link with the head of state. I am not in any way undermining the power and authority of the minister but we could also look at examples from other countries. In Ghana, the head of the Population Council is appointed by the President. In Malaysia, that is the same situation. I have actually gone on the internet and there are seven countries doing that. I have tried to look for a country where the head of a population council is appointed by a minister and I do not see that.

Given the fact that the committee did not give compelling reasons as to why we should change the existing status - If you look at what we have just passed in the minutes, it says that the role of the Secretariat is to promote the integration of population factors in development planning at the national and lower levels. This needs some support from the head of state. After all, a minister is working on behalf of the President and I do not find any problem with giving it to the President. 

I just want to make sure that this information comes out because I know when hon. Ruhindi stands to speak here, he will not be speaking as the hon. Ruhindi but he will also be backed by Article 119. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: He is the learned Attorney-General.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairperson, first of all, I maintain what I said here before - what is in a name? I hope that hon. Tanna will oblige. Why I say this is because whoever has stood up to say one thing or another has not stood up to propose any substantive amendment either to the functions or to the powers of that office. For as long as the powers and functions of an office remain the same, to me what you designate that office to be becomes immaterial. 

I have no problem with this person being referred to as executive director; in fact, if it is for purposes of consistency, because the existing offices are being occupied by people called executive directors, so be it. We may hear from the sector minister but I do not have any major problem with that, whichever way you take.

On the issue of who appoints, I like the reasoning of hon. Lyomoki; he asked, “Is there a particular format or precedence that guides us?” Yes, there is. Of course, we faced the situation when we were dealing with the petroleum Bills and those ones were a bit of a departure. However, when you talk in terms of constitutional bodies - Uganda Human Rights Commission, Judicial Service Commission and so forth - you will note that all appointments are by the President and that is where there is a departure. For these other administrative and executive offices or bodies, appointment is always by the sector minister.

In any case, under the Constitution, as hon. Mwesigye put it, ministers perform work on behalf of the head of state. The President is the chairperson of Cabinet and most of these appointments, whether of boards of such bodies or offices, go through Cabinet and it is easier that way in terms of management and reporting purposes. Imagine if you were to have a council and the President appointing on the advice of the minister and the council has not made any input - rarely may it - and then you find that this person appointed will be reporting to the council; where will the point of loyalty be? You will lose it completely.

Given this background, my proposal is to go with the proposal by the chairperson. I was interacting with the sector minister and he is more or less in agreement that the minister should appoint on the advice of the council. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the point has been raised that the existing head of the Population Secretariat was appointed by the President. If that is any information to go by, what would be the implication of that, learned Attorney-General?

MR RUHINDI: This Bill has a sector minister. I consulted him when I was making my submission, but I do not think I find any contradiction because we are making a law. Parliament is legislating and I do not think there is any contradiction whatsoever.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Members, the guidance from the learned Attorney-General is that there is no fundamental departure on the name. Should I put the question to which name should be adopted? In the Bill it is director-general. The proposal is that it should be executive director. The learned Attorney-General sees no problem with any name being used. Can I put the question that the name remains as it is in the Bill? I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now I will put the question to the issue of appointment - which authority should appoint this director-general. The position in the Bill is that it should be the President. The committee, after consultation with all the stakeholders, has come to propose that it should be the minister. The learned Attorney-General also seems to have the view that it should be the minister. 

I put the question to the amendment proposed in clause 11(1) that the appointment of the director-general would be performed by the minister on the advice of the council. I now put the question to that.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There was another amendment proposed. The proposed amendment in sub clause (2) falls by the wayside, but there is a proposed amendment in sub clause (4)(b). There is a proposal to rephrase (4)(b) to read as proposed by the chairperson of the committee. It is about the cessation of the office by the director-general.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, I think we need to first get clause 11 (2) out of the way.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Which one?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Clause 11 (2) has a minor amendment at the end to replace the word “council” with “minister”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, it reads that, “There shall be a director-general appointed –

MR LUGOLOOBI: No, no, it should read, “The Director-General shall be the secretary to the council and the accounting officer of the council” and not the minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Where is that?

MR LUGOLOOBI: It is in the Bill. In the Bill it says that he or she shall be the accounting officer of the minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, I think that was a major typing error. I think that is clear. I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is another proposal to redraft clause 11(4)(b), about what can cause the director-general to lose office. There is a proposal from committee. Learned Attorney-General, you are an expert on drafting issues; is there any fundamental departure proposed?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, maybe I need to restate it because it seems many Members do not have copies of the report. Our proposal is that we amend (4)(b) to read as follows: 
“The Director-General shall cease to hold office if- 
(b) he or she is removed from office by the minister on the recommendation of the council for…” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, the proposal is only to replace “minister” with “President” and the rest of the drafting remains the same. I think that now becomes consequential on what we have approved above.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Going by what we have just passed, the appointing authority will now be the President but the chairperson of the committee is proposing that the person to disappoint will be the minister. So, it now becomes a consequential amendment. Since we have agreed that the President will appoint, it should be the President to disappoint.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The amendment proposed in clause 11 (4)(b) cannot stand in these circumstances.

MR LUGOLOOBI: I concede, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, now I think there are no further amendments on this except for the redrafting on the abuse of office in (5)(b).

MR LUGOLOOBI: I propose an amendment in (5)(b) to read as follows: “he or she is convicted of an offence involving abuse of office, fraud or moral turpitude.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Learned Attorney-General, is there such an offence as moral turpitude?

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The issue I also want to raise is how court is going to convict somebody on moral turpitude. I just want to know how we can go about that. Otherwise, I propose that we leave that part of the amendment out. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Learned Attorney-General, there is abuse of office, so what value is added by the words “fraud” and “moral turpitude”?

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, I have another view. It looks like we do not need (5). When you read clause 11(5) in the Bill, it says, “For the purposes of subsection (4)(b)(ii), the Director-General shall be taken to be guilty of misconduct if…” and then we have (a), (b) and (c). When you look 11 (4)(b)(ii), it says,  “he or she is removed from office by the President on the recommendation of the minister for- (ii) gross misconduct…”.

My view is that we should leave the determination of the misconduct, gross or not, to the discretion of the minister. If the minister is convinced, in consultation with the President, that this person is not good enough to hold this office, without even labouring to spell out what amounts to gross misconduct under (5), there is no need to leave (5) here. That is why I suggest that we delete the entire (5). That is my understanding of this situation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is bankruptcy gross misconduct?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, in the past we have been consistent with the provisions of the Constitution where we talk about being convicted by a competent court of a crime involving dishonesty or moral turpitude. So, we can use the same wording.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: How about the submission that the entire sub clause (5) should be deleted because they are trying to define gross misconduct? Sub-clause (5) talks about what amounts to gross misconduct.

MR RUHINDI: No, we should not delete that one. We should maintain the main clause because this is actually an umbrella clause and it is a constitutional provision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Which one, because the entire sub-clause (5) is defining (4)(b)(ii), which is gross misconduct?

MR RUHINDI: Gross misconduct? Can I internalise this a bit, Mr Chairman?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please. Are there any other contributions on this? The point being made by the Member for Padyere is that in clause 11(5) we are elaborating, “For the  purposes of subsection (4)(b)(ii) – that is for the purposes of  gross misconduct - the Director-General shall be taken to be guilty of misconduct if - (a), (b) (c).” 

Now the Member for Padyere is saying that gross misconduct should be a matter for the discretion of whoever will be determining what amounts to gross misconduct. Better still, what would amount to gross misconduct could be defined in the terms and conditions of service of those people. 

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Once we are making legislation, all things must be clear. If we delete this, a person could take the appointing authority to court later claiming that the authority had no basis of determining whether they have been badly behaved. I do not see why we should not clearly explain what gross misconduct is and the conditions under which a person must see you as behaving, if I could say, in a miscellaneous way. (Laughter) 

Under those circumstances, I beg that the honourable Member for Padyere should accept that we retain this to help the person who is monitoring - the supervisor - so that in case there is misbehaviour, it is very clear. The supervisor will just quote and then he sets you free. Thank you.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I think there is a remedy that we should employ here. In sub clause (4), we have paragraphs (a) and (b), and in (b) we have (i), (ii) and (iii). We should bring in sub clause (5) (a) and (c) here and substitute (ii), gross misconduct, with “he or she is removed from office by the President on the recommendation of the minister for -” If that person has been convicted, we could say, “…after conviction by a competent court of a crime involving dishonesty or moral turpitude.” I want that one to replace sub clause (4)(b)(ii).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You want it to replace “misconduct”?

MR RUHINDI: To replace “gross misconduct” because this is broad and it is a constitutional provision that we should go by, rather than going into the definition - (Interjections) - let me first finish then you come in. It may be a drafting issue but that one can be sorted out. 

We could also bring in (5)(a) here - “if he or she is declared bankrupt by a competent court or suspends payment or compounds with his or creditors.” – and then wealso have (c). In other words, we should do away with sub clause (5) for purposes of defining by bringing it in sub clause (4). 

Can I repeat? It should read as follows: “The Director-General shall cease to hold office if- (a) he or she resigns…” We can then have (b) by bringing in (a) of (5) - “if he or she is declared bankrupt by a competent court or suspends payment or compounds with his or her creditors.” We can also bring in the (c) - “in the case of a person having professional qualifications, he or she is disqualified or suspended from practicing his or her profession by a competent Authority or ceases to be a member of the profession.” 

Now, you go to (4)(b). I want us to say in (4)(b), “If he or she is removed from office by the President on the recommendation of the minister…”- maybe we can actually have it as a separate paragraph instead of having Roman numerals- “…based on a conviction of a competent court for a crime involving dishonesty or moral turpitude.” We could do it better by making it a paragraph, maybe (a), (b), (c) or (d), without putting the Roman numerals, and then we delete gross misconduct - “If he or she is removed from office by the President on the recommendation of the minister based on a conviction by a competent court of a crime involving dishonesty or moral turpitude.” So, we can easily have everything in sub clauses (5) and (4) together. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clearer, honourable members?

MS NAMARA: Mr Chairman, I appreciate the submission of the Attorney-General but he leaves out one important issue, that is, incompetence. You are leaving it out yet it would be a ground for dismissal. You did not mention it and so I thought –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  That will stay, so it does not have to be amended.   

MS NAMARA: He did not mention it so I thought he was leaving it out.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes. That is the issue that the honourable Member for Bulamogi wanted to raise. 

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much. I think the modification made by the Attorney-General is okay. My only issue is with the provisions raised in sub clause (5) especially (c)   -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Sub clause (5) (c) will be a standalone sub clause in clause 11(4). Like sub clause (4) (a), it will be a standalone instead of subjecting it to gross misconduct. 

DR LYOMOKI: That is right. My issue is about the point raised by the principal. In (c), it says, “in the case of a person having professional qualifications, he or she is disqualified or suspended from practising his or her profession by a competent Authority…” – That is okay, but then it goes on to say, “…or ceases to be a member of the profession.” 

What I was wondering is, supposing someone has a professional qualification in something else and it is not even connected to why he was appointed the director-general; here, we are assuming that the appointment was because of those qualifications, but this provision does not link the qualifications to his or her being appointed. It can be abused. Someone will be appointed and because of some other reason somewhere in the profession, which is not even connected to the person’s being in this particular office, he is stopped from being a member of the profession and that becomes a ground. I just want to find out the rationale. Don’t we need to put more emphasis on whether these qualifications were taken into consideration in his appointment? I just want to find out whether it will not be abused.

MR RUHINDI:  I want to seek clarification, Mr Chairman, from Dr Lyomoki; under what circumstances would he lose his professional qualification of being a doctor other than through some kind of miscarriage or malpractice or unethical conduct. Once a professional, always a professional; I want anyone here who is a professional to give me an exception to that rule. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the point which was being made by the honourable Member for workers is that you are a lawyer and also an accountant and in this particular establishment, you have been employed as a professional accountant. Now, the Law Council decides to fire you as a lawyer; would the firing by the Law Council also affect your appointment as an accountant in this particular agency? That was the point. 

The response is that if you are a professional accountant and also a professional lawyer and you misbehave as a lawyer and you are fired from that profession, that same conduct runs through your professional qualifications.

DR LYOMOKI: My point was not about being fired, my point was about ceasing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: How else can you cease being a member of a professional body?

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have teachers and students of Walugembe Memorial Secondary School in Bugasa represented by hon. Kiyingi Deogratius and hon. Namaganda Susan. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them.

MR BAHATI: I think the point raised by the MP for workers, particularly on the last part - Attorney-General if you may listen - ceasing to be a member of the profession –(Interjection)- Like a professional accountant, if you fail to pay your membership fees, you cease to be a member of the accounting body.

MS KABAALE: I would like to give information with two examples. In a recent situation, the accountant of OPM, one Kazinda, was disqualified from the body of accountants. The other example is from the USA where the executive directors of banks, who were accountants and almost caused bankruptcy of most organisations, were disqualified from their professions. I think we can make use of those examples to make this law.

MR BAHATI: I want to suggest, Mr Chair, that maybe we can leave up to “a competent Authority” and then we leave out that leg of ceasing to be a member of the profession. This is because ceasing to be a member of a profession can be interpreted differently. You can even choose to cease to be a member. 

The point we want to put forward is if you have a case of misconduct that has led to the forfeiture of the membership of the professional body; that is the point we want. However, you can choose not to be a member; for example, if you do not renew your membership of ACCA, you cease to be a member but should that also affect your job?

MR ANYWARACH: I would think that clause 11 has been overtaken by events. I would move that this clause be stood over so that -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, what do mean taken over by events?

MR ANYWARACH: There are so many drafting issues that were coming in. However, substantially, we are also seeing that the issue hon. Lyomoki has brought in would really go in resonance with 11(3) if only the executive director was appointed on the basis of his qualification; the very qualification is in dispute due to the body to which he professionally belongs. 

Sub clause (3) says, “The Director-General shall be a person of high moral character and proven integrity, with the relevant qualifications and experience relating to the functions of the Council.” Now, if the relevant qualifications are the ones going to be in question due to the decision of the professional body or authority, then there we would consider not just ceasing to be a member but say, “where the authority finds him incompetent or for some other gross misconduct, he cannot be a member of such a profession.” That is why I was moving that way.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Chairman, I want to inform the honourable member that normally, when people are asked to present their CVs, people bring in whatever they think will help them to sail through. The issue of relevant qualifications is very important to us because what you brought in is relevant and that is why you are considered higher than others who brought less. So, I would really support the other Member who said that we stop at “by competent authority” and then this issue of ceasing to be a member of the profession can be catered for.

I want to add something else to what the Attorney-General has said – (Interruption)

MR NDEEZI: Mr Chairman, my understanding is that when you are looking for somebody to work for you, you identify that person on the basis of individual qualifications and capabilities, and if it is time for work, that person will be responsible for what he or she does and will be held accountable individually.

I have a problem with this business of mixing individual accountability with accountability for professional organisations or professional groups. After being a professional doctor, I am a member of the doctors’ professional body and if I cease to be a member of the doctors’ professional body, it does not mean that I am now less qualified. So, Mr Chairman, my view is that we must separate the individual who wants to work for us and the professional body. I am proposing that the professional body should not form part of the Bill altogether.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I wish to make an amendment to what I said before. There is where I had wanted to capture what is in the Constitution against sub clause (4) (b) (ii). I had said earlier, “if he or she is removed from office by the President on the recommendation of the minister on the basis of a conviction by a competent court of a crime involving dishonesty or moral turpitude” That is not correct because once one is convicted, it should be automatic; there should be no recommendation. You should just cease. So, it should stand alone among the paragraphs - “The Director-General shall cease to hold office if he or she is convicted by a competent court of a crime involving dishonesty or moral turpitude.” We can then delete (4)(b)(ii) because that would capture it, and then we shall have brought in the (a), (b) and (c) of (5). 

On (c) of (5), which we are bringing in (4), in answer to what hon. Lyomoki is saying, Mr Chairman, you were saying that you may be a professional lawyer, a professional accountant and then you are selected on the basis of being a professional accountant. That is what is captured in paragraph (c) because the opening words say, “In the case of a person having professional qualifications”. Now, when you are finishing that sentence and you say, “…ceases to be a member of the profession”, it refers to the profession based on which you were appointed. So, there is no contradiction. However, for the avoidance of doubt, you can put there, “or ceases to be a member of the relevant profession.” I think that would cover it, for the avoidance of doubt; otherwise, to me it is clear. With those few observations, I move that you put the question. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, for the record, the proposal made by the Attorney-General is to absorb sub clause (5) into (4) in the following ways: in (4), the main sub clauses would absorb the (a) in (5) and the (b) and (c), and then (b) in (4) would remain as it is with the absence of gross misconduct in (2). Is that clear? Can I put the question to that amendment? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: There was a minor amendment, which we had proposed, that he has also adopted. It is an amendment on (5) (b) which the Attorney-General has also captured. You have not mentioned that for the Hansard.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is the one where we said it should now be phrased in the terms of the Constitution, that if he or she is convicted of an offence involving - 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Abuse of office?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no. You changed the whole thing –

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, it was abuse of office, fraud and moral turpitude.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no. You changed the whole thing. Please restate that. You changed it to “…by a competent court of an offence involving…” -

MR RUHINDI: This would be one of the paragraphs in (4) of 11: “If he or she is convicted by a competent court of a crime involving dishonesty or moral turpitude.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, that is the provision in the Constitution; that is what he had read. So I put the question to the amendment, honourable minister?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, when you were summarising, I did not hear you say that we have dropped that part under (5) (c), “or ceases to be a member of the profession.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That one was not dropped. They only said “relevant”. However, by using “relevant”, we would just be using too many words because it is specific to “the profession”, meaning the one referred to. I think the learned Attorney-General was just being accommodative on this particular occasion but there is nothing gained or lost by not putting “relevant”. So I put the question to the amendment as proposed and summarised – 

MR NDEEZI: Mr Chairman, I am uncomfortable with the expression “relevant professional body”. The Attorney-General has given an example of lawyers and accountants who have professional bodies. What happens if I come from any other discipline that does not have a professional body? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This one relates to the case of a person having professional qualifications. So if you do not have a professional qualification, then you do not fall in this category.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Chairman, honestly, and with all due respect to the Attorney-General, this provision is very redundant. Secondly, I feel that it is very discriminatory. What happens if a member of a professional body gets mixed up in politics and runs after you for political reasons and not for competence? What do you do? So, I would feel comfortable if we drop the provision altogether.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I will put the question to the amendment as proposed by hon. Ndeezi that (c) be dropped on the issue of professional qualifications. I will put the question to that, 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can I now put the question to the amendment as it is? I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the learned Attorney-General. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS ASAMO: Mr Chair, clause 11 (4) (b) part (i) says, “inability to perform the functions of his or her office arising out of physical or mental incapacity.” I was wondering about the degree of physical or mental incapacity. If this director-general gets an accident and maybe one of his legs is cut off, that will be a physical challenge; will he be thrown out of the office? I ask this from a human rights perspective. So I want to amend and say that this this person leaves his or her office arising out of permanent physical or mental incapacity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But, honourable member, the amputation of a leg is permanent.

MS ASAMO: What is the degree? When my leg is off and I have been the director-general, automatically I can be pushed out of office and yet I can still work.

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, I just want to give some information to the honourable member. If the person involved in this particular position loses a leg in an accident but his functions do not really require him to have a leg, he can continue being a director-general. He has got his leg, arms, eyes and his head and he can properly reason. So, that particular disability will not affect his ability to continue working in the office. They are only talking about a physical disability which affects that person’s ability to continue to perform the functions for which he or she was chosen. Thank you.

MS ASAMO: Here, I just want to say that we could add those words he has mentioned – “if it affects the performance”.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But that is what the clause is saying – “inability to perform the functions of his or her office arising out of physical or mental incapacity”.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, I just want to allay the fears of our colleagues. The functions of the director-general are clearly spelt out in clause 12 and they do not include playing football or anything like that. So even after losing a limb by amputation, the director-general will still perform his functions as they appear here. So I think the way it is here is clear, honourable colleague.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Members, I now put the question that clause 11, as amended, stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What is the issue again, Attorney-General?

MR RUHINDI: The sector minister may wish to have this clause recommitted –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We have taken a vote – 

MR RUHINDI: With the incorporation of (5) (c) into (4), the deletion of that (5) (c) is fundamental – (Interjections) -   I thought we deleted it. Did we not? [HON. MEMBERS: “No.”]- Amen. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, it was not deleted. What happened is we brought whatever was provided for under (5) and incorporated it in (4). That is what we did. Isn’t it? We dismantled (5) and incorporated it in (4). So, where (4) (b) is will remain as it is. Mr Chairman, is that the correct position? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes.

Clause 12

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, we are proposing to add a new sub clause (5) that should read as follows: “The Director-General may delegate any of the above duties to any other staff of the Council”. The justification is: to provide for delegation of the director-general’s powers. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do you want to say, “in writing”? Learned Attorney-General, can you delegate on phone? It is not implied here. The ED can turn round and say, “I did not make that phone call”. Delegation must be in writing. Do you want to restate that, Mr Chairman?

MR LUGOLOOBI: “The Director-General may delegate any of the above duties to any other staff of the Council in writing.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The drafting people will see where the “in writing” bit fits properly. I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, I thought that we should debate this, although following the decisions made earlier it would follow that the committee proposal falls by the wayside. However, I think we may need to re-examine it critically and see if we are not rendering the council ineffective in terms of recruitment of staff. What we are trying to do is to import all the staff from the existing secretariat into the new council regardless of whatever circumstances. I thought that we should have a debate on this one.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, this is a transitional provision and it is very usual. We are not making this law because the Population Secretariat has ceased; no, we are just reinforcing the Population Secretariat. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, in the spirit of your guidance, I think we do not really need further debate. What this clause 27(1) (a) is saying is that if you were an employee of the secretariat before commencement of this law, you remain an employee. Part (b) then goes ahead to say that the amount of money you are receiving as salary will not be varied; it will remain the same. That is my understanding. There should be no interruption of your employment for even one month or one year or whatsoever. Therefore, I think 27 is straightforward, Mr Chairman.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Chairman, I have a problem with the word “shall” in (1) (a). It says, “all persons who were employed in the Population Secretariat immediately before the commencement of this Act shall continue in the employment of the Council.” What if somebody is not interested in remaining in employment? It means that we, as Parliament, must compensate that person to stay in employment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can the person resign? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. This is a transitional provision. It does not mean that if we say all the employees of the Population Secretariat are saved with this legislation, they cannot resign or leave employment. 

We had a lengthy discussion on this issue. The Population Secretariat has steered this law and, therefore, it would be unfair for them to bring a law which eats them up. For your information, the Population Secretariat is actually thin and lean; there are not very many employees. So, it is only fair that as a transitional arrangement, they remain in the secretariat but when the council comes, it will look at how to expand it and improve the staffing and so forth. 

I just want to allay the fears of hon. Ndeezi. Even when we save the staff of the Population Secretariat, one will still be able to leave on his or her own accord if they want to resign. 

MR ANYWARACH: This is just simple information. The information I want to give to the honourable Dr Baryomunsi is that the rule of law is that you are given a right. So, this “shall” is actually giving you a right and is a general rule. The exception can be within your own desire, but the fact is that you shall continue to protect your right. If you want to opt out, yes, but we cannot say, “may continue”. If we say “may”, this will mean that those who ought to have continued are now at the mercy of the new authority. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ndeezi, would you like to withdraw your objection so that I can take the Member for Kyaaka County?

MR NDEEZI: Mr Chairperson, I concede. However, my problem is that we are setting a precedent where we have Parliament making a law to compel some people to be employed in certain places. Maybe we do not know their conscience but if we say, “shall”, then you must go and work there. (Laughter) 

MR KWEMARA: Thank you, Chairperson. It is unfortunate hon. Ndeezi has withdrawn, but I think we are setting a bad precedent to say that the staff of the secretariat should automatically become staff of the council. This is because there is a very big difference between the council and the secretariat. There is a very big difference in their mandate. The secretariat was formed to come up with the National Population Policy and within the National Population Policy there is a provision for the council. My view is that let us open up; let these staff compete and those who cannot join the council can revert to the Ministry of Finance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no. Let us not make laws as though this was the first law we were making. There are transitional provisions for all laws that are passed with existing structures or people. This is not limiting the expansion of the staff of the secretariat; it does not do that. The issue is that when they come and they are there, it is up to the council to do the review. This is not a restructuring Bill for the secretariat. Let me put the question to this clause.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, we have attempted to reformulate clause 4 based on what the Members were saying and we propose that it reads as follows: 
“Composition of the Council 
(1) 	The National Population Council shall be composed of the following: 
(a) the chairperson.
(b) the vice-chairperson. 
(c) two members.
(d) the Permanent Secretary of the ministry responsible for finance. 
(i) 	the Uganda National Bureau of Statistics.
(ii) 	the National Planning Authority.
(iii)	the ministry responsible for gender.
(iv) 	the ministry responsible for health.
(v) 	the ministry responsible for education.
(vi) 	the ministry responsible for internal affairs.
(vii) 	the ministry responsible for local government.
(viii) 	One representative from the civil society organisations.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that in your report? What I have is “and three representatives from civil society organisations, one of whom shall be a woman.”

MR LUGOLOOBI: We have since moved from that position.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Oh, I see, but the Chair was not notified. Okay, that is the proposal. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, we have other sub clauses; I do not know if I should proceed straightaway. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, proceed.

MR LUGOLOOBI: “(2) The chairperson and vice-chairperson and the other two members referred to in paragraph (1) (c) shall be appointed by the President on such terms and conditions as may be determined by the President.

(3) 	The President shall, in appointing the persons under subsection (2) of this section, have regard to the knowledge of the persons and their ability to contribute to the work of the Council.

(4) 	The director-general appointed under section 11 shall act as the secretary to the Council and shall arrange the business for and cause to be recorded and kept the minutes of the meetings of the council.”

The justification is that there is need to involve the relevant authorities that would help guide the implementation of the strategies laid down in the national population policy. Secondly, the chairperson of the council must be a technical person knowledgeable in population matters to help move the population agenda. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is the proposal from the committee. They are getting broader representation from the institutions instead of specific offices. In the Bill, it is permanent secretaries but they are now proposing representatives from institutions. That is one departure. The second departure is to have a chairperson and vice-chairperson who are not part of the institution already, or from outside, who can keep the institution running. There is the last bit that has been proposed - There are two members also.

MR SABILA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. When I look at the composition, there is one issue that has become silent, and that is the issue of gender. Although it is usually obvious that we have women, it should be clear that one third of the composition must be women so that we move together. If we do not talk about women, I think we shall get a problem.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So the proposal is that there should be an overriding clause making provision for a fraction for women – that is one third. 

MrS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I thought the last time we discussed very well and agreed that one representative should be a person with disability knowledgeable on population issues. From what the committee chairperson has read now, I have not heard anything about people with disability; what happened to that part of the clause? 

I think the issue of people with disability is a serious one. Often when they carry out a census, we are not enumerated properly thus we are underrepresented and as a result, we are not well planned for. So I still insist and beg you to include a person with disability on this council, so that they can advise the council and the secretariat so that our issues are included. Disability and gender go hand in hand because we have our peculiar problems. Please, can we institute our representation of persons with disability? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let me guide so that we can shorten this debate. There is a proposal from the committee bringing in a completely different structure of a different chairperson other than a permanent secretary and a different vice-chairperson other than the previous arrangement. In other words, these people will be outsiders but knowledgeable in the subject matter. Can I first put the question to that particular aspect? 

Let us agree to the principle that the chairperson, the vice-chairperson and two other people should be appointed by the person responsible from outside the government institutions already listed. Do we agree to that principle? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, of all this, there is a rider for women, which will be one third, and a provision for people with disabilities. How are we going to structure that so that it is captured properly here? Can I sample the opinion of the Attorney-General on this matter? We have agreed that there should be a provision for women. We have also agreed that there should be a provision for people with disabilities. Have we agreed on those two?

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, I have a problem with the numbers - one third and so on - for the moment. Because we are getting representatives from ministries, there might be a problem with that. Maybe we could agree that from the chairperson, vice-chairperson and the other members who are directly appointed, one third of those must be women. However, if you are going to look at the whole council and say that one third of them must be women, then you could have a problem because it is the ministries nominating the person to go and they may not consider this. There is also another issue that comes up. Each ministry is nominating independently of the other so they would not know whether the other ministry has nominated a woman or a man.

In addition, still on the issue of people being appointed by the ministry, I need clarification as to why they are departing from the original position of having permanent secretaries. I thought the reason for having permanent secretaries was because they wanted to raise the stature of the National Population Council. I need clarification on that change they are proposing, where they will just have a representative from the ministry rather than the permanent secretary. 

MR NDEEZI: Mr Chairperson, all I want to say is that the day we were sworn in as Members of Parliament, we agreed to abide by the provisions of the Constitution. I want to remind you that the issue of one third representation is a constitutional one. There is no way we can challenge it today. We must abide by what the Constitution says. So, I beg my brother to please accept the one third.

Also, the issue of representation of people with disabilities is a constitutional arrangement. So, please, I beg you to accept. Attorney-General, please guide us.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the departure from naming specific officers as permanent secretaries has been suggested and probably met. This is because the council will not constitute itself. All these names will have to be sent to somebody and that somebody should be responsible for making sure that the principles we are agreeing upon, of gender and disability, are incorporated in this. So, the argument that it is only the four would not therefore stand. If it is the minister responsible saying, “Uganda National Bureau of Statistics, send me people”, they will look at the list and say, “please, send me somebody like this” and they will be able to find them.

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, could we first resolve the previous issue of whether it should be a PS or just a representative, because if it is just a representative -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, let me deal with that. The proposal in the Bill is that they should be permanent secretaries. An amendment has been proposed from the committee that they should be representatives of specific institutions rather than specific office bearers. In other words, discretion should be given to the nominating institutions to supply a name.  I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAHATI: Having resolved that issue and while waiting for the Attorney-General to guide us, could we insert something to say, “one third will be women and one of whom shall be a person with – (Interjections) – listen. “One third will be women and one will be a person with disabilities.” What I am proposing is that we must have three women on this council and we must have one person -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, not three women but one third.

MR BAHATI: One third of the council will be women and one person will be a person with disability. Can we formulate something around that?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, when you count the number of members for this Council, they will be 11 -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, they will be 12 because they say two others, not three others.

DR BARYOMUNISI: If they are 13, it means to make one third we are looking at four women.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: They are 12. With the amendment they are 12 because they said in (viii) it is two, not three, from the civil society organisations. So that makes it 12 not 13.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. If we are talking of 12 members, then one third brings us to four. This is simple mathematics. So, on this council, we have at least four women. 

In constituting the council, the minister will guide these different ministries. I am sure there are very many women in the ministries with technical knowledge on issues of population but it may be possible that among the officers coming from the ministries, you may not get a person with disability. So maybe it is best to say that of the two members, one should be a person with disability, so that we are sure we have made a specific provision. 

We could, therefore, say, “two members, one of whom shall be a person with disability”, and then at least four women will come from the entire membership of this council. That will address our concern.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay? So the rider is that from the 12, one third will be women. Of the special appointees, who are four, that is the chairperson, vice-chairperson and the two people from the civil society -

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, the two are not necessarily from civil society. There is a specific provision for civil society, which is one person, but we have two who could be selected from anywhere.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, actually there are 13 people.

MR LUGOLOOBI: No, they are actually 12. We have the chairperson, vice-chairperson, the two members, the Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Finance, UBOS, the National Planning Authority, the ministries responsible for gender, health, education, internal affairs, local governments, and then civil society organisations.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So they are 13.

MR AYOO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think we would be much better off if we left room for selecting one person with disability from among the 13, other than narrowing it to five, which can be very difficult. So, if it is from the representatives for women, or those ones coming from the ministries or those five appointed, it would be easier. Narrowing it down to the five will give the person selecting them a difficult task.

Mr Chairman, you may be aware that with immunization, disability is also coming down. So, it may be difficult at that level. It is better to leave the 13 other than restricting it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, the proposal is that the special representation of the women and people with disabilities should be taken from all. Is that okay?

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, just a small issue. When the chairman read the list, I do not recall hearing the director-general as being part of the council yet we have been told they will be the secretary to that council. Did I just not hear properly? In the original Bill, the director-general is listed as a member of the council. Also, in the other clauses, it is said that the director-general is the secretary to the council. Is it I who did not hear properly or he left the director-general out?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is the director-general a member of the council? Minister or the chairperson of the committee, please advise.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, we considered this matter but we felt that in trying to comply with the principles of good corporate governance, the director-general should not be a member of the council but he could be a secretary to that council. We have actually provided for that under 11(2) where it is says that the director-general shall be the secretary to the council and the accounting officer to that council.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, would it be important to make it clear that the director-general will be an ex officio?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, it should be made clear that the director-general is an ex officio member of the council and that he or she shall be the secretary to that council. Of course, it is known that ex officio members do not have the right to vote.

Before I leave the Floor, I would like to agree with the principle of having representatives from these ministries for the simple reason of looking for special expertise. However, when you leave it as broad as this, this practice has been abused because a ministry can even send an intern and call them a representative. They do it, by the way. They can become very busy and they will just pick on so and so to come and represent them. In my view, we should put a benchmark; for example, we can say that we shall need one representative maybe not below the rank of a commissioner, or director, or whatever the minister wants to propose, for as long we have got a benchmark. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, you can put a rider for purposes of paragraph (d) – “the persons appointed shall not be…” – Please, conclude the matter.

MR RUHINDI: The committee has a proposal, which is in (d), which says, “one representative from…” I propose that we say, “one representative not below the rank of commissioner from…”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, the proposal is that this person should not be below the rank of a director or is it a commissioner; which one is which?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, I also support the proposal that that representative should not be below the rank of a commissioner. These are people who have the knowledge of the operations of their department and who have got the authority to take decisions on behalf of their ministries.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, the minister is proposing that the person should not be below the rank of a commissioner.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Chairman, we do not want to underrate or get people who do not have a voice in those ministries. The intention of getting these representatives is to bring them on board so that they integrate population issues in their programmes. So, you need somebody at a certain level. I want to say that this person from the ministry should either be a permanent secretary or somebody not below the rank of –(Interjections)– Yes, I want to bring it back –(Interjections)– No, we did not vote on it. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is information from the relevant minister in these matters.

MRS SEZI: Mr Chairman, the commissioner is the vote holder. Being a vote holder, the commissioner can plan for population matters. The level of a commissioner is the same as that of an under-secretary. The preference is for a commissioner because the commissioner is usually in the professional line and not administration, which is the relevant area for an under-secretary. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I just want to seek clarification from the Minister of Public Service. In bodies like UBOS, at what level is the commissioner? You can have a commissioner at ministries of health or finance but UBOS only has departments that are headed by directors with the executive director at the top. So, what is the equivalent of a commissioner in UBOS or civil society?

MRS SEZI: Mr Chairman, whatever level one is at, whether it is at a director level before the director-general, we look at the salary scale of the job holder for us to relate. However, I do not see any difference between a director at UBOS and a commissioner because both are subject holders in those two organs.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, can we just make it a general clause to say, “Somebody at the level of a commissioner” so that wherever it applies - 

DR BARYOMUNSI: The information I want to give to the Minister of Public Service is that the nomenclature in the line ministries is such that commissioners are heads of department. In institutions like UBOS, Uganda AIDS Commission, the heads of department are directors. So, they are at the same level. So, we could just say, “at the level of a commissioner.” That will be relevant.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Who proposed this amendment?

MR LUGOLOOBI: The Attorney-General proposed the amendment, but what he said was: “A representative not below the rank of a commissioner” from the agencies as we listed them. However, I want to propose some minor –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we deal with this first?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, on that list we had included the CSOs to which that expression of a commissioner does not apply.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, then you make the CSOs stand alone.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, can you restate it.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Should I restate the entire list?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now (d) will apply to people at the level of commissioner. That is (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi) and (vii), and thereafter it becomes (e).

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, and it will read, “one representative from the civil society organisations”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The other two have disappeared now.

MR LUGOLOOBI: The other two were just open.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, you do not want to list them separately? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: We listed them after the vice-chairperson. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is fine. So you are not assigning any qualifications for those ones. I will put the question.

MRS SEZI: Mr Chairman, I think the issue of having someone at commissioner level is in terms of the job content. Whether you come from the private sector or the civil society, your responsibilities must be equivalent or must be at that level. So, we should not make a separation. The one from the civil society must be holding functions and responsibilities that are equivalent to a commissioner. That is what we are looking for, so that the discussions can be at the same level and they do not give us people at a lower level. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, this one will apply to all; it sounds strange.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, I have difficulties with this. Under (d)(i) to (vii), we are talking about public offices, whereas, as you said, we should have (e) to cater for civil society organisations where qualifications may not necessarily be the same as in the civil service or public service. 

I would, therefore, like that we restrict ourselves to a level not below the commissioner under (d)(i),(ii),(iii),(iv),(v), (vi) and (vii) and then we just leave the one under (e), which was (viii), as it is - “One representative from the civil society organisations”. Now it will be up to the NGO Forum to send to us a person - once we have described what this council is supposed to do - that can be able to measure up to the duties and responsibilities of the council.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: They will also supply curriculum vitae - something that can be assessed - so that the person appointing can have a basis for saying, “This one cannot qualify, this one can qualify.” Of course, the general provision that relates to gender and people with disabilities will be incorporated in the other clause that applies to all the others.

MS ASAMO: Mr Chairman, when you bring in the level of commissioners for the ministries, if I have to be very straight, apart from the assistant commissioner for children there is no commissioner who is disabled. So, it is as if people with disabilities are falling out there. 

I think that it does not cost us anything to say that one of the two members should be a person with disabilities - (Interjections) - The chair, the vice and the two members. I heard the chairman saying the two members can come from anywhere provided they have the qualifications that will be derived by the appointing authority. 

I think that let us just say one of these two members is a person with disability because when you go to the qualifications, I do not think we shall have anybody coming in. A director in National Planning Authority, for example, might not be a disabled person; at least, I know the government institutions. So I beg that we make one person with disability to be among the top four. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal now is clearer. Instead of saying two representatives, they say one person to be appointed by the minister from wherever and then the second person to be appointed from among people with disabilities. So, you split the two into specifics.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Chairman, I am just proposing a remedy, by adding the word “knowledgeable” or “with qualifications on population issues”. I think “knowledgeable” is better. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It does not solve my issue with the hon. Asamo. 

DR KASIRIVU-ATWOOKI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I was very uncomfortable with hon. Matia Kasaija’s suggestion of the CSOs, where you said there should be CVs to be analysed. What do we do in cases where someone who has analysed the CV feels that you do not measure up to the appointment?  

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, what if we propose that out of the four people appointed by the President - that is the chairperson, the vice and the two other people - one of them will be a person with disability, rather than restricting choice of the person with disability to only the two. It is as if you cannot appoint a person with disabilities as a chairperson or a vice-chairperson. If we suggest that out of the four appointed by the President on the council, one of them should be a person with disability, I think that will solve the problem.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Chairman, I want to thank hon. Bahati for this very wise and patriotic proposal. I request that you put the question now. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposal brought by the honourable Member for Ndorwa, hon. Bahati.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, there were other sub clauses. I do not know if I should read them. I thought they were subject to debate but I have not heard –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let me see the ones you have because you have changed them now. Honourable members, there were proposals to bring in new sub clauses as follows: 

“(2)	The chairperson and vice-chairperson and the other two members referred to in paragraph (1) (c) shall be appointed by the President on such terms and conditions as may be determined by the President.

(3)	The President shall, in appointing the persons under subsection (2) of this section, have regard to the knowledge of the persons and their ability to contribute to the work of the Council.

(4)	The Director-General appointed under section 11 shall act as the secretary to the Council and shall arrange the business for and cause to be recorded and kept the minutes of the meetings of the Council.”

There was also a proposal that we say, “The Director-General appointed under section 11 shall be an ex officio member of the Council and shall act as the secretary to the Council and arrange the business for and cause to be recorded and kept the minutes of the meetings of the Council.” Is it clear now? I put the question to the amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, we had stood over a new clause which is on the tenure of the council.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: On page 7, there was a proposal to insert a new clause after clause 4. Did you put it on record? Did you read it?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, I did but we were asked to come up with further amendments on what we had proposed. The bone of contention was on the term limits, whether the term limits that we had proposed should apply to the institutional members of the council. We have now provided an amendment to take care of that. We are proposing to insert a new clause immediately after clause 4 to read as follows:

“(1) A member of the Council appointed under section 4(2) shall hold office for five years and is eligible for reappointment for only one term.
(2) A member of the Council may at any time resign his or her office in writing addressed to the President.
(3) A member of the Council may be removed from office by the President -
(a) for inability to perform the functions required of him or her arising from infirmity of body or mind.
(b)	for misbehaviour or misconduct.
(c)	for conflict of interest.
(d) 	for incompetence.
(e) 	if a member is convicted of an offence involving abuse of office, fraud…”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we will take the other formulation now, “…of an offence involving dishonesty and moral turpitude.”

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes. Then, “(f) if the member is absent without prior permission of the chairperson or without reasonable cause to the satisfaction of the minister for more than four consecutive meetings of the Council or is absent from Uganda for more than 12 consecutive months.
(4) Where a member resigns, dies or is removed from office, ceases to be a member of the institution or body which he or she represents on the Council, the chairperson shall notify the minister of the vacancy and the minister shall notify the President who shall appoint another person to hold the office for the unexpired portion of the member’s term of office.”

The justification is that there is a need for a change mechanism to encourage a constant flow of new ideas into the system.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is clear. Can I put the question to that amendment?

MS ASAMO: Mr Chair, on the tenure of five years, I would like to get clarification from the chairperson about the people who come from the ministries like commissioners; will they also have five-year tenures and then they are renewed?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, that has been clarified; it is only for the four. Can I put the question to this amendment?

MS MUTYABULE: Mr Chairman, I just want to be reminded. At one time when we were discussing something about terms, we had agreed in this Parliament that it should be four years and not five years.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That one was for a specific board. There are many boards that have five years; Uganda Wild Life Authority is one of them.

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, just one more thing about the civil society organisations; won’t we provide a limit for how long they will be on the board?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is part of what was limited.

MR KABAJO: It was limited only for the four people; it did not limit civil society organisations. We should also limit the civil society organisations’ member to a first term and one more term.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I thought it takes care of the whole picture.

MR LUGOLOOBI: No, we did not include the civil society organisations because we thought that the CSO representative is a nominee; it is therefore up to the nominating authority to decide. So we do not have to limit them.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is discretionary to the person nominated. Is that correct? 

MR MADADA: Mr Chairman, I agree on issues of the term limits, but details of how one is supposed to leave I thought should appear in the regulations. We are becoming too detailed yet the minister has a right to make regulations to spell out those issues.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is not just a right; that right has to be given by this law.

MR MADADA: We could give authority to the minister, in the law, to come up with regulations prescribing ways of disqualification and how we get out. Otherwise, it is too detailed here. I do agree on the term limits, but saying somebody will leave office if they left Uganda is too detailed and can be in the regulations.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I do not think it does any harm to have it here. We have already taken a vote on that. The regulations are in clause 24, which we have already adopted.

MS OTENGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have a problem with the proposal by the chair that for the CSOs, it will be left to the appointing authority of the CSOs to decide who comes and how long they stay. I think that is not very right. We are talking of institutions but if you begin saying that the appointing authority will decide, you will find that they can even disorganise the whole council because if you do not agree with that individual, after six months he puts in another person. 

By the way, the civil society is very vibrant and they can decide to be very difficult also. So, this person being appointed should be protected like we are protecting others. We do not leave him in the hands of this one person we are calling the appointing authority.

MR RUHINDI: In respect of these representatives from ministries, these are designated offices. It is not so in the case of civil society organisations. Therefore, the CSOs should also be limited to the terms fixed. If you say the Commissioner Civil Litigation will represent the Minister of Justice in an organisation, it is the office, so you cannot peg it to a period; you cannot say for a term of five or six years. However, if you have a representative of civil society organisations, it is not an office but an individual and when the term expires, that person should go and they should nominate another one. That is my view.

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We could have a situation where all the 13 people have been appointed and they are supposed to have another term and it is given. If the term expires, does it mean that all of them have to go? How do we deal with the institutional memory?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no. That is why they are restricting the terms to the special appointees who come from outside institutions. The ones from the institutions will continue.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Mine was in harmony with the one of the Attorney-General; we are not going to make laws in isolation. If we are going to make a law, it should be a law that is general so that all the appointed members suffer the same consequences, whether appointed by the President or anyone else.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal is to bring the members of the civil society organisations within the bracket of those whose terms expire. Has somebody drafted it to include these people or do we adopt a principle? The principle is that the person nominated from the civil society will operate under term limits. Those rules will apply to the person appointed from the civil society. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, before I go to clause 2, in the public gallery this afternoon we have students and teachers of St Joseph Igayaza Primary School which is represented by Dr Atwooki Kasirivu and hon. Nabbanja Robinah of Kibaale District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, you have put the question to whether the CSO representative should be subjected to the same conditions but you have not put the question to the whole clause and then you are talking about going to clause 2. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You are right. That is an amendment to that clause which we have adopted. Is it a new clause 4 or clause 5? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, we have actually inserted two new clauses after 4 and so this is the second clause that we are adding. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You should state the short title.

MR LUGOLOOBI: The title is “Tenure of the Board.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The clerk should state the title. I put the question that the new clause on tenure of the council, as amended, stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is there anything that needs definition or interpretation, as some people call it?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, we propose to delete the phrase, “continued in existence” and replace it with the word, “established” in the definition of Population Secretariat or Secretariat. So, the new definition is: “Population Secretariat or Secretariat means the National Population Council Secretariat established under section 9.”  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay, learned Attorney-General? That is the definition of the Population Secretariat.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Maybe I will update the learned Attorney-General; when he was not here, we introduced a new clause on the establishment of the Population Secretariat before we talked about the continuance in existence of the existing secretariat.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee that it be “…established under section 9” rather than the phrasing in the Bill. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

The First Schedule, agreed to.

The Second Schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Population Council Bill, 2011” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

5.44
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Mr Speaker, I beg for the indulgence of the House to permit me recommit clause 15, “power to open and operate bank accounts.”

Mr Speaker, the justification for this is that so many local government agencies have been operating illegal bank accounts. The cases in the Office of the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Public Service are very fresh in our memory. So I want to move that although we empower the council to open and maintain bank accounts as they may find it necessary, we need to peg it to something - in consultation with the Auditor-General or as per the Public Finance and Accountability Act. This will put a check with the Accountant-General and on these accounts because someone can wake up one morning and say, “We are opening up an account” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are you proposing? Is it in accordance with the law? 

MR MUWUMA: I propose, “In consultation with the Accountant-General” instead of leaving it open. This is because he is the one supposed to authorise the opening of individual accounts.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will it be under the operation of the public finance and accountability law? Will that be broader than specifically naming an office?

MR MUWUMA: Yes, if it is specific it comes out clearly but if we leave it open – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, wouldn’t you propose that those accounts be opened in accordance with the Public Finance and Accountability Act rather than mentioning the Accountant-General or the Auditor-General? There is a proposal for re-committal of clause 15. I put the question to that proposal.

(Question put and agreed to.)

5.45
MS JOY ATIM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I move in accordance with rule 127 for a re-committal of clause 6. Clause 6(2) says, “The official seal shall, when affixed to any document, be authenticated by the signatures of the Director-General and one other member of the Council and in the absence of the Director-General, the person performing the functions of the Director-General shall sign.” 

Mr Speaker, here you will realise that we have about 12 or 13 members of the council; who are we referring to specifically? This is because there can be a connivance here. The director-general can choose any person of his interest and they sign. So here there can be an issue of connivance. 

Also, when we say “in the absence of the director-general”, we realise that he or she is an ex officio but there are other members of the council. So, in the absence of the director-general, who do we have specifically? It has not been put in the law specifically that if the director-general is not around, then this particular person acts on behalf of the director-general. That is my proposal. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, that is the proposal. Honourable members, is the request clear for recommitting that?

MR KABAJO: Mr Speaker, I remember there is another clause which says that when the director-general is absent, he can delegate in writing. If that is the case, if the director-general is absent and he delegates in writing that this person will act in their place, even the other necessary measures including signing can also be done. 

So, I wonder whether it is necessary recommit this clause since we already know that the director-general can delegate in writing. If he can delegate in writing, then whatever that person to whom he has delegated does, he or she takes responsibility. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a proposal for re-committal of clause 6.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, I really support the re-committal of clause 6 although I will not be so rigid on limiting the delegation powers of the director-general but on any other member who can be a signatory. I think that must come out very clearly, to avoid connivance between him and a particular person of his interest. So, I pray that we accept the re-committal. Thank you. 

MS NTABAAZI: Mr Speaker, I do not see anything that is going to change here because it is not well indicated here that the person that the director-general will delegate should be from the council. It is the prerogative of the director-general to appoint or maybe delegate somebody. There is no specific person indicated here. 

I want to allay the fears of my colleagues that because he or she is not a member of the council, then whom will they delegate from the council members. It is not directly stated here that the person to be delegated must be from the council. It can be a staff member from his office. So, if it is not direct here, then there is nothing that is going to change requiring us to recommit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am going to put the question on whether we should recommit clause 6. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, before you put the question, I see some vagueness. I am glad my sister has dealt with this one. It says, “The official seal shall, when affixed to any document, be authenticated by the signatures of the Director-General and one other member…” I think we need to delete that word “other” and say, “…by one member of the council.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, the minister supports a re-committal. Let us hear from the Attorney-General. Proceed.

MR RUHUNDI: Mr Speaker, I was welcoming the offer from the second deputy premier. 

The proposal being made by the sector minister does not get rid of the vagueness but we shall come to that; in other words, I do support the re-committal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let me put the question to the re-committal of clause 6.

(Question put and agreed to.)

5.53
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In line with rule 127(1), I would like to move that we recommit clause 10 - functions of the population secretariat. 

Mr Speaker, we are going to recommit clause 5, which is about functions of the council, and when you look at functions of the secretariat in clause 10, you will realise that some of these functions will be tampered with if clause 5 is recommitted. I will give an example. 

One of the functions of the population secretariat is to mobilise resources to support population programmes. If we leave this as it is, it would imply that the director-general can go ahead without consulting the council and organise a fundraising drive to raise funds to support the population programmes and he would be protected. Mr Speaker, that is one justification.

Another one is from clause 13(1) - officers and staff of the council. It says, “The Council shall have such officers and staff as may be necessary for the efficient performance of its functions”. This refers to functions of the council and not of the secretariat. This is why I believe that we need to recommit these functions of the secretariat as they are, because I believe at the end of the day if we recommitted the functions of the council, some of these will change. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is for re-committal of clauses 5 and 10. On clause 5 we had agreed that arising from the decisions we took in clause 10, there would be implications on what was adopted in clause 5. So, that re-committal was anticipated and was already known. So I put the question to the re-committal of clauses 5 and 10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So the clauses are 5, 6, 10 and 15.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL POPULATION COUNCIL BILL, 2011

Clause 5

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, at the last sitting of Parliament, we deliberated on this clause and we had made major amendments to merge the functions in clause 10 with the functions that are in clause 5. However, following the deliberations this afternoon, it has become necessary to revisit this particular clause since the functions that we had moved from clause 10 to clause 5 have now been pushed back. So, Mr Chairman, I would like to move that clause 5, as originally in the Bill, be reinstated.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is for reinstatement of clause 5 as it is in the Bill. 

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Mr Chairman, I have a further amendment. I propose that we insert sub clause (3) in clause 5 to read, “Advise the President on professional matters” and (4), “To promote, popularise and publicise the National Population Policy and set up a national population information databank”. I also want to insert (5) to say, “Undertake, in conjunction with Uganda Bureau of Statistics, the enumeration of the population of Uganda periodically through census and other surveys and make publicity of the same.”  I am moving these because- 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, I think they are clear. Those are the amendments proposed by the Member. You see, it is important that when you make amendments, people should look at them.

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Mr Chairman, I have just come up with them but I want to justify why I am moving these amendments. One, we are saying that this council is going to authenticate the information –(Interruption)

MR JAMES KYEWALABYE: Mr Chairman, since she has proposed many amendments, could we have her read one at a time and we adopt them and then move to the next. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, let us go one by one. 

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Sub-clause (3) reads:“To advise the President on professional matters.” The justification is: one, we see the role of the President in appointing the director-general; two, our President officially speaks for this country on population issues and commits finances. So, the population secretariat and council, since the members are going to be appointed by the President, should give him an update on population matters. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clear, honourable members? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Secondly, we have the National Population Policy and I would think it is the responsibility of the population council to promote, popularise, disseminate it and also enable the data in – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: First read the amendment.

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Okay, the amendment reads as follows: “To promote, popularise and disseminate the National Population Policy and also set up a national population information databank”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, is that one clear?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, under clause 10 we have functions – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we are on clause 5.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Yes, Mr Chairman, but I want to draw your attention to clause 10 on functions of the population secretariat. Clause 10(2) (e) tells us about popularising the National Population Policy. So if we adopt the idea brought by hon. Nalubega, I wonder whether it would not bring contradiction between the work of the national population secretariat and that of the council.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, it may be duplication but I do not think I have any problem with duplication. Whatever the secretariat does, it does it on behalf of the council. It may be a replication, but I agree with hon. Nalubega because what she has highlighted actually captures the gist of what the council ideally does – advising the government, updating the nation on population matters and so forth. The details which are captured in the implementation functions of the secretariat in clause 10 are okay and can still be maintained.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment on the new sub clause as proposed by the Member from Butambala. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman and the Attorney-General, for your indulgence. The next part I would like to insert reads as follows: “(5) To undertake, in conjunction with Uganda Bureau of Statistics, the enumeration of the population of Uganda periodically through the census and sample surveys and make publicity of the same.” 

Mr Chairman, UBOS is mandated to carry out the census but since we are talking about population issues, which are part of census, it is important for the council to work hand in hand with UBOS during the process of enumeration. 

I had further amendments on this when it comes to the issue of the council’s mandate but I do not see any clause in the Bill which talks about the mandate on carrying out the census. However, I would think that the data centre, which we have now put in (4), will help UBOS to feed into the data centre of the population council so that they have up-to-date information.

MR KYEWALABYE: Mr Chairman, I have a problem with that particular proposal because hon. Nalubega seems to be bringing the mandate of UBOS into the National Population Council. I know that since the National Population Council is concerned with population issues, they will obviously be concerned with what the results of the census are but it does not mean that they should be the ones to carry out the census or to be actively involved. 

I would understand, for example, where one would make a proposal to put a member of the National Population Council on the board of UBOS, like in this particular case a member of UBOS is actually a board member of the National Population Council. However, I think her proposal seeks to bring the mandate of another organisation and tries to smuggle it into the National Population Council. I would request the House to reject that amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, can I put the question to this amendment?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to agree with the honourable Member from Kiboga that the Uganda Bureau of Statistics is mandated to carry out surveys and censuses and the population and housing census is one of them. It carries out censuses for agriculture and livestock as well as economic surveys but of course when it is working, it brings on board the affected departments. So if we give a statutory mandate to this council to conduct censuses, I think there will be a clash. That mandate should remain with UBOS but operationally, and when they are carrying out these surveys and studies, they can bring on board the various departments.

MR MUWUMA: Mr Chairman, my chairman has said what I was supposed to say. I would like to convince our colleague, hon. Mariam Nalubega, to concede on this matter to avoid clashes of agencies.

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: I was not assigning the duty -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, I will put the question.

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: I was not assigning the duty to the National Population Council. I was only attempting to initiate and strengthen the work of UBOS to work together with the population council but not to remove the mandate from UBOS. If it is not clear to Members then we can leave it out.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, we leave that amendment. We have adopted all the other amendments. I put the question that clause 5, as amended, stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. It was my proposal that the official seal should be authenticated by the signatures of the director-general and the chairman of the council and not just any other member as it was in the original Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think that is very clear.

MR RUHINDI: I was of the opinion that we could make it flexible by saying, “The official seal shall, when affixed to a document, be authenticated by the signatures of the Director-General and one other member authorised by the Council” so that you make it flexible.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay?

MS JOY ONGOM: I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment as improved by the learned Attorney-General.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. If you look at the contents of clause 5 as recommitted by the chairman of the finance committee, hon. Lugoloobi, you will agree with me that we do not necessarily need to specify all these functions under clause 10 but rather we could maintain clause 10(1) only. It says, “The Population Secretariat shall be responsible for the implementation of the policy decisions of the Council.”

I think that it would be adequate because when you look at clause 12, there are functions for the director-general. Also in 13(1), it is specified that the council shall have officers and staff as may be necessary for the efficient performance of its functions, that is, functions of the council. Since we have already highlighted them, I would think it would be adequate for us to delete all those functions and retain clause 10(1). I thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there was a discussion in which the Attorney-General explained that this would not be in contradiction since the secretariat would be acting on those issues. Let us hear from the learned Attorney-General on the issue of whether we should delete sub clause (2), which is elaborating on the functions of the population secretariat.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I have already given my views on that. I really do not think there is any harm in putting it across in the Bill. Yes, it is implementation of the policy, and they are guiding you on the areas in which the secretariat may come into play. 

By the way, this is very good for purposes of accountability because if you leave it very broad, you may not capture the key elements that you want covered by the secretariat. By enumerating them and even including an omnibus clause in (q) - to undertake any other relevant activities - I think you are guiding the secretariat in implementation of the policies of the council.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal from the Member for Ibanda North is to delete sub clause (2) of clause 10, which elaborates the functions of the secretariat. Can I put the question on this because we need to resolve this one way or the other? I put the question for the deletion of sub clause (2) of clause 10.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 15

MR MUWUMA: Thank you. Mr Chairman and honourable members, I moved for the re-committal of clause 15 (1), which states, “The Council shall open and maintain such bank accounts as are necessary for the performance of its functions and the functions of the Secretariat.”

I propose to add the words “…in regard to the Public Finance and Accountability Act.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It should be “in accordance”.

MR MUWUMA: “In accordance with the Public Finance and Accountability Act” because it is expressly clear that for any accounts to be opened, they have to be authorised by the Accountant-General. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clear, honourable members? The submission was made very elaborately. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered and recommitted clauses 5, 6, 10 and 15 and passed them with amendments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was no amendment in clause 10.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Sorry, Mr Speaker. I meant to say, except clause 10.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I now put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE NATIONAL POPULATION CPUNCIL BILL, 2011

6.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The National Population Council Bill, 2011” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The National Population Council Bill, 2011” be read the third time and do pass. I now put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE NATIONAL POPULATION COUNCIL ACT, 2013”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister, the chairperson of the committee and all committee members and all of you, honourable members, for making this a success. This House is adjourned to –

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I just want to beg for a minute to express our heartfelt thanks to all honourable members of this House and particularly to you, Mr Speaker, for having guided us well to have this Bill turned into law now.

MR BIGIRWA: Mr Speaker, I was very carefully listening and very excited when you congratulated the entire House, the committee, the minister and the rest for passing this Bill. But as you were adjourning, I saw the excited honourable minister stand up to announce something. Can he announce what is to happen next, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it is very inappropriate to interrupt the Speaker’s move to close the House unless you have a substantial matter - (Laughter) - and being the Minister of Finance –

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, appropriate arrangements will be made.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.18 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 24 July 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 

