Wednesday, 22 July 2015

Parliament met at 2.02 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. It looks like my watch has been ahead today but I have now confirmed that it was not because I see that even the one in the Chamber is showing the same time. But thank you.

We will be causing an alteration from my communication. Yesterday, I had directed that today we would not be having Prime Minister’s Question time. However, we received notification to the effect that there is a legislative programme for the session that has been submitted by the Prime Minister.


Instead of using rule 34 (2) (b), which we normally use, we will use 34(2) (a) this time, which is to the effect that the Prime Minister may make a statement.

This statement was going to be restricted to presentation of the legislative programme for this session, which has been submitted to the Speaker and he wanted the Prime Minister to be on record as to what this House should expect in the course of this session; the programme and the list of Bills that are expected so that the House is alerted on how we are going to proceed. Thank you. That is the only change that will be on the Order Paper.

However, you can also see that there is item No. 5, which is the loan. It has been overdue and a request has been made that we should find time and handle it today. Let us proceed and see how we go with these matters. Thank you.

2.06
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a matter of national importance. Nyabushozi is in the water stressed belt of Uganda and for the last two months, Kiruhura District and in particular, Nyabushozi County, which I represent in this Parliament, has been experiencing a severe drought that is getting to disaster levels. The water wells for cows and human beings have dried up resulting in scarcity of water for both human and animal consumption.

As a result, people have resorted to hiring water bowsers and tankers to collect water from long distances for more than 16 kilometres on average. In most cases farmers are incurring a cost between Shs 800,000 and Shs 1.2 million on average, for fetching water for cows per day, for those who can afford it. And for those who cannot afford, their animals are dying.

Mr Speaker, we are grateful to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for providing us with two water bowsers. However, we pay Shs 100,000 on a daily basis to URA per water bowser. This payment is made by farmers but it excludes the cost of fuel and maintenance.

Given the fact that the livelihood of the people in this area depends on cattle keeping and considering the loss of over Shs 6.5 billion, according to research by Department of Research Services of Parliament of Uganda, that was caused by the cost of East Coast Fever in the last three years, the drought further poses another economic threat in the area. Animals are dying and human beings are at a risk of acquiring diseases and malnutrition. 


Mr Speaker, another problem of theft of cows and goats has also set in, as people travel long distances in search of water. I, therefore, pray that: 
(1) 	The responsible government ministries that is, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and Ministry of Disaster Preparedness immediately come and intervene before a catastrophe befalls us.

2) 	All earth moving equipment in the country should be mobilised to be taken to Nyabushozi to open up more dams for the people.

(3) 	The cattle keepers neighbouring Lake Mburo National Park should be allowed to take their animals to Lake Mburo to access the lake water.

(4) 	Farmers should be exempted from the URA tax of Shs 100,000 per water bowser on a daily basis, such that water becomes more accessible to more households.

(5) 	The programme for pumping of bulk water for production form Lake Kakyera should be started on immediately because this programme has been discussed for several years but it has never been started on.

(6) 	To prevent the rampant theft of cows and goats, police and other security organs should increase their vigilance in the area.

(7) 	The Judiciary should be strict to deal harshly with thieves, such that justice can be seen to be done. Mr Speaker, I beg to report and I have a document to lay on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is okay. It is an urgent matter. Is there somebody who is leading the government this afternoon? Honourable ministers, can one of you make a response to this issue of water stress in Nyabushozi killing animals and the mobilisation of all earth moving equipment to go and open up the dams.

2.10
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for raising this concern. Mostly, this affects the Ministry of Water and Environment.

My colleague is on the way but I take it upon myself to deliver the message to the minister so that he comes and gives a substantive response.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not a message; it is a concern.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I withdraw the message; the concern, so that he can take appropriate action.

2.11
MS CONNIE	NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, which concerns residents of Masanda village in Nabitiri, Bukasakya Sub-County in Mbale District. The residents of this area petitioned the President but had not received any response and they came to my place for some advice. They would like to be assisted.

Uganda Investment Authority intends to put up an industrial park in this particular area which is occupied by over 800 residents. However, in 2008, a valuation exercise took place and people were promised immediate payment but since then nothing had taken place until early this month, when they were visited by Uganda Investment Authority officials accompanied by the Minister of Industry, hon. Mutende, who came and promised the government would pay Shs 4.6 billion to 863 beneficiaries.

Mr Speaker, to the surprise of these people, when a list of beneficiaries came out, over 300 people who were intended beneficiaries were undervalued. These valuations ranged from Shs 6,000 to about Shs 7 million. Therefore, many people are getting less than Shs 100,000 and others Shs 23,000 and they felt that this was very unfair. Much as development is essential, people should be able to find an alternative place to stay. However, if they cannot even afford - what can Shs 6,000 buy? Which land in Uganda costs Shs 6,000 anyway?

Mr Speaker, it is, therefore, my prayer that the relevant ministry tries to review their payments. If these people are to be evicted, they should have alternative places to go. I would like to get an answer from the relevant ministry, especially the Ministry in charge of the Uganda Investment Authority or the Ministry of Industry so that my people’s fears are allayed. Otherwise, they are running up and down, they have given us sleepless nights because they want us to help them.

Here is a copy of the petition that they wrote to the President and I would like to lay it on Table. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. If it is a petition, then they will use another procedure to bring it to the House. However, for now that has been received. Does the minister have any response for Mbale?

2.15
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, I have heard the concerns of the honourable member and I pledge that I will take these concerns to the concerned minister so that he can give –(Interjections)- I think it is wildlife. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is something to do with Investment Authority so it has to be ministry –

MR BYABAGAMBI: I think this is Ministry of Finance; it is not Ministry of Justice and I will take the concerns to the concerned minister and I pledge that the minister will give an appropriate response.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Please, honourable members, who have raised these issues, follow this with the ministers concerned since this matter is read before the House. Then, we shall see how to assist in following it up.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, we received this motion, which was spoken to and I proposed a question. There was a report from the committee, which was presented yesterday. There is a minority report, which we agreed we would receive this afternoon before the Prime Minister’s question time. This would be the time for the minority report authors to present the report.

2.16
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the minority report that was signed by four members. 

The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2015, which is a  Government Bill, was read for the first time on the 27th  Sitting of the Third Meeting of the Fourth Session of the Ninth Parliament of Uganda held on Thursday, 30 April 2015. The Bill was subsequently referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for scrutiny.

On the 13 May 2015, the Speaker ruled that the committee would consider the Bill together with all other views brought by the people of Uganda. We were fortified by the Speaker’s ruling. The Bill provided a vehicle for the people of Uganda to express themselves on the process of amending their Constitution for the better.

Background

Mr Speaker, Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides as follows; 
    1) “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda. 
    2) Except as provided in this Constitution, no person or body other than Parliament shall have power to make any provisions having the force of law in Uganda except under authority of an Act of Parliament. 
    3) Parliament shall protect this Constitution and promote the democratic governance of Uganda.”

It is imperative to strongly caution ourselves whenever called upon to make laws to remind ourselves of that solemn responsibility especially while dealing with our great Constitution that establishes our high offices as Members of Parliament bearing in mind the aspirations of our people as expressed variously whenever permitted to do so.

Furthermore, Chapter Eighteen of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides for the amendment of the Constitution. Specifically, under Article 259, it provides as follows: 
“Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may amend by way of any addition, variation or repeal any provision of this Constitution in accordance with the procedure laid down in this chapter. This Constitution shall not be amended except by an Act of Parliament-
a) the sole purpose of which is to amend this Constitution; and 
b)  the Act has been passed in accordance with this chapter.”

The chapter also specifies;
    i. Amendments that require a referendum.
    ii. Amendments that require the approval by the district councils; and
    iii.  The quorum required for Parliament to pass constitutional amendments.

The proposals contained in the Bill together with others expressed by the people may be passed by Parliament as prescribed by Article 262 of the Constitution without any difficulty.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Speaker and honourable colleagues for the approach adopted in applying rule 118(2) (3) (4) whenever it has come to interpretation in as far as how to consider matters in this House.
Methodology
The committee extended an invitation to all interested parties through the media and meetings were held with all those that indicated interest in making submissions on the Bill. The committee identified and visited regions across the country and met several people who expressed various views on the process.

Memoranda 

In the process of scrutinising the Bill, the committee met and received memoranda from stakeholders as enumerated by the main report. I would like to adopt as it is in the main report.

Regional workshops

The committee held public meeting workshops in the districts as enumerated in the main report.

Regional benchmarking

Mr Speaker, the committee sent a delegation to the Republic of Kenya and People’s Republic of Tanzania to benchmark and pick lessons on the independence of the electoral commission.

Judicial reforms

Determination of emoluments paid to public officials, electoral process and related matters. 

Scope of the work of the committee

The committee, as directed or guided by the Speaker, received submissions and proposals for amendments for the entire Constitution from various stakeholders. The committee received proposals specific to the Bill and also submissions touching outside the Bill as directed by the Speaker in the ruling. We are fortified by the Speaker’s ruling, which observed rule 187 of our rules of procedure.

Objective of the Bill

The minority agree with the objects as summarised by the majority brethren with respect to the objective of the Bill.

Mr Speaker, our point of dissent is where I am moving and touches on the issues raised by our colleagues. The section of the report gives a critical analysis and the basis for dissent in the proposed amendments of the 1995 Constitution.

The majority have given a thorough analysis in some instances to the provision tackled. The majority have, however, left out the majority critical views submitted by the people.

Observation 

Clause 1 of the Bill, which seeks to amend Article 60 of the Constitution is as follows;
    a) By substituting for clause 1 the following;
“There shall be a commission called the Independent Electoral Commission which shall consist of the chairperson, the deputy chairperson and such other members as Parliament shall by law prescribe, all of whom shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament.”

The proposal is only to change the name to “Independent electoral commission.” This in our view is not sufficient to establish an independent commission desired by the people as expressed in the views received. 

In our view, the independence can only be seen in the tendency of independence as expressed by the principles and guidelines on the independence on the electoral management bodies as developed by SADC countries. These include;
    a) The commissioners should be hired through a transparent public appointment process that enlists wider stakeholder consultation and instil public confidence.
    b) The composition of the Electoral Commission must have such professional commissioners and technical staff able to manage elections more efficiently and impartially.
    c) The qualifications of the commissioners must be provided by the law to guarantee that the persons appointed have the necessary experience in executing their duties independently.
    d) The term of office should be secured to ensure that the commissioners work without fear or favour. 
    e) Conditions of service; international best practice requires adequate remuneration and privileges of commissioners to avoid compromising their independence. 
    f) Funding of the Electoral Commission; the laws governing electoral management bodies should provide for an appropriate secure and transparent framework that enables the commission to minimize dependence in the execution of its mandate. 

The stakeholders whom we interfaced with made several proposals regarding the proposed amendment to Article 60.

They proposed that the name of the Electoral Commission should be the “Uganda Independent Electoral Commission” or the “Independent Electoral Commission of Uganda”. The justification was that there was need to emphasise its identity as Uganda’s electoral body.

They also proposed to have the number of commissioners fixed in the Constitution rather than have them determined by Parliament. The justifications were:
    (a) That the other constitutional commissions, such as the Uganda Human Rights Commission, Judicial Service Commission, Public Service Commission and others, have their membership fixed in the Constitution. 
    (b) To enhance its independence, they emphasised that the manner of appointment must change.

The proposals are summarised by the majority in the report and we annex the summary for ease of reference.

Regional public meetings 

All the regions consulted agreed with the proposal to create an independent, impartial and fair referee that can freely preside over elections and referenda. They emphasised that change of name is not enough but the tenets of an independent electoral body.

Recommendations 

The minority recommend that Article 60 of the Constitution be amended as follows:

(1) By substituting for clause (1) the following:
“Amendment of Article 60(1)
    a) “There shall be an independent electoral commission consisting of a chairperson and deputy chairperson together with nine other commissioners appointed by the Judicial Service Commission.
    b) The chairperson and deputy chairperson shall be persons qualified to be judges of the High Court of Uganda. 

(2) A person shall not be appointed as chairperson, deputy chairperson or a member of the commission unless that person is a citizen of Uganda who:
(a) 	is of high moral character and proven integrity; 
(b) 	has demonstrated competence in the conduct of public affairs; 
(c) 	holds a degree from a recognised university; and 
(d) 	possesses considerable experience in- 
    i) electoral matters;
    ii) law;
    iii) finance;
    iv) governance or; 
    v) public administration. 

(2a) A person shall not be appointed to the commission if that person: 
(a) has been convicted of a criminal offence by a       competent court anywhere in the world;
(b) has been declared bankrupt;
(c) is of unsound mind;
(d) has, at any time within the preceding five years, held office or stood for election as a Member of Parliament, a member of a local government or a member of the governing body of a political party or organisation; 
(e) being a public officer, has not obtained leave in accordance with the procedure of the service or employment to which the person belongs.”

By substituting for clause (3) the following:
“(3) The members of the commission shall hold office for seven years and are not eligible for reappointment.”

By substituting for clause (4) the following:
“The office of the chairperson, deputy chairperson or any member of the commission shall fall vacant if he or she:
    a) dies;
    b) resigns;
    c) is removed from office as a result of misbehaviour or misconduct;
    d) assumes another public office
    e) is unable to perform his or her duties arising from infirmity of body or mind, impartiality, grave misconduct or incompetence.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let me just say something here; honourable members, I know we agreed yesterday that the reports should be read verbatim but some of the amendments that are now being proposed are being proposed in a wrong organ of the House. I do not know how we shall proceed with it. These are actual amendments and I do not know how we can propose actual amendments to the House constituted like this rather than the committee. 

I know that we agreed but I think the structure of your report, honourable member - I think you are going to have to help us. You cannot read proposed amendments to the House as it is constituted now. You will have to skip proposed amendments and wait for the committee stage to read those amendments. This is because for now, we are just looking at the principles of the Bill.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. While writing the minority report, we adopted the format used by the committee and you will realise that when they presented it yesterday, in some instances, they had a problem with the conclusion but the reason is what we are dealing with.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But now you are proposing amendments to the House presided over by the Speaker. Amendments should be brought before the Committee of the whole House.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The genesis of our minority report is premised on a number of issues: one, the ruling that – actually the – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us just make sure that we are on the same page. My point is this; these are amendments being proposed to the House as it is constituted now. Amendments should be proposed at the committee stage but right now, we are dealing with the principles of the Bill. So, if you have new amendments that you intend to propose at the committee stage, you are not stopped; the Speaker’s ruling is not in vain. You will propose them at that stage and we shall see how to proceed with them. However, to propose amendments at this stage is irregular.

MR MWIRU: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. Now, we will move to amendment of Article 83. The proposed amendment of Article 83 - I will move to the stakeholders’ proposal in respect of Article 83. 

Stakeholder’s proposals
A number of stakeholders interfaced with by the committee appreciated the spirit of the proposed amendment as being the need to promote party discipline and cohesion. However, they were mindful of Article 1(4) of the Constitution, which accords the people the right to determine who represents them in Parliament. 

The stakeholders were concerned that the proposal had the effect of promoting party dictatorship. A number of stakeholders were of the view that the matter is sub judice in view of Constitutional Appeal No.01 of 2014: Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo and three others vs. the Attorney General and four others, where the matter is substantially in issue. 

Observations

The minority wish, with respect, to disagree with the majority members. The proposal is incongruous with and inimical to good democratic practice. The proposal for a member to lose his seat upon expulsion from his party will defeat the essence of freedom of a member to debate and express himself or herself in fear of reprisal. This will defeat the core function of a Member of Parliament under Article 79 of the Constitution. 

The proposal has the effect of taking away the privileges attached to the office of a Member of Parliament to promote freedom of expression guaranteed under Article 29 of the Constitution. This freedom is so sacrosanct that its denial will give the effect of weakening Parliament as an institution, which is at the apex of promoting democracy and freedom of every citizen. The disciplinary process of parties cannot be extended to Parliament which is not an organ of the party. The party may exercise disciplinary procedures within its organs but must not extend its tentacles to Parliament, as doing so would defeat the essence of parliamentary procedure. 

Further, it is our considered view that loss of a parliamentary seat by way of a party recalling a member is only in cases of proportional representation system where a member is on a party list.

Finally, the proposal is discriminatory in so far as it targets only members of Parliament leaving out other political offices like the presidency and local governments.

It should be noted that the same proposal was defeated in the Eighth Parliament when brought by the then Attorney-General Prof. Khiddu Makubuya in the year 2009 when Members forced him to withdraw it and he did.

Recommendation 

The minority propose to reject the proposal. 

Amendment of Article 8A

Mr Speaker, we observe that this is already provided for in the Constitution and calls for no amendment. We recommend that the proposal be dropped.

Amendment of Article 21 of the Constitution

We observe that this proposal adds no value to the provision which is sufficient in content and form. We recommend that the proposal be dropped.

Amendment of Article 27 of the Constitution
We observe that Article 27 makes sufficient provision and any addition is idle. We recommend that the proposal be dropped.

Amendment to Article 28 of the Constitution

We observe that the proposal makes an unreasonable and unpredictable cost and burden to the State yet there is a provision for pauper suits within the Civil Procedure Rules.

We recommend that the proposal be dropped.

Amendment to Article 31 of the Constitution
We observe that there are sufficient laws governing sexual relations. Further, that there is no need for addressing sexual relations in the Constitution, as the same are not constitutional.

We recommend that the proposal be dropped.

Amendment of Article 31 of the Constitution
We observe that the proposal is in line with Article 33 (5) of the Constitution and we recommend that the same be dropped.

Amendment of Article 33 of the Constitution

We observed that the provisions on equality of all under Article 21 of the Constitution – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In Article 31, you would be proposing an amendment –

MR MWIRU: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you are saying that it should be dropped but then you are proposing an amendment which will be – okay, you can just highlight that you will be proposing an amendment to Article 31.

MR MWIRU: Most obliged. In respect of Article 33, we observed that the provisions on equality of all under Article 21 of the Constitution is fully understood and implemented and are sufficient.

In respect of Article 39 A, we observe that the country has made inroads in the provision of services proposed. We further observe that the country may not afford the services needed by all her citizens.

We recommend that the proposal be dropped.

Amendment of Article 43 of the Constitution

We observe that Article 45 of the Constitution makes sufficient provision for the application of international Human Rights Instruments ratified. 

The proposal has the effect of applying instruments without ratification which has an effect on the sovereignty of the State and the role of Parliament in domesticating instruments.

We recommend the proposal be dropped.

Article 58A of the Constitution
We observe that there are increasing levels of poverty rendering many citizens vulnerable. There is need to formulate a framework for the provision of free legal aid services to the needy.

We shall be proposing an amendment to that effect, Mr Speaker.

Article 51A of the Constitution

We observe that there is need to have integrity and transparency in the appointment of people running the various commissions in the country.

We shall be proposing an amendment to that effect, Mr Speaker.

Amendment to Article 55 of the Constitution 

The committee has already recommended the creation of the Salaries and Remuneration Commission which takes care of the proposal.

We recommend that the proposal be dropped.

Amendment to Article 61 of the Constitution

Mr Speaker, we shall be proposing an amendment and the justification is to give the Commission more time to organise free and fair elections.

Amendment of Article 63 of the Constitution
We shall be proposing an amendment to that effect, Mr Speaker. 
The justification is to reduce the cost of public administration and increase efficiency through adequate training and remuneration of Members of Parliament.

Amendment of Article 67 of the Constitution 

We observed that there is need for certainty of the date of the election and we shall be proposing an amendment.

Amendment to Article 71 of the Constitution

We observe that compliance with provisions of the Constitution is mandatory with or without any express provision in the same Constitution. 

We further observe that the Political Parties and Organisations Act should be the one to operationalise the Constitution. 

We propose that the proposal be dropped.

Amendment of Article 71 of the Constitution
We recommend that the proposal be dropped.

Amendment to Article 72 of the Constitution
We observe that the issue is already catered for under the provisions of the Public Order Management Act thus there is no need for further constitutional provision.

We recommend that the proposal be dropped.
 
Amendment of Article 78 of the Constitution: 
We observe that there is no permanent constituency for people living in the diaspora. People in the diaspora will not be able to represent others when they are themselves not in the country.

We recommend that the proposal be dropped.

Amendment of Article 78 of the Constitution
We observe that there is need to separate the powers between the organs of the State.

We shall propose an amendment.

Amendment of Article 79 of the Constitution 
We observe that there is need to strengthen Parliament in express terms for efficiency.

We shall be proposing an amendment.

Amendment of Article 80 of the Constitution
We observe that Government for the last 15 years embarked on universal primary and secondary education programmes, which increased the number of graduates that can enhance the efficiency of Parliament.

We shall be proposing an amendment.

Amendment to Article 82 of the Constitution
We observe that there is need for the Speaker and Deputy Speaker to concentrate on the said roles to serve the country and the nation.

We shall be proposing an amendment.

In respect of Article 82, we observe that this is good practice that enables smooth running of Parliament especially in absence of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker.

We shall be proposing an amendment.

Amendment of Article 82A of the Constitution 
This is to enable the chronological flow of the provisions by inserting the Speaker’s Panel and we shall be proposing an amendment in that regard.

Amendment of Article 87 of the Constitution
We observe that there is need for separation of powers between the Executive and Legislature. The Clerk to Parliament is a staff of Parliament in whose appointment the commission needs to participate to ensure efficiency and independence.

We shall be proposing an amendment. 

Amendment of Article 94 of the Constitution
We observe that there is need to clarify the status of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. There is need to clarify that Parliament makes only principal legislation and subsidiary legislation.

We shall be proposing an amendment. 

Amendment of Article 98 of the Constitution
We observe that there is need to strengthen the Office of the Vice-President by changing it to Deputy President who should be a running mate to the President

We shall be proposing an amendment. 

Amendment of Article 99 of the Constitution 
We observed that there is need for consistency as above.

We shall be proposing an amendment. 

Amendment of Article 100 of the Constitution 
We observe that this is a consequential amendment.

Amendment of Article 103 of the Constitution 
We observe as indicated above. 
The justification is to secure the Deputy President who has full mandate with the Deputy President. 

Amendment of Article 104 of the Constitution

The justification is to allow:
    1.  an aggrieved political party or organization and a voter to petition the Supreme Court;
    2. To allow a petitioner reasonable time to collect evidence in support of the petition;
    3. To give the Supreme Court reasonable time to consider the presidential election petition.

We shall be presenting an amendment.

Amendment of Article 105 of the Constitution 

We observe that there is need to reinstate term limits in order to nurture democracy.
We shall be presenting an amendment in that regard.

Amendment of Article 108 of the Constitution

We observe that there is need to provide for and strengthen the Office of the Deputy President as proposed herein.

We shall be presenting an amendment.

Amendment to Article 108A of the Constitution 

We observe that there is duplication of roles thus the need to clarify and streamline positions and roles.

We shall be proposing an amendment, Mr Speaker.

Amendment of Article 111 of the Constitution 

We observe that the cost of public administration is high and needs to be reduced to improve efficiency.

We shall have an amendment to that effect.

Amendment of Article 112 of the Constitution 

We observe that this is a consequential amendment and we shall be moving it.

Amendment of Article 113 of the Constitution 

We observe that there is need to enhance the doctrine of the separation of powers and we shall be moving an amendment to that effect.

Amendment of Article 119 of the Constitution 

The justification is to enhance professional and balanced opinion of the Attorney-General and to avoid having subjective opinion; we shall propose an amendment in that respect. 

In respect of 120, we observe that there is need to streamline the operations of the office of the Director of Public Prosecution to make it more professional and balanced and I am proposing an amendment in that respect. 

In respect of 121, we observe that there is need to streamline the exercise of prerogative of mercy and we shall be proposing an amendment.

In Article 130, we observe that there is need to protect the honour and seniority of the office of the Deputy Chief Justice and we shall be proposing an amendment.
In Article 131, it is a consequential amendment and we shall be proposing it.

In Article t of 134, it is a consequential amendment and 135 is also consequential amendment and we shall propose it.

In Article 136, the justification is that the quorum of court and its sitting is based on seniority thus the most senior person in the absence of the Deputy Justice is the appropriate person to act as the Chief Justice. We shall be proposing an amendment. 

In Article 144, we observe that there is need to include all judicial officers in accordance with the law and we shall be proposing an amendment. 

In Article 146, the justification is that there should be a Judicial Service Commission subject to clause 3 of this Article consists of the following persons appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament. This is to streamline the - when we dealt with Article 60; we were dealing with the composition. Therefore, this in effect is also consequential to 60. 

In Article 147, we observe that there is need to improve quality of appointees in constitutional commissions and make the manner of appointment more transparent. We shall propose an amendment.

Then Article 178, we observe that the provisions relating to local governments are entrenched and would require a more elaborate procedure. We also observe that the people of Uganda still maintain by majority that feudalism is more ideal for them and we shall propose an amendment.

In Article 180, Mr Speaker, we observe that there is need to improve the quality of service delivery at local government level. This cannot be done without improving the level of education for the local leaders. We shall propose an amendment.

In Article 260, we observe that there is need to entrench those provisions, which are so core to the democracy and strengthen the constitution and we shall propose an amendment.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I want to state that whereas the chair of the committee, while presenting the report alluded to the fact that the committee had no time to deal with views as presented by the people of the Republic of Uganda, I want to say that there was sufficient time and that is why we thoroughly looked through the well thought out proposals. I seek the indulgence of this House that when we go to the debate, that should not even arise. 

I want to move that Members find it appropriate to adopt the main report in as far as the issues we agree on are concerned and adopt the minority in as far as our issues are concerned. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, there is something you need to clarify. The mover of the minority report is saying that you stated on record that you did not have time to handle the other proposal or did you say, “We might not have time to handle.” I do not know which statement it was.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Speaker, as I said yesterday, we considered the Bill, made the consultations and had a number of meetings and visited some parts of the country mentioned in the report. However, we also received proposals, which we circulated and compiled. That is the last set of documents that I laid on the Table.

We did not have time to thoroughly examine them. We have more than 100 proposals; we only considered a few and that is why in our concluding remarks we said that a thorough process should be allowed to take place, like it was done before the Constitution was promulgated in 1995. That is why even in 2005, before the amendments were effected, a thorough consultative process involving stakeholders, the people of this country was done. We only went to 16 districts and in my case, we would only get 50 to 100 people. These were 16 districts out of 112.

Mr Speaker, as it can be noted from the minority report, it is clear that they are proposing a wide range of amendments, some of which did not come as proposals in the committee. That is why we think that there is further justification of having a thorough process done so that many more Ugandans are consulted and what comes out is a true reflection of the wishes of the people of this country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am interrogating this matter because when the matter of constitutional amendments Bill was first tabled, there were concerns particularly from the Opposition that the Bill did not contain some of the provisions they expected it to contain and they wanted to propose another Bill. In my guidance, I said “No, there is already a vehicle; there is already Bill in the House. All you can do now is go to the committee and articulate those views then interact. Then the committee will come and advise the House on how we proceed with these matters.”

You can see it is variously quoted in the minority report, that that was the guidance given by the Speaker. So, it will be the first decision point for us whether we debate the principles of the Bill or enlarge to encompass all the other aspects or whether we should only deal with only the Bill. That will be the first decision point for the House so that we see how we will move forward.

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, with the greatest respect to my senior colleague; the rules under which we operate as operate as Parliament, when a committee is faced with a challenge of time, the rules require that we report back to Parliament and seek guidance from the Speaker in as far as time is concerned.

I want it to be on record that by the fact the committee never came back to Parliament to seek the extension of time, we cannot plead time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Do not take that line honourable. You know where we are. Today is 22 of July; do we have time? Isn’t time of essence in our debate - because we have to deal with the constitutional amendments and then we also have to deal with the electoral laws that will implement the changes? The question is; is time not of issue in these debates that we are conducting?

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I want to say that whereas I appreciate that time is of issue, the issue of time as of then to the committee was solved by the minority report because this is also a report of the committee. We have looked at those other issues. It has collapsed and it is no longer an issue now. What we have to ask now from this juncture onwards - that is for you now, Mr Speaker.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the issue you have raised as to whether this House should consider all other matters other than those that were presented in the Bill, I would invite you to guide us on rule 118, particularly sub-rules 2, 3 to 4. In my view, a clear reading of rule 118 shows that once a Bill has come to the committee, it is up to the committee to make inquiries in respect of the Bill and all matters incidental thereto. Once the inquiry has come to conclusion that you can put in additional matters in the Bill, sub-rule 3 and 4 seem to agree with what the minority report suggests. So, I believe we are not barred from bringing in new matters as presented in a minority. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was the basis of my guidance. That the committee should not close. However, the issue is now that the committee has reported, how do we move? The majority report says there may not be time to handle these other ones; the minority report is saying there is sufficient time because we are already in the process. That is why I am saying it is going to be the first decision point for this House to determine how we proceed with this matter. That is all I have said. But I am very much conversant with the provision you have just stated.

2.52
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Whereas there is a report from the committee and the minority report, and the electoral process started, I do not know to what extent these reports will help the planned election time. And at an appropriate time, if the government cannot withdraw this report, then we shall advise that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The government cannot withdraw a report.

MR KWIZERA: I mean to withdraw their Bill because this Bill is not curing any emergency. If it was curing any emergency, they should have brought it a year before. At an appropriate time, we should consider scheduling this business. Thank you.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The matter at hand is very vital to our nation. We are in the middle of the process of electioneering and we must learn from past experiences. There was a Bill on the Floor of the Eighth Parliament; the Kampala Capital City Bill and the way it was handled hurriedly -

MR MUGUME: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. Hon. John Ssimbwa is a member of the committee so I do not know why he is again presenting -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are not yet discussing the report. This is a procedural matter. Therefore, no member is precluded for at this time.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for the wise ruling.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Be relevant to the issue.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Speaker, what I am saying is that we should not handle the amendment of the Constitution hurriedly because the matter we are talking about touches a wide range of issues. The Constitution is the supreme law of the land and if we are handling amendments within that supreme law of the land, people in our constituencies must get involved in the consultations and we must have time to study, analyse and understand those amendments.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to propose that since we are not doing it hurriedly, Government should consider withdrawing the Bill. This will give us time to handle this matter because Parliament is not stopping today; it is there forever.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that was not the issue before us. (Laughter)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a regular mover of minority report in this House, I wanted to allay the fear of hon. Paul Mwiru that once, during the committee stage, a group which is dissatisfied with what has been discussed and passed, presents a minority report on the floor of the House, the minority report fully qualifies to be debated in the plenary session and to be a source of law in terms of amendment. A case in point is the Land (Amendment) Act, 2004 where I moved a minority report, which eventually overwhelmed the total majority of the committee. I thought he required that information to get courage.

MR SEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and colleagues. Holding of elections is not a ceremony. In fact, the President of the Republic of Uganda has been involved in the dialogue between the parties in Burundi; him and other leaders have been urging the President of Burundi to postpone elections.

In the last Parliament, the issue of time was given. There were opinions to the effect that they could not consider amendments because the country was going into elections. There was promise to consider them in the next Parliament. However, this Parliament is saying it does not have time; maybe, they should be considered by the next Parliament.

Mr Speaker, my own view and proposal to you is that all is not lost; even the elections can be postponed. In fact, for me if the committee came here and said they want two months to be able to traverse the country to consider the views of all Ugandans and civil societies, I would be listening and welcoming that proposal. For the committee to come and make the same plea that was made in the last Parliament that there is no time and therefore, they only have time to deal with the eleven proposals from Government; I think they are really taking us for a ride.

Mr Speaker, you proposed here that views that were not accommodated in the Bill of Government can actually go to the committee. And civil society organisations even went - I do not know whether it was for a ceremony. Even the views from the 16 districts that you covered why did you go there if you wanted to concentrate only on what Government had tabled?

Therefore, my own proposal - I think this Parliament has two options because I remember the Speaker had actually proposed that when we are considering this Bill, we would be sitting in the morning and afternoon because of its importance. Maybe she and all of us did not know that the committee would come here and say that after all we do not need time because to change the name of the Electoral Commission by adding only the word “Independent”, I do not think that is a matter that you need to discuss for an hour. That you needed to sit in the morning and afternoon to discuss whether Electoral Commission should now be called the Independent Electoral Commission. I think the public that is watching this Parliament will be disappointed if we took that route.

Therefore, my own view and very strongly, Mr Speaker, is - first of all, the chairperson of the committee should tell us how much time he needs to consider all these other proposals for us to say he does not have time. How much time did he need? Probably, that time can be given. 

The Electoral Commission announced yesterday that nominations for parliamentary elections should actually go in December. That is the time they needed and they said we need to deal with all these issues now. But now those who are not organising elections and only preparing to stand are saying there is no time. We have the whole of August to November. How much time did the committee need to consider proposals that were brought before it for them to come here and say that - do you need a year? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, all we are saying now reinforces the point I have just made that the committee has made a recommendation and the minority has also given an opinion. That might be the first decision point for this House to determine how we proceed. That is just reinforcing this.

Also, you need to note that we are not yet debating this matter - please Member for Busongora North - this is not a matter for debate yet. We agreed that we will debate this matter tomorrow and this was just to guide on how we are going to proceed based on my reading of the majority and minority reports to alert the House how we should proceed when we start the debate tomorrow. Therefore, there is no debate on this matter for now; that shall be for tomorrow.

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have Grammar Primary School Kanyampumo, Ntungamo, represented by hon. Stephen Tashobya and hon. Naome Kabasharira. They have come to observe the proceeding. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. 

We also we have Chadwick Namate Primary School in Entebbe Municipality represented by hon. Mohamed Kawuma and hon. Rosemary Seninde. Please, join me in welcoming them. We also have Ambassadors of Christ Nursery and Primary School Project, represented by hon. Balikuddembe Mutebi and hon. Rosemary Seninde. Please, join in welcoming them.

Finally, we have Prime Nursery and Primary School represented by hon. Felix Okot Ogong and hon. Cecilia Ogwal Atim, Woman Representative for Dokolo. They have come to observe the proceeding. Please, join me in welcoming them too.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have guided that debate shall begin tomorrow. But there is a procedural point I want to raise on the same issue under rule 64 (5) which reads, “The Speaker shall make a ruling as to whether a matter is sub judice or not before debate or investigation can continue.”

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I rise on a matter which we consider sub judice under rule 64. I also request the stay on debate on Article 83 of the Constitution (Amendment) Bill. 

We have had the occasion to read the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. It has disregarded presentations made to the committee that the proposal to amend Article 83 of the Constitution to include a session by any means and we consider it sub judice. The matter as presented in the report is subject to the pending judgement in a Constitution Appeal No 1 of 2014 between hon. Theodore Ssekikubo and four others vs. the Attorney-General and others in the Supreme Court of Uganda. 

We attach herewith a copy of the Memorandum of Appeal filed in the Supreme Court showing that the determination of the meaning of Article 83 of the Constitution is one of the areas subject to the appeal, for your attention. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, this appeal was heard by the Supreme Court on 16 July 2015 and it is pending judgement. We therefore, request that you find the debate on that matter sub judice, pursuant to Rule 64 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament that disallows debate on such matters. 

The mater in question, to the benefit of Members - we have attached a copy of the Memorandum of Appeal, which reads, “The Republic of Uganda: In the Supreme Court of Uganda at Kampala, Constitutional Appeal No. 1 of 2014: (1) Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, Hon. Muhammad Nsereko, Hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire and Hon. Abdu Katuntu, as appellants vs. the Attorney-General, (2) Hon. Lt (Rtd) Saleh Kamba; (3) Ms Mary Agasha; (4) Joseph Kwesiga; and (5) National Resistance Movement.”

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I will just read this. I might not go in to its full details: “Appeal from the judgments and orders of the Constitutional Court in consolidated Constitutional Petitions Nos. 16, 19, 21 and 25 of 2013 and Constitutional Applications Nos. 14 and 23 of 2013, given on 21 February 2014. Theodore Ssekikubo, hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, hon. Mohammed Nsereko and Barnabas Tinkasiimire and hon. Abdu Katuntu, the above named appellants, being dissatisfied and aggrieved by the whole of the decision and orders of the majority of their Lordships: Honourable Justices S.D Kavuma (Acting Deputy Chief Justice) as then, Justice A.S Nshimye, Justice Faith Mwonda, Justice Richard Buteera. Given at Kampala on 21 February 2014 Appeal to the Supreme Court against the said decision on the following grounds:”  

I would like to read only one of them, which is most relevant to this and this is ground No 4. It reads, “The Learned majority Justices of the Constitutional Court ordered and in law and misinterpreted Article 83 (1) (g)…” which is now before this Parliament “…of the Constitution and thereby came to a wrong conclusion that expulsion from a political party is a ground for a Member of Parliament to lose his or her seat in Parliament and wrongly concluded that the first, second, third and fourth appellant left the National Resistance Movement Organisation upon their expulsion and thereby vacated their seats in Parliament.”

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we read this because we are seeing it being considered. So, we appeal to this House and to you, Mr Speaker, to disallow the debate on this. 

In the same report, a matter was raised of Kampala District Land Board vs. the Attorney-General and Kampala Capital City Authority. The Chairperson of the committee ruled that matter was sub judice. It is before the Constitutional Court. How come that one which was considered to be a sub judice matter and yet this very one of which we are the responsible persons and we are here symbolising our seats here. We thought the chairperson should not have missed taking cognisance of the fact that the four seats here are a subject of litigation in court. 

Therefore, we were disappointed and we thought through you, Mr Speaker, you could put this matter to rest. It is of judicial notice; everybody notices it and that is why there is this sitting arrangement. We are just awaiting judgment from the Supreme Court. To that extent, Mr Speaker, I beg to lay this on the Table and request that under rule 64, it is incumbent upon you to have this matter resolved before any debate can commence. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are you laying, honourable member? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I am laying on the Table a request to stay the debate on Article 83 of the Constitution (Amendment) Bill-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was the letter written to the Speaker? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes, it was written to the Speaker and it was duly - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you want to lay on the Table the letter you wrote to the Speaker? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: For the benefit of this House -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We can relay the records of the court; that is the memorandum. But the letter to the Speaker, how do you bring it here? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I would also like to say that it was received by the office of the Speaker, the office of the Deputy Speaker and the Office of the Clerk to Parliament. I am laying on the Table a document entitled, “The Republic of Uganda in the Supreme Court of Uganda at Kampala: Constitutional Appeal No. 1 of 2014: the Memorandum of Appeal.” I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. I can see that is why the middle bench is fully constituted this afternoon. Yes, learned Attorney-General, on what matter do you rise? It was just a procedural matter – Maybe you can offer some guidance on this matter. Please proceed.

3.10
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am well aware of the provisions of rule 64 of the Rules of Procedure regarding the sub judice rule. When you look at rule 64 (2), it provides thus: “A matter shall be considered sub judice if it refers to active criminal or civil proceedings and in the opinion of the Speaker, the discussion of the matter is likely to prejudice its fair determination.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have allowed the Deputy Attorney-General to make a comment. 

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, this rule does not in any way infringe upon the mandate of Parliament to make laws. The mandate of Parliament to make laws is provided for under Article 79 (1) of the Constitution and it reads thus: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.” 

The proposed amendment does not in any way refer to the case of hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire and others; not at all. It refers- (Interjection) - I know what is contained in the Bill. Parliament has inherent powers to make laws whether there is a matter pending in court or not. My learned friends - I understand these days hon. Theodore Ssekikubo is a learned friend but he should read the case of Kassiano Wadri and see – (Interjections) - Well, whether we are a party or not, the mandate of Parliament to make laws cannot be infringed upon or deterred by any institution or authority. If what we are considering in the amendment was specific to the case of hon. Barnabas Tinkasimire, hon. Theodore Ssekikubo and the others - this is not the case. 

Suppose, in its wisdom, Parliament found that there was merit in what hon. Theodore Ssekikubo and others were saying and Parliament was of the view that they should make a law to streamline the matter, nobody can say that the sub judice rule would deter Parliament from making that law. That is number one.

Number two, Parliament will interpret the situation in accordance with what pertained at the time before the amendment, not after. So, there is no way passing a law will, in any way, influence the results or outcome of the court judgment. The court will be interpreting the matter as it was then, not after the amendment. 

Mr Speaker, it is therefore overstretching the rule to say that it can influence the minds of the judges when they are making a determination on the matters before it, because judges will not be looking at the amended law. They will be looking at the law as it was then, not at the law after amendment. In that case, therefore, there will be no prejudice to the case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will be giving my guidance on this matter tomorrow before we start debate. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking guidance on a procedural point regarding this constitutional aspect. Article 2 of the Constitution of Uganda states reads as follows: “The Constitution is the supreme law of Uganda and shall have binding force on all organs of the state.”

I need some guidance on behalf of the people of Rubaga South. Before we begin debate of a very important nature, there is need for us to get clarification on how we are going to move. On page 5 of the report, it mentions areas, which the committee visited in various part of Uganda. My question, therefore, is: in the event that we find it necessary, before we pronounce ourselves on this constitutional amendment that we have to take the story back to our people, shall we live by what has been visited or we would be at liberty to go back to our people for consultations? I am raising this issue because what I see in the report is bad enough to give us an impression that, that is all that has been done in regard to public interaction.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, when that time comes and that issue is slotted, you will take the decision as Parliament. You cannot take it now because it is not a matter before us now.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  The committee did its work and when they finished their work, in the wisdom of the business committee, this matter was put on the Order Paper. In regard to that, the business committee performed this fundamental action so that Parliament can be able to proceed in the manner in which the business committee actually did so.

In such circumstances, Parliament has no locus – (Interjections) - Yes, Parliament has no locus to assert itself and say that there is no time to discuss and debate the minority report.  Therefore, Mr Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which Parliament has said that? 

MR NZOGHU: The plenary here -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not this one I am chairing, certainly. This Parliament has not said anything like that. When did we make that decision as Parliament? I have been chairing this meeting and I have not put any question to that matter. Please - (Laughter) - there is no decision to that effect. I will be giving guidance on the matter raised by the Member from Lwemiyaga tomorrow before we commence debate on this particular matter that has been raised.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I said this earlier but let me re-state it: we had agreed that we would suspend Prime Minister’s Question Time today but a matter came up and we needed to receive the legislative programme for this session of Parliament, which we received from the Office of the Prime Minister. It was then that we decided that we would proceed under that particular rule, rule 34 (2) (a), which is about the Prime Minister making a statement. Today we received a letter from the Prime Minster nominating the Deputy Leader of Government Business to make this statement. I now invite him to do that.

3.20
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, this statement is moved under rule 34 (2) (a) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, 2012. I would like to use this opportunity to present to Parliament the Legislative Programme for financial year 2015/2016. This legislative programme will include the following Bills, resolutions, motions and policies:

The Bills are:
    (i) The Constitutional (Amendment Bill), 2015;
    (ii) Bills on the amendment of Electoral Laws;
    (a) The Presidential Election (Amendment) Bill;
    (b) The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill; and
    (c) The Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill.

The other Bills are:
(1)	The Geneva Conventions (Amendment) Bill, 2015;
(2)	The Kampala Capital City Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2015; 
(3) 	The Uganda Land Commission Bill;
(4) 	The Land Lord-Tenants Bill;
(5) 	The National Data Protection and Privacy Bill;
(6) 	The Anti-Counterfeit Goods Bill;
(7) 	The COMESA Treaty Implementation Bill;
(8) 	The World Trade Organisation Implementation Bill;
(9) 	The Sugar Bill;
(10) 	The Cooperatives Act;
(11) 	The Cooperative (Amendment) Bill;
(12) 	The Uganda Wild life Bill, 2015;
(13) 	The Mental Health Bill;
(14) 	The Uganda Heart Institute Bill;
(15) 	The Uganda National Health Laboratories Services Bill;
(16) 	National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill;
(17) 	The Nation Council for Disability (Amendment) Bill;
(18) 	The Fisheries (Amendment) Bill;
(19) 	The Mining and Minerals Resources Development (Amendment) Bill;
(20) 	The Electricity (Amendment) Bill;
(21) 	The Climate Change Bill;
(22)	The Roads Bill, 2015;
(23)	The Uganda Construction Industry Commission, Bill, 2015;
(24) 	The Metropolitan Area Transport Authority Bill, 2015; and
(25) 	The National Road Safety Authority Bill, 2015.

 The Regulations are:
    (1) Regulations for the Uganda Communications Act;
    (2) Regulations for the National Information Technology Authority Uganda; and 
    (3) Those for E-Government.

The motions are:
    (1) Motion for a Resolution of Parliament to create new counties; 
    (2) Motion for a Resolution of Parliament to create new municipalities; and
    (3) Motion on the establishment of Kabale, Soroti and Lira universities as public universities under the University’s and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001.

The policies are:
    (1) A revision of the National Water Policy; and
    (2) The revision of the National Environment Management Policy. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That is the statement from the Prime Minister on what business we should expect in this session of Parliament. Leader of the Opposition, do you want to comment on this or we just proceed? This is the legislative programme for this session of Parliament. If you have no comment, we will proceed to the next business.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO US $145 MILLION EQUIVALENT TO 94,600,000 SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS (SDR) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO FINANCE THE ALBERTINE REGION SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am advised that the report is not yet on the iPads. It is already there? I man the report on this loan. Okay, then we proceed.

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that Parliament passes a Resolution to authorize Government to borrow up to $ 145 Million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance the Albertine Region Sustainable Development Project.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by the Minster of Works. Is the Minister of Finance seconding his own motion? (Laughter) Okay, it is also seconded by the Minister of Information and National Guidance, and the Minister of State for Education, Science Technology and Sports.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker and honourable members –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, justify your motion.

MR KAJARA: The Albertine Region is surrounded by nine districts of Nebbi, Nwoya, Bullisa, Masindi, Hoima, Kibaale, Kyenjojo, Kabarole and Ntoroko and it is in this area that oil exploration is taking place. 

This area has an estimated population of about 2.85 million people as of the Population Census 2013 and therefore, there is an urgent need of improved rural and regional connectivity to link local producers in the area, tourists and the commercial and industrial enterprises to goods and services.

This North-South link is very important for this country and it is in line with the National Development Plan 2010/2015, but also in accordance with the road sector development programme, which Government is implementing.

This loan has three components; one of them is regional access and connectivity which is to do with roads. The second component is local access, planning and development, which aims at increasing rural accessibility to markets and services; it is meant to prepare selected key urban centres for growth and provide economic infrastructure targeted to key sectors in the region.

The third component to this loan is about skills, access and upgrading. This component is designed to upgrade BTVET quality in the oil and gas sector, make it more in line with the private sector demands and provide greater access to the BTVET system to people living in the Albertine Region.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the project funding will be $ 153.89 million out of which Government is seeking to borrow, from the IDA, $ 145 million and the balance of $ 8.8 million will be provided by the Government of Uganda. 

The total loan amount is $ 145 million. The loan period is 40 years. The loan repayment period is 30 years but with 10 years of grace. It attracts a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum on dispersed and outstanding balance of credit. It also has a commitment fee of 0.5 per cent on outstanding balance of the undispersed credit.

This loan was tabled before this Parliament, considered by the Committee on National Economy and a report of thereof has been generated. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Yes, point of procedure?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I rise on point of procedure. I would like the Ministry of Finance to brief this Parliament, about what the implications of this huge borrowing will be to the already huge debts that this Government has? You recall that when we were looking at the budget and our financial –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, is that the procedural point?

MS OGWAL: I am moving to the procedural point. (Laughter) Is it procedurally right for the minister to bring this loan proposal to this Parliament without explaining to us: one, whether they have already identified the source of co-funding, because that has been a serious burden for us, and we are paying heavily because of that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, wouldn’t we need to listen to the committee in order for us to ask those questions? 

MRS CECILA OGWAL: It is the ministry that normally initiates this -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This matter was sent to our own committee of the House, honourable member and it is due to report on the matter. Don’t you think it would be proper to listen to whatever they recommend before we can raise those issues formerly? That is important because now we are putting the Cart before the Horse.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Sometimes it is important for this Cart to go before the Horse because we are really overburdened. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now propose this question for your debate, which will be preceded by a report from the committee.

I now propose the question that the Resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to $ 145 million, equivalent to SDR 94,600,000 from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group, to finance the Albertine Region Sustainable Development Project. That is the motion I propose it for your debate, which will be preceded by a report from the committee.

3.34
MR XAVIER	KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Dear colleagues, this is a report of the Committee on National Economy, on the proposal by Government to borrow up to $145 million, equivalent to 94.6 million (SDR), from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group, to finance the Albertine Region Sustainable Development Project.

Mr Speaker, here with me is the original report of the committee, the brief by the minister, the project appraisal, the draft financing agreement and several correspondences regarding the same project. I beg to lay them on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the report of the committee, the brief to Parliament, the appraisal report and the draft agreement and the documents that support them.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker, I would like to also lay on the Table, the minutes of the committee regarding the project.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes too.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker, and honourable members, the committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow US$145 million, equivalent to 94.6 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank group, to finance the Albertine Region Sustainable Development Project - in this report it is being referred to as project - in accordance with rule 166 (2) (b) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

The request was presented to this august House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 9 July 2014, and accordingly referred to the committee for consideration.

We have considered and scrutinised the request and we now beg to report. Mr Speaker, with your permission, I beg to skip the methodology and get to the background.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, please.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Uganda’s strategic vision focuses on transforming the country to its National Development Plan (NDP) 2010/2011 to 2014/2015 in terms of a modern society within 30 years.  The NDP prioritises a massive increase in skilled labour to contribute to the production of value-added export-oriented goods and services. 

Also high among Uganda’s development priorities for sustained economic growth are improving infrastructure networks, adding value to agricultural products, reintegrating northern areas that were until recently, involved in armed conflict and addressing service delivery and employment needs of a growing urbanised population. This is in line with Uganda’s Vision 2040. Mr Speaker, with your permission, I beg to go to page 4, where we have the project beneficiaries.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, please. 

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, very much. The project will directly benefit the population living in Hoima, Kibaale and Kyenjojo districts through the upgrading of the Kyenjojo-Kigumba Road. 

The road will improve access to markets, reduce public transport costs and increase access to social services. These will provide the beneficiary areas with the potential for induced development that will boost local economies.

Planning and investing in local infrastructure will provide benefits to the population living in the districts of Hoima and Buliisa, including rural and urban areas. The heavy focus on district roads in Hoima and Buliisa districts is to benefit the majority rural population so that they can have better access to infrastructure, markets and services.

The project will also provide benefits to trainees who will attend the targeted technical and vocational institutes, that is, the Uganda Technical College in Kichwamba (UTC) and the Uganda Petroleum Institute in Kigumba (UPIK) and a new training institute to be developed in Nwoya District.

Project Components 

Mr Speaker, and honourable members, the project comprises the following three components: the first component is regional access and connectivity, which is financed by US$95 million, where Government will also be contributing an equivalent of US$6.89 million. 

This component aims to improve overall accessibility to the Albertine Region, reduce travel times and improve access to markets and services. 

It will finance the upgrading of 100 km stretch of road from Kyenjojo to Kabwoya, which forms part of the 238 kilometre Kyenjojo-Hoima-Masindi–Kigumba Road, connecting the districts of Kyenjojo, Kibaale, Hoima, Masindi and Kiryandongo in Western Uganda.

The work will entail upgrading of the existing unpaved gravel Kyenjojo to Kabwoya road, to a paved class II bitumen standard road.  The remaining stretch from Kabwoya to Kigumba is already being financed by the African Development Bank loan, of $ 110,690,097 under the Road Sector Support Project IV. 

This component will also finance the costs associated with construction, supervision and individual consultants to support the Uganda National Roads Authority in the oversight of the component.

The second component is local access, planning and development, which will be financed by IDA to the tune of $25 million. This component aims to increase rural accessibility to markets and services, prepare selected key urban centres for growth and provide economic infrastructure targeted to key sectors in the region. The component will finance physical planning and infrastructure development in the district local governments of Hoima and Buliisa including Buliisa Town Council. 

Mr Speaker, road infrastructure will focus on improvements or repairs of district roads and some urban roads and the local economic infrastructure will focus on markets, fish landing sites, storage facilities and slaughterhouses. 

Physical planning will focus on eight key urban centres which include Wanseko, Biiso, Kigorobya, Kiziranfumbi, Kyangwali, Kabwoya, Butema and Kyarushesha, which are expected to capitalise on growth from the oil development and likely to contribute to the future development of the region. In addition, a regional strategic plan will be prepared to outline future development strategies and potentially inform any follow-on operations. 

Also financed under this component will be consultant services to support implementation, engineering design and supervision and technical assistance. Oversight and capacity strengthening for the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the local governments to implement the project will also be supported.

The last component is skills access and upgrading. This will be financed using $25 million from IDA and Uganda will contribute an equivalent of $2 million. This component is designed to upgrade BTVET quality in the oil and gas sector, make it more in line with private sector demands and provide greater access to the BTVET system to people living in the Albertine Region. 

This component will finance the upgrading of selected institutes which support the objectives of the Skilling Uganda Strategy, including the Uganda Petroleum Institute Kigumba (UPIK) and the Uganda Technical College Kichwamba and a new third institute in Nwoya District, including, inter alia, physical infrastructure, goods, curricula development and instructor training.

UPIK will focus on training specialised technicians for the emerging petroleum industry while UTC Kichwamba will focus on training of artisans and craftsmen in construction, which will support the development phase for the oil and gas sector. This component will also finance assessment and appraisal for establishing a new training institute in Nwoya District. 

The component will also support the development of institutional mechanisms for collaboration with the private sector in skills training programmes in the Albertine region.  The government contribution to this component will finance bursaries for approximately 600 trainees from the Albertine region for an amount equivalent to $2 million to undergo skills training in the foremost institutes in the country on construction, agro-processing, tourism and nursing. 

IDA will support the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports to establish the institutional arrangements for the administration, monitoring and evaluation of the bursaries programme.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, let me go to project cost and financing arrangements. The total project financing will be $153.89 million as contained in the table comprising an IDA Credit of $145 million equivalent and $8.89 million contribution from the Government of Uganda, to be implemented over a period of five years. Out of the government contribution, an estimated $6.89 million will be for Resettlement Action Plan costs associated with Component One and the $2 million will support the bursaries under Component Three.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, all that information is summarised in tables 1 and 2 on page 8.  I take the pleasure to report on the terms and conditions. The loan amount is $ 145 million; the loan period is 40 years including 10 years of grace period; a service charge of 0.75 per annum on disbursed and outstanding amounts; and a commitment charge of 0.5 per cent per annum on outstanding balance of undisbursed credit.

Other conditions

The financing has the following conditions attached to it:
    1. Issuance by the Attorney-General of Uganda of a legal opinion stating that the terms and conditions of the agreement constitute enforceable binding obligations upon the Republic of Uganda.;
    2. Conclusion of a subsidiary agreement between the Government that is the Ministry of Finance and the project implementing entity which is UNRA, for implementation of Component One of the project and an opinion on its validity issued by the Attorney-General;
    3. Government to adopt the Project Operational Manual, in accordance with the provisions of section 1(b)(i) of Schedule II of the Financing Agreement; and 
    4. Government to adhere to IDA and PPDA procurement processes plus ensuring that reporting, including financial and audit reporting, is done as required by IDA and Government financial regulations.

Financing conditionality

Table three below indicates that the interest costs of the loan is 0.75 per cent as already highlighted on the loan outstanding and disbursed, which is lower than the standard discount rate used of 5 per cent recommended by the International Monetary Fund and World Bank. 

This implies that the present value of the loan - $63.318 million - is typically smaller than the nominal value of the loan contracted which is $ 145 million. This means, therefore, that the country’s total future payment for this loan is cheaper than the proposed amount to be borrowed in present terms.

The Debt indicators are highlighted in table 3 but to summarise, the loan is highly concessional, since its grant element is 56 per cent which is larger than the threshold of 35 per cent recommended by the IMF and the World Bank. The concessionality of the loan is further influenced by its long maturity and grace period.  Mr Speaker, with your permission, I beg to get to the observations and recommendations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. That is on page 12.

Albertine Regional Access and Connectivity- Kyenjojo to Kigumba Road

The committee observed that the Albertine region is in urgent need of improved connectivity linking local producers, tourists and commercial and industrial enterprises to goods and services. Currently, there is lack of a direct and efficient connection within the Albertine region and between the region and the rest of the country, as well as with neighbouring countries. 

The Kyenjojo to Kigumba road is a critical part of the national road network. This road network has significant commercial agriculture dominated by tea in Kyenjojo, tobacco and rice in Hoima and sugar in Masindi which will benefit from the road infrastructure. 

The road also forms part of the link between the Queen Elizabeth and Murchison Falls National Parks and will significantly reduce driving time between the two parks.

The committee welcomes the efforts government is currently undertaking to ensure the total upgrading of the entire Kyenjojo to Kigumba road from gravel surface to higher standards as this will greatly enhance connectivity within the Albertine region, linking major urban growth centres such as Kyenjojo, Kagadi, Kabwoya, Hoima, Masindi and Kigumba and the outlying towns of Kaiso Tonya, Butiaba and Buliisa close to the oil fields. 

The improved connectivity of the Albertine region will further facilitate the development of the oil, agriculture, tourism and fishing industries. 

Resettlement Action Plan 

The committee observed that during the upgrading of the Kabwoya-Kyenjojo Road, structures within the road reserve will be demolished but this may not happen until every affected person is compensated. Several structures will be affected in Kagadi Trading centre, Muhoro, Haikoona and Bwijanga.

The committee recommends that UNRA should ensure the timely and proper compensation of project affected persons as well as addressing grievances that may result from the implementation of the Resettlement Action Plan.

Provision of Stop-over Points in the Road Designs

The committee observed the continued absence of public stop-over points along the entire major road networks in the country. This has been attributed to the road designs that do not have provisions for the establishment of these structures. The 238-kilometre long Kyenjojo-Kigumba Road being part of the tourism road network in the Albertine region will require the establishment of stop-over points in key strategic spots along this road network. 

The committee therefore recommends for the integration of stop-over points in the road designs of the Kyenjojo to Kigumba road.

Constrained Capacity of UNRA for Effective Contracts Management 

The committee noted that the increased annual budget for the transport sector currently close to $1 billion requires a substantial increase in UNRA’s implementation capacity. 
With the increased workload, the capacity of UNRA to review the quality of documents submitted by design consultants and to supervise major civil works contracts has been highly constrained. Effective contract management requires the client to not only rely on the supervising consultants but also have an internal capacity to check the performance of both the contractor and supervising consultants. 

Government efforts to address this challenge have mainly been through the provision of technical assistance, which is not sustainable if not accompanied by skills transfer.

The committee recommends that Government reviews UNRA’s current staffing structure in order to improve its efficiency in implementation of road projects. 

The government should further provide adequate budgetary funds to UNRA to enable the entity to continuously build the capacity of its staff to take on the supervisory roles for future road projects that are mainly outsourced through procurement of expensive consultants whose impact is sometimes not realised.

Relocation of Water and Electricity Distribution lines

The committee observed that one of the impacts of the Kabwoya-Kyenjojo road alignment will entail relocation of water and electricity distribution lines along the road project.

The committee recommends that UNRA should ensure the construction of alternative water sources for communities before damaging the existing ones along the Kabwoya-Kyenjojo Road Project. UNRA should further coordinate with the Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited to ensure that relocation of power lines is done as quickly as possible to avoid prolonged power shortages for the communities along the same road.

Delays in Implementation of Debt-Financed Road Projects


The committee noted with great concern the increased delays in the implementation of debt-financed road projects by the Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA after parliamentary approval.

 Mr Speaker, that bracket is not applicable because we do not have a table – I am sorry about that. This has had negative implications on the timely achievement of the set project objectives.

The committee recommends that Government should introduce measures aimed at improving project implementation, including improved procedures in regard to project selection, appraisal and design, portfolio reviews, monitoring and evaluation. To strengthen the results for the Ugandan economy and maximise benefits from external assistance for financing the above projects, greater effort should be made by the Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA in order to reduce transaction costs, improve utilisation and absorption in the Works and Transport sector.

Local Access, Planning and Development

Absence of an Albertine Regional Physical Development Plan

The committee observed the absence of an Albertine Regional Development Plan that will help in the laying of the foundation to the development of detailed local plans especially for the centres in the region that are experiencing rapid growth as more people are attracted to the region in search of opportunities.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should fast-track the development of the Albertine Regional Development Plan, as this will provide guidance and an overall framework on the spatial development options, land-use functions, infrastructure network, socio-economic services and environmental strategies.

Externalities of Unplanned and ill-managed Urban Growth

The committee noted with concern the negative externalities associated with insufficiently planned and ill-managed urban growth that is characteristic of many urban areas in the country. In the Albertine region, smaller urban centres are facing immediate development pressures and have lagging services especially in infrastructure provision. While the local governments in the Albertine region have some form of development plans in place, it was not clear whether these plans were up-to-date – whether they were driving strategic decisions about future development and infrastructure investment or if they were aligned with local budgets. 
The committee welcomes government efforts of avoiding the potential negative externalities associated with insufficiently planned and ill-managed growth in the Albertine region. If done well, effective planning and execution will further compound the value of existing assets and foster more closely-knit urban communities in the Albertine region. 

Rural-urban Connectivity in the Albertine Region

The committee further observed the relatively low connectivity between the rural and urban centres in the Albertine region. Rural areas in this region still need connectivity to markets in order to sell their products and also improved access to social services.

Borrowing to finance physical planning

The committee observed that an estimated US $980,000 under this project will finance the development or refinement of physical development plans for eight key urban centres in the districts of Hoima and Buliisa, an expense which ought to have been part of the co-funding from Government. Borrowing to finance the development or refinement of physical development plans is against the general debt strategy principles, as there might not be any guarantees that these plans will be implemented by the respective local governments.

The committee recommends that the estimated $980,000 meant for the financing of the development or refinement of the physical development plans and the surveys done – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Peter Lokeris, I can hear you from here.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you for the protection, Mr Speaker. The committee recommends that the estimated US $980,000 meant for the financing of the development or refinement of physical development plans and the surveys done for the eight key urban centres to be part of the additional co-funding from the Government of Uganda.

Skills Access and Upgrading in the Albertine Region

Skilling Uganda Strategy

The committee observed that the Skilling Uganda Strategy does articulate a paradigm shift towards developing a demand-driven, responsive, employable skills and competencies rather than simply providing education certificates that may or may not be relevant to the needs of the labour market. A reform task-force was established as an interim management unit for the establishment of a Skills Development Authority. Other reforms within the Skilling Uganda strategy have by and large stalled due to lack of funding.

The committee recommends for the active engagement of the private sector employers in the entire process of skills development in order to mobilise adequate resources for the implementation of the Skilling Uganda plan.

Skills Upgrade in order to Capture Emerging Employment Opportunities in the Albertine region
The committee noted that Uganda’s Oil and Gas policy stresses that Ugandans will benefit from the oil and gas industry if local individuals and firms can actively participate in the sector. The country faces a challenge of training people in the region and the country at large to be able to provide immediate support for the development phase of the oil and gas sector by elevating the country’s training standards to internationally-accredited levels.

The committee welcomes Government’s efforts of building the capacity of the Petroleum Institute to be able to deliver internationally-recognised specialised training for petroleum operations and maintenance in the near future. However, a lot still needs to be done in order to enable the Petroleum Institute operate at its full potential.

Organisation and Financing of Uganda Petroleum Institute Kigumba (UPIK)

The committee observed that this project will support UPIK to enable it provide focused training of specialised technicians for the petroleum industry (petroleum operations, mechanical maintenance, electrical maintenance and instrumentation). UPIK is still a new institution and its start-up since 2009 has also not been without its challenges and difficulties. 

Most importantly, some organizational aspects of UPIK have not been sufficiently developed to date to enable it benefit from this project finances. 

The committee noted that no governing body has been established for the institute as yet and there currently appears to be a lack of full time management at UPIK as the current Uganda Industrial Research Institute staff are working for two institutes. 

A Caretaker Principal for the institute for one year was assigned by the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports on 01 February 2014 but the handover of the office to him by the Ministry of Education was never done and the instrument that assigned him as Caretaker Principal expired on 31 January, 2015.

The committee recommends the following:
    1. The Government should urgently sort out the organisational challenges faced by UPIK. A dedicated UPIK management team must be formed quickly and located in Kigumba and not in Kampala, in order to enable a more effective start-up of UPIK. 
    2. UPIK should not receive support from this project not until all the organisational challenges currently facing the institute have satisfactorily been addressed by the Government. This is aimed at ensuring that the project funds are not misused.
    3. A clear formula for sustainable financing of UPIK needs to be established between the Ministry of Education and Sports, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development.

Funding mechanisms for training of Ugandans for the petroleum sector, mostly commonly defined in the Production Sharing Agreements, are based on the amount of hydrocarbons produced or capital expenditure from the service sector on an expatriate fee or tax for work visas. 

    4. The capacity of UPIK should also be built in order to develop strong business cases for the proposed activities in order to access funding not only from the Petroleum Skills Training Fund, but also from donor organisations and petroleum production and services companies as well. 

Without a funding formula for UPIK in place to provide sufficient UPIK funding, the institute might not be able to sustain itself in order to achieve its objectives.

    5. Government should explore the existing global partnerships in petroleum education and training and ensure that UPIK patterns or twins with established international petroleum education and training organizations to provide the initial programming and curriculum, expatriate instructors, facilities and equipment specification and organisational assistance.

Government Bursaries

The committee observed that as part of its contribution to the project, the government will finance bursaries for approximately 600 trainees from the Albertine region to undergo skills training in foremost institutes in the country in construction, agro-processing, tourism and nursing. This is estimated to cost $2 million. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education, Science, technology and Sports should ensure the establishment of transparent institutional arrangements for the administration, monitoring and evaluation of the bursaries programme. 

The committee further recommended that half of the bursaries should go to the Albertine Region and the remainder to the rest of the country.  

Project Institutional and Implementation Arrangements of the Project 

Reform Task Force (RTF) Oil and Gas Committee

The committee noted that the project implementation of Component 3 will be mainstreamed in the Ministry of Education, Science, technology and Sports using existing institutional establishments. 

However, it is also noted that some specific aspects of Component 3 of this project will be implemented directly by the Reform Task Force Oil and Gas committee. The same committee is also a member of the Bursary Scheme Task Force that will oversee the bursary sub-component. This might lead to conflict of interest among the RTF Oil and Gas Committee members. Besides, the involvement of the RTF Oil and Gas Committee in project implementation is also against the principles of good project management.

The committee recommends that the RTF Oil and Gas committee should be left to participate only in project monitoring of Component 3 under the Ministry of Education and Sports institutional arrangement and should not be involved in the implementation of any aspects of the Component 3 of this project. 

Lack of a Land Title for UPIK

The committee noted that the 30 June 2013 audit report for UPIK indicated that the institute has 200 hectares of land which was donated to it by the Uganda Cooperative College Kigumba. However, there was no evidence that the institute had obtained a land title as proof of ownership. There is a risk that the land may be encroached upon without legal protection.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education, Science, technology and Sports should expedite the land transfer process of the institute land in order to guard it from encroachment. 

Financial management in UNRA

The committee noted that the 30 June 2012 audit report for UNRA was qualified due to overpayment to contractors and theft of UNRA funds. 

Other weaknesses reported in the entity audit report included inter project/account borrowing, variation of prices, cost overruns, excess payment to contractors, diversion of funds, inadequate budgets, premature failure of pavement layers on some roads, irregular payments and non-deduction of liquidated damages and delayed payments of contractors’ certificates.

The committee recommends that in order to guard this project from the above weaknesses noted in the UNRA audit report, Government should ensure that the feasibility studies of the road project are of high quality, ring fence this road project budget, upgrade the UNRA accounting system to include inbuilt controls, recruitment of technical auditors and carry out regular performance and financial audits of UNRA.

Sustainability of the Project Infrastructure Investments

The committee noted that adequate and regular maintenance of the infrastructure of the project will be important to their sustainability. 

Investments in the beneficiary districts will depend on regular maintenance by the local governments.
The committee recommends that Government should ensure that the recurrent costs associated with the implementation of the Project Infrastructure Investments are timely absorbed in the subsequent national and local budgets of the implementing agencies of these projects in order to guarantee the availability of adequate funding for the maintenance of Project Infrastructure Investments.

Conclusion 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, given the above, the committee recommends that the loan request to borrow $ 145 million, an equivalent of Special Drawing Rights 94.6 million from the International Development Association be approved to finance the Albertine region Sustainable Development Project; except that the funds for UPIK should be disbursed after the governance and management challenges at the institute have been resolved.  I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much. Honourable members, this has been one of the items that has put this House in bad light. This particular loan request was made on 09 July 2014 and we are debating it one year after.

Issues have been raised and it seems that fingers have been pointed at Parliament. I would like to state it for the record that it was not the responsibility of the committee.

This is a multi-sectoral loan involving different ministries like Works, Education, Oil and Gas and others but one of the departments chose not to appear before the committee to establish their position and for one year, we have been waiting for that department. 

We will not be taking any responsibility for the inability for other departments of Government to bog down this Parliament. We will not be naming them today but the next time it happens, we will call the actual people, name and shame them because Parliament cannot take a beating for somebody else’s irresponsibility. It is not fair.  

I thought I should say this to caution other departments of Government so that these unnecessary delays are not brought to Parliament and Parliament is blamed for something it has not done. One year is too long for a particular loan request to be processed by this House. We have done others faster than this. I thank you.

4.12
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Mr Speaker, before we debate this loan request, I have two points of clarification that I will need from Government. 

The first is about the case in London about the money owed to us – I think it was about $460 million. I read in the press that we eventually got $250 million. We need some explanation because this matter was here and we even approved money for that case.

Secondly, twice the head of state has made remarks that personalise the oil industry. About five years ago, he said in Bushenyi that he had killed his animal and that he had just discovered oil and people were asking him to leave, and he asked where he would go because that was his oil. Recently in Masaka, the head of state again said this is his oil and people who are opposing him and do not want him to come to power are doing so to take his oil or use it.

These are statements which seem simple but are very serious. It is very serious for a head of state to be personalising a national resource and calling it his. We would therefore like clarification from the Government whether these loans we are approving are for the interest of Uganda or for a person to personalise – (Interruption) 

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker and colleagues, I appreciate the concern of my colleague but this loan principally is for the construction of a road with some component of side roads and some component on education as was rightly observed, Mr Speaker. Is he procedurally right to be raising matters that are not so connected with this loan? I would have expected that we should be discussing this loan in the context of road construction.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Leader of the Opposition, there is a law on relevance which is in our Rules of Procedure. (Laughter) The matters you are raising are not within the context in which you have raised them. However, being the Leader of the Opposition I always give you the prerogative to raise your concerns because being outside Government is very frustrating. Therefore, you might want to raise this thing so I always give you the latitude but please, do not over shoot what I have given you.

MR OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, the loan we are raising is to do with the Albertine region. I have seen even the institute of petroleum there and it is to do with oil. I take your advice but still we want to know why the head of state keeps on personalising oil, referring to it as his.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to raise that as a matter of national public importance or a motion or something so that we can have a proper vehicle to carry it forward?

MR OGUTTU: It is connected, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the motion before you and debate starts now. I can see the members rising are many so we will be debating this in two minutes each, so that we can also conclude our debate on the State of the Nation motion.

4.12
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion but with some observations. 

Sometime back last year, we passed a loan request for the construction of the Kigumba-Masindi–Bulima Road but to date, there is nothing on the ground. We have been trying to find out what is happening and that loan is making interest but the Government is not coming out to tell us the problem. Can we get to know what is happening to that loan? I am disappointed because the committee has not mentioned this loan on how far it has gone in implementing the project which it was supposed to do.

Mr Speaker, on Skilling Uganda as one of the components of this loan, I would like to thank the committee for their observation but I have not seen Kyeema Technical Institute, which at one time housed the Kigumba petroleum institute, being mentioned. It is has not been mentioned and yet I believe this technical school, which has been offering certificates and diplomas in those skills training courses, would have benefited greatly especially from this project.

I would like to find out from the relevant minister- The committee has made an observation on Uganda Petroleum Institute Kigumba (UPIK) and the challenges it is experiencing. Can we get to know when the minister intends to address those challenges? This is an important institute in the region and the entire country but when you look at what is coming out, it is not functional because of the organisational challenges. Can we get to know how long it will take for the minister to address these issues? 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee on recommendation number 8 especially on getting these challenges addressed and also on recommendation number 13 on getting - (Member timed out.)

4.19
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion and I would like to address myself specifically to three components that appear in the table on page 8. 

I noted that component No. 1, which deals with regional access and connectivity, is the biggest and moreover covering the longest parts of the roads. Technical assistance and oversight together with supervision services take only 6.5 per cent of the overall component budget. However, when you go to component No. 2, which is about local access, the total component budget is $25 million but the technical assistance is taking a whole $3.5 million just for supervision, technical assistance and oversight. When I computed this, it takes about 14 per cent of the whole component budget. I think there is something very wrong.

On component No. 3, I totally would even move that this component, if possible, be dealt away with and the money be transferred to component No. 1. This is because I do not see why we should start borrowing money for giving bursaries. Why do we have to borrow money to support an institute whose management structures are haphazard? I am told there was a caretaker principal who was assigned to be a caretaker in January 2014 and the instrument that assigned him power expired before the handover, one year later. What kind of management structure is that? So, I would suggest that component No. 3, which is about bursaries and skills coordination, should just be dealt away with. 

In future, I would recommend that whenever we borrow, let us not have so many components and then do very little of each component. We would rather borrow money and have one component and do much of it rather than borrowing money - Now in component No. 1, you are talking about Kyenjojo-Kigumba Road and you are covering just 100 kilometres. I would have preferred that such money on skills component No. 3 be added to - (Member timed out.)

4.22
MS HELLEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the motion and I would like to make a few remarks.

I agree with hon. Jalia Bintu that this Parliament passed a loan for the Kigumba-Kyenjojo Road and to date, we are still asking what happened to that loan. I am actually reluctant to even support this loan request because it may also not work. Since we passed the other loan request, we are still in dust. 

Bunyoro region does not have a major road connecting the districts of Kiryandongo, Masindi, Hoima up to those other districts that make up the greater Bunyoro. Mr Speaker, therefore, I request all of you to support this loan request and pass it. We have always asked the minister about this and he has always told us that there have always been procurement issues that call for administrative review.

The other issue I would like to comment about is the issue of the Uganda Petroleum Institute Kigumba. I have raised on this Floor several times talking about the same issue but we have never got detailed information either in form of a written document or an oral answer here giving us the status of the organisation at the moment. As I talk, there is no substantive principal. The principal at that level is the accounting officer. Everything is still in the hands of the interim taskforce and I wonder what the problem is. Where is the difficulty in putting in place - (Member timed out.)

4.24
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thanks to the committee for the good report. I also would like to thank Government for finally realising that Bunyoro region is very important. (Laughter)

For the last two terms, I have been asking Government when they would borrow money to particularly construct this road. I am happy that they have borrowed money when I am still around. However, my fear will be in line with those raised by hon. Jalia Bintu that you should not borrow to insult us but borrow to fix the problems in Bunyoro. I will not enjoy words from Government that they are setting up camps for a year to start the project on a road which has been waited for for centuries. I read in the development plan-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you use the word “centuries” figuratively or actually?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Relatively –(Laughter). I would like to state - I am giving information – that I have read the development plan, which had been made by the Government of Obote, and he had planned to tarmac this road in 1968. After how many years is the project coming? We should congratulate the Banyoro for the patience and ask the honourable minister to move faster. (Laughter)

4.26
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine are concerns about the absorption of this loan. 

Whereas principally I support the loan based on the report of the chairperson, I have an issue when it comes to UPIK. Mr Speaker, UPIK has been a problem to the extent that there is no co-ordination between the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports and UPIK. Even in the Public Accounts Committee, we could always invite UPIK but the person in charge of UPIK would not turn up. He would always refer us to the appointing authority. 

The chairman is aware of this because he was a member of the Public Accounts Committee. So, this would happen until we compelled the Permanent Secretary to come but he never appeared. They used to tell us he does not appear and he has never tried to account. This takes me to the question as to whether the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in his wisdom thinks we should borrow to keep the money until the management issues are raised or we should expand the component which relates to UPIK. I seek clarification on that.

The other issue is that I have been seeing immediately we commit to these loans, the lender will say he has secured for us the money and the interest starts running even before disbursement. I do not know whether ever since we committed, we have been incurring interest on this loan.

Finally, I want to talk about the absorptive capacity of this loan generally. You know we normally pass them here like we passed the Buseruka loan. Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, you know the dam is not operational but we passed the loan. There is no such dam in operation. You can go to your record –(Interruption)

MR WERIKHE:  Thank you for giving way. I would like to inform the House that Buseruka Dam is actually operational. To say that Buseruka Dam is not operational actually misleads the House.

MR MWIRU: Thank you for the information. Mr Speaker, I think we are dealing with a big problem. The dam was constructed but it was supposed to get some enhancement in order for it to operate. I think this is one of the issues where we get a little bit offended. Whereas we support the loan, it is important that the Committee on National Economy interests itself in these loans. I have the current information from there. 

Finally, we should also concern ourselves with the absorptive capacity of this loan. The chairman will tell you we have up to around $5,000,000 which has not been absorbed and yet we are paying interest on these loans and mortgaging the future of our country. I think it is important for the committee and the ministry to pick interest in that matter and also the Buseruka one so that we come and give factual information. This is Parliament. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.29
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee chairperson for the report. 

I have two issues on this loan. I am also concerned about the money being borrowed for purposes of the bursaries for the students and the fact that it is exclusive for the students from the Albertine region. We all know that this institute actually trains children from across the boundaries of Uganda.
Also, the fact that we are borrowing this loan means every Ugandan will pay for it. 

I wonder why we should borrow this money and say any other Ugandan will not benefit from it other than those from the Albertine region. If anything, we could have given priority to the people from the Albertine region but other parts of the country should also be able to benefit from this particular amount of money - the equivalent of Shs 8 billion which is for people to train in nursing, tourism and other courses. I am not convinced that this money should be exclusive. 

This is a very huge loan - $145,000,000. It is a lot of money and the area where it covers has a population of about 2 million people. I would be very reluctant to support any other loan request coming here if I do not see that critical roads in some regions like Busoga are also considered. 

Mr Speaker, I am tempted to think that if it were not for oil, maybe this loan would not be thought of but because oil was found in the Albertine region, we have considered it as an area of priority. Now, what happens to other areas where they do not have these kinds of minerals? I, therefore, would like to say this for the record: we have regional roads in Busoga, for example the one that connects up to seven districts from Buwenge via Lambala, Kaliro up to Pallisa. I would be very interested to see that this road is considered and funded - (Member timed out.)

4.32
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I must say that the committee has done a good job and the people of Bunyoro, particularly my constituency of Buhaguzi, are very happy. I have just been communicating with some of them and this is what we have been waiting for.

Colleagues, we really need to support this loan request because if you move through the region today, you will realise that there is a lot that needs to be done, especially to do with physical planning. This aspect of physical planning is what we have always raised on this Floor. 

As we talk, quite a number of unplanned developments are taking place. Take an example of the trading centres, which have been mentioned in the report. There are a lot of buildings and constructions going on and I am afraid that if we had continued in this way, Government was going to face a lot of costs in compensations. However, with physical planning coming in, I am very sure that now we can have planned construction and planned urbanisation, which will also help Government in terms of avoiding what would be unbearable costs in terms of compensation. 

I also want to say, just like my other colleagues, hon. Jalia Bintu and hon. Hellen Kahunde have said, that the biggest challenge we have had with the passing of loan of this nature has been implementation. As we talk, if you check the progress of work on Kigumba-Bulima Road up to Kabwoya, for which we got a loan, you would ask yourself what the challenge is - (Member timed out.)

4.34
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report. This has been a long awaited project for the Albertine region. However, I would like to ask the ministry to also consider the area north of the Albertine region to be part of this. Normally, when this House talks of the Albertine region, they leave out my district, Nwoya, and the upper part of the Albertine region. 

When you see the landing sites in the physical plan, they are only concentrated on the southern areas and yet Nwoya District also has one of the biggest oil wells. Unfortunately or fortunately, it lies within the national park and that is why they talk of oil in Bunyoro. May I request that when Members are talking about oil, they stop tribalising it? This is because as Ugandans, we all have a share in this. 

Mr Speaker, I request the House to include one other landing site, which is north of –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is up to her to accept the information.

MS ADONG: Mr Speaker, I do not need that information as he will take my time. I am requesting that at least one landing site in Nwoya District be included in the project and that is Obira. It is coming up haphazardly and people are struggling over that land. A halt was instituted regarding land title issuance there but on the upper side, land titles are being issued by Government. Therefore, can Obira be included as well? 

In addition, the urban centre should also be planned –(Member timed out.)

4.37
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion for the loan request but with reservations. You have heard Members repeatedly mentioning the problem of absorption capacity. Our capacity to absorb loans is proving to be difficult. We find ourselves paying colossal sums of money in penalty charges as a result of not working within the timeframe schedule. 

The second point is about the repayment period. We are talking of 40 years and we are sure that in 40 years, it is not going to be us paying off the loans but our children. Should we not take a lot of care when borrowing so that our children do not have to suffer as a result of unutilised funds? 

My third point is about avoidance of corrupt tendencies. I would urge the authorities concerned to put up safeguards in the ministries to avoid corrupt tendencies - eating up the money that is supposed to be used for producing results. If we are conscious, we shall be able to move speedily. Otherwise, I support the motion.

4.39
MS TOPHACE KAAHWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I rise to support the motion and I want to thank the committee for coming up with a very good report.   

As someone who comes from the Albertine Graben, this is what we have been waiting for. You are all aware that the Albertine Graben is now a centre of attraction and we are getting an influx of people from all corners of the country hoping to tap into the opportunities therein. As a result, all the existing trading centres are now growing into big urban towns, which are not planned. Therefore, we need this money to plan for those towns that are coming up. We also need it to support the farmers because these people need food. We need to support them so that they can improve on their production. 

On skilling Uganda, I would like to thank the Members that have contributed on Masindi District where we have Kigumba Petroleum School, which was also included in the programme. However, the centre of Bunyoro is Hoima where we have Hoima School of Nursing and that institution was left out when we were planning for these institutions. That institution was left out and yet as we receive many people into the region, we need many nurses and doctors who will be looking after and taking care of these people. Therefore, we need to include Hoima School of Nursing as it is a very important institution. 

Finally, I would like to talk about the loan. We passed a loan request for the Kigumba–Masindi–Kyenjojo-Bulima Road but up to today, we are getting many questions from our voters concerning that road. We have been telling them that money is available and that we passed the loan request but we have not seen any work being done on that road. Therefore, as we pass this loan request, we need to emphasise on implementation. We should see some work on the ground. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

4.41
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to support the motion. Specifically, I would like to support the recommendation of the committee that half of the scholarships should be given to students of the Albertine Graben. In my view, that was very genuine because the activities that are taking place right now, especially oil exploration, affect the people in those districts directly. People have been evicted from their land and these are some of the ways in which they should benefit from this. 

I also want to say that we must know that the Albert Nile is not only in Bunyoro region; it extends up to Yumbe District. Therefore, when we are dividing those scholarships, all those districts that are suffering must benefit. 

I would also like to support the committee’s observation that Kigumba Institute does not have a land title up to now. That is a very big risk. I am aware that all these public institutions that do not have land titles raise the appetites of land grabbers. Therefore, I would like to propose that we give the minister three months to have the land title for that institution otherwise, we are going to face a very big problem.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, this loan that we are borrowing is a multi-sectoral one. Therefore, we also need to have multi-sectoral strategic implementation otherwise, we shall have a challenge - when UNRA is opening the road, National Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC) will not be there and then when the road is finished, NWSC will come and begin to destroy it –(Member timed out.)

4.43
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee. I rise to support the motion.

My observation is on the components. I do not see the component of environment anywhere. We know how much road construction and the allocation of electricity lines affects the environment, especially our forests. Right now, they are constructing Gomba-Mpigi-Butambala Road and all our forests are being cleared. There is no effort or even an arrangement for re-afforestation. I would like to see a component of providing seedlings to nearby farmers for afforestation and also to plant trees along the road so that we can beautify our roads.

I would like to support the committee’s recommendation on public stopovers. Mr Speaker, you can drive along Masaka Road and you will fail to find where to stop. The same applies to Butambala Road. I would therefore like to ask the minister to include these stopovers in the on-going project. We also have to construct places of convenience for our people.

Lastly, on compensation, the committee is recommending timely compensation. Mr Speaker, the people who are going to be re-allocated or displaced need timely compensation. This compensation should be looked at in many terms; it should not be money only. In Butambala, there are people who were paid money and their houses were demolished - (Member timed out.)

4.46
MS LYNDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the committee for the elaborate report. The road and project that is being debated today is indeed a long awaited project. This is the right time to debate and consider this project.

I would like to give an example of the road from Kyenjojo to Masindi, which has never seen anything like tarmac. This is the time, under the Government of President Museveni, that we are considering it. It was previously planned for but it would appear and then disappear. I pray and beg the honourable minister that we put in effort to see this project pass to the best. We should also get the best in terms of monitoring and evaluation so that this road is an example as compared to other roads that have been constructed.

Mr Speaker, regional access is very important. We cannot talk of regional access when we are spending six hours on the road from Hoima to Kyenjojo that would otherwise take about three hours only. That is business lost because we count business in terms of hours.

I would like to allay the fears of the honourable member who fears loans. Every person must have a loan to look responsible, including the Government of Uganda. Do not fear loans, honourable members; we are here to pay and we shall pay and clear the loans. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, the only fear that needs to be put to rest is that of delayed compensation. This is not something that should delay projects. It is important that we compensate people in time so that when construction is supposed to start, it is not delayed but simply takes off. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.48
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and my honourable colleagues. I greatly support the proposal by Government to borrow money from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance the Albertine Region Sustainable Development Project.

The development of any part of this country is our pride. We feel very proud when there is development in any part of this country. We move a lot and we enjoy driving on nice roads and sleeping where there is electricity. We also enjoy sending our children to good schools. I therefore support this proposal to borrow.

However, I would like the minister to note the following: one, the issue of shoddy work; two, the issue of corruption; three, value for money. For whatever is being done, the work must be commensurate with the amount of money that is pumped in. Let us really work so that we enjoy the fruits of this loan. A lot of money was pumped into the road between Nebbi and Pakwach, for example, but after one year we are witnessing cracks and potholes, among others.

My dear colleagues, next time when there is a loan request for construction of the road from Atiak to Moyo, let us also support it. Thank you very much.

4.50
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the motion. I will mainly focus on the link with country strategy because we are looking at the future cities like the oil and gas city. Hoima city is extremely important for the development of this country. Coming from another strategic city, Fort Portal tourism city, I see the construction of this road blending in very well with business in Fort Portal and it will boost business.

I happened to travel on that road going to Paraa from Fort Portal via Kagadi, Hoima and Masindi and it was a nightmare. I spent over seven hours on the road. I had to go for treatment for my back as a result of the road being so bad. I imagined that if tourists are going through similar experiences then we are risking our tourism industry. Therefore, when I saw this proposal, I was very excited and determined to come here quickly to support it wholeheartedly because it is going to boost the economy of this country and also the local economy of these respective areas, including Fort Portal tourism city.

Mr Speaker, there are two quick things that I wanted to place emphasis on. I am part of the Committee on Natural Resources and when we visited other oil producing countries, we found that these technical institutes are taken very seriously. It is very unfortunate that we are going to be producing oil in 2017 and yet we are not generating Ugandans who are trained in technical skills –(Member timed out.)

4.52
MS JUDITH AMOIT (NRM, Women Representative, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion well aware that the Albertine region is an area of oil and gas resources. 

I would like to support this loan request because it is a priority for Ugandans to have better infrastructure. However, we have passed very many loan requests, including the loan for the Tirinyi-Pallisa, Pallisa-Kumi and Pallisa–Kamonkoli Road in December 2013, but up to now, there is no sign of development. I fear that when we continue passing these loan requests and nothing is being done, our excitement is turned into pain. Our people have lost patience. They are asking, “What you are doing in Parliament? Are you following up these loans?” When you go to the office of the minister, he will tell you that procurement is going on; so what do we do?

I am very obsessed with loans that are not implemented and I would like to appeal to the minister who has been to Pallisa and seen the poor state of the roads. They give us contractors who are blacklisted and incompetent to repair roads – (Member timed out.)

4.55
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support this motion one hundred per cent and to say that the Albertine region needs to be developed in preparation for oil production. 

Fellow Ugandans, we know that we are all going to swim in this oil money once it is produced and therefore, we need to support the infrastructure because this place is going to be a business hub. For those people who lament when they reach the Albertine region and say that oil will bring curses to that area, we would rather prepare and support this so that it is fully developed and so that it does not portray that picture where people are expecting the oil to bring a curse to our country. Therefore, I support the motion.

I would also like to support the artisanship for empowering our people. However, we tend to excite Ugandans, particularly the local people who believe that immediately after training one is going to get a job. Right now, I have a batch of students who have completed studies in Kigumba oil school who are on my neck because they want to get employment. I do not know how you are going to curb the excitement of Ugandans that yes, we have the oil, we have trained and we are going to train more people but they should know the available capacity and where it will stop.

In preparing this region, we need to bring in the component of gender. I have not heard about it from the chairman of the committee. How are women going to benefit from this loan? When you write your reports, you tend to generalise and at the end of the day, we do not see our women benefiting from these loans. We need to come out clearly –(Member timed out.)

4.57
MR ATWOOKI KASIRIVU (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion. 

Since I came to Parliament in 1986, all Members of Parliament from Bunyoro region have been talking about the Kigumba-Kyenjojo Road. I will be very happy when I see machines on any of the sections of that road, whether it is Kigumba -Bulima, Bulima-Kabwoya and Kabwoya-Kyenjojo. I will again be very happy when, at long last, we see a tarmac road traversing Bunyoro region. For colleagues who have not moved extensively in these parts of the country, it is actually Bunyoro region which has lagged behind when it comes to road infrastructure. A road went to Kisoro but for Bunyoro, nothing. 

As I read through the report of the Committee on National Economy, I would have wished that this loan focuses on new innovations and better technology. When I look at the focus, especially money going to Kichwamba and Kigumba, wouldn’t we have established an institute with modern technology and with focus on ICT and other technologies? The other day, I saw the President - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will now put the question on this motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to $145 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance the Albertine Region Sustainable Development Project. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers of Adam Juma Islamic Nursery and Primary School represented by hon. Balikuddembe and hon. Seninde. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. 

We also have students and teachers from Kyankwazi Junior Primary school represented by hon. Samuel Ssemugaba and hon. Ann Nankabirwa. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON THURSDAY, 4TH JUNE 2015.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, debate begins now. I had already proposed this motion for your debate. Each Member will take three minutes and we conclude this debate today.

5.01
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Women Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I thank His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda for the speech. One of the issues he mentioned was that northern Uganda would be the heart of industrialisation. He also said that this is highly dependent on the strength of the power or electricity that we are going to have. 

When we analyse this and scrutinise the level of industrialisation in northern Uganda currently, this is the region, which is least industrialised. Therefore, I request that the ministers take this as a matter of priority and begin to prepare northern Uganda to become the hub of industrialisation.

The President greatly emphasised the issue of power. I therefore request that the Government takes it as a priority to stabilise electricity where it currently exists. In Adjumani and Moyo, for example, power has reached there but it is so unstable to the extent that the local people have nicknamed it Aziku, meaning that it goes at any time and comes at any time. Therefore, I request the minister responsible to make interventions where power has reached so that it is stable.

Mr Speaker, in addition I propose that in each of the districts of northern Uganda, we initiate small industries. Under enterprise selection, we have specific enterprises that are selected by the Government. If we can convert these into small industries, this will help us achieve what the President has said. 

On the issue of roads, I am happy that we have just concluded with this loan. However, what I have realised is that the process of starting to construct a road takes too long. The initiation to borrow takes too long, the borrowing process takes too long and after the approval, the implementation - (Member timed out.)

5.04
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the mover of the motion and particularly the President for this wonderful address that he made to this country.

Mr Speaker, I have been reading through the State of the Nation Addresses that the President has been making to this Parliament. I would like to say that this particular one is quite meticulous and outstanding of all those that have been delivered. I thank the President for this wonderful message he gave to the country.

Mr Speaker, the President talked about the security situation in the country and about Uganda having total peace. I know that many people would say that we have many cases of murders that are happening and so on and therefore, probably they would want to fault this statement that there is total peace in this country. However, I would like to agree that indeed, Uganda is peaceful. One can move from one corner of the country to another without disruption and whatever happens are actually incidents of criminality, as the President stated. I must commend the UPDF for the great work they have done in securing this country. 

Mr Speaker, the President talked about roads and enumerated the work that has been done, what is planned and so on. However, I am concerned that from the roads that are planned as stated in the State of the Nation Address, there are those that I think would be a priority but are missing on that list. There is a regional road, for example, which I believe joins the various regions in this country. This road starts from Buwenge and passes through Naigobya, Kaliro, Saaka to Pallisa, connecting about seven districts. It would be important for us to look at this road for purposes of market access and regional connection. 

Mr Speaker, the President talked about loans and particularly, agricultural loans. He was looking at UDB being recapitalised and used for purposes of extending loans to the agricultural sector. In this regard, I would like to say that I am a bit sceptical. I wonder whether it is going to be easy for our farmers to access loans through Uganda Development Bank even if it is recapitalised. I think it is important for us to look at coming up with agricultural banks that appreciate the uniqueness of the agricultural sector, given the vagaries of the weather that these people go through - (Member timed out.)

5.07
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In 1980 during the general elections, I was in senior two. President Museveni, by then a UPM candidate, came to Mbale and he was welcomed by only three adults: Magode Ikuya, Maumbe and a third person that I cannot recall. The rest were us the children. I can tell you, now he is being proclaimed as a good President but in 1980 he was not. As an individual, he may have good plans but maybe the people surrounding him are the problem. Yesterday, I was watching TV and they showed Gen. Muhwezi going to pick forms. He said, “We want to build our country now.” Where has he been for 30 years? 

These are the things I am raising and one of them concerns roads. There was a master plan concerning roads, which indicated that $10 billion would complete our roads. Our yearly budget is over Shs 10 billion and for 30 years, that is Shs 300 billion. Why haven’t you got the $10 billion to complete all the roads? One of the reasons is corruption. All the money is being eaten left and right.

They have been talking about roads and I have heard my brother from Kaliro raise this very well and I have an example I would like to give. When I saw the Bagisu recently dancing that they should not allow hon. Amama, I really laughed. There is a road from Nabumali to Lwakhakha, which the President has sung about, saying that it will tarmacked, ever since he came to power. Up to now, it is still murrum. This is one of the roads that links to the border where taxes are collected. There is another road from Namagumba to Budadiri to Sironko, which he has sung about since 1993 that it will be tarmacked. He only talks about it to campaign.

Therefore, I would like to tell colleagues that these budgets we pass are for a few individuals. You are here saying we should pass - You have passed a loan request here and I saw hon. Byabagambi doing this; he knows that his staff are going to be the first beneficiaries of these loans and budgets. While you people who are saying that we need the budgets passed are the ones who are going to suffer. Unless we wake up as Parliament and deal with this Executive, we are finished.

Finally, this country belongs to all of us. We have no problems with Museveni as an individual but we have issues with his policies and the way he is governing the country. You cannot bring a person like Gen. Muhwezi, who has been involved in scandals, to be a minister again. What will he do when he is there? (Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Mr Speaker and honourable members, is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to allege that I have been involved in scandals when I have been cleared by courts of law with no case to answer because there was no merit in the allegations that I was guilty of any wrongdoing? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a rule on courtesy to each other. We also have a stronger rule on personal attacks. These rules avoid those things; they actually prohibit them. Therefore, honourable members, I expect you to extend courtesy when debating and I request the Member for Budadiri West to withdraw the offensive remarks.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am ready to go to the Committee on Rules and Privileges to confirm how Gen. Muhwezi has been convicted but he has used the system to evade - He was involved in GAVI funds; what can I say? I want you to send this to the rules committee so that I can go and make my case there. We will not allow these ministers –(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Mr Speaker, hon. Nandala-Mafabi has stated and it is on record that I was convicted. I challenge him to prove that conviction. If he cannot, I demand that he be punished for these offensive, malicious and defamatory statements that he is making. Is he in order, after you have ruled, to continue and repeat those offensive statements?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member for Budadiri West, I have asked you to withdraw the statements and it is within the professional courtesy of the House to do that. I ask you to withdraw those statements unless you have in your possession a record of a conviction secured from any court of this country against hon. Jim Muhwezi.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I think I was talking too fast and my head was thinking before I could speak. He was not convicted but there is evidence that – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, with that I withdraw but the facts are known. Mr Speaker, the reason I am raising all this is because roads are being eaten – (Member timed out.)

5.13
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the President for his precise State of the Nation Address on 4 June 2015. 

The President talked about the achievements of this country and what we plan to do if we want to be a middle class country. He also talked about roads. The greatest achievement we have in Uganda is in the roads sector, where you find that roads joining one part of the country to another are all tarmacked and now we are on the way to tarmacking those roads that are joining districts. I think we must applaud the NRM Government for this achievement.

However, I would like to comment about the lifetime of these roads. As we are making some of these roads, they are breaking down. I will give the example of the Arua-Karuma Road where this road is totally broken between Pakwach and Nebbi and yet it has taken just five years. That means that as soon as we finish tarmacking one road, we are beginning to repair it. This is really drawing us back. Therefore, we must urge the contractors and UNRA to supervise the tarmacking of these roads so that we have roads, which can last for more than 20 years. Otherwise, we are just spending money on these roads to repair them.

Mr Speaker, I acknowledge the distribution of electricity. However, this electricity only passes along the main roads. In Koboko, for example, the poles are being extended from Arua to Kaya and from Arua to Yumbe but there are growing towns like Lobule and Ludara, which do not have electricity. It is said that Koboko is going to receive power but actually, it will only receive it along the main roads. I urge the minister to extend power to the rural areas as well because most of the production and industries are going to be in the rural areas.

Mr Speaker, on the side of agriculture –(Member timed out.)

5.17
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to add my voice to thank the President for the very convincing State of the Nation Address. I wish to concur with him on the need to reduce the cost of doing business in Uganda by increasing electricity generation in the country and by improving road and railway infrastructure and ICT services. I also believe and agree with him that once we have improved these services and infrastructure in these areas, the country will be able to develop at a faster rate.

It is unfortunate that the Minister of Energy is not here but I wish to remind the minister that her ministry has promised the district of Kiboga, where Kiboga East is, several electricity lines in order to extend rural electrification in that the area of Kiboga District. I am of the view and I am convinced that once electricity is extended to the rural areas in Kiboga, the cost of production, for example of cooling milk - these people are currently using diesel generators to cool the milk - will reduce. That extra money they are paying for diesel will go into the pockets of the people and will be able to improve their household income, as the President has always been saying. 

Therefore, I once again concur that this State of the Nation Address was quite at par in pointing out the things that we need to do as a country in order to develop. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.19
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. However, there are some issues that sector ministers should take note of. 

On pages 3 to 6, where the President talked about the kilometres of power extension, they should also give statistics on how many people have been connected. This is because we have seen in a number of areas that the extensions are there but affordability is still high. This has not helped us as regards the extent and rate at which our forests are being degraded.

When you look at the roads, there is fragmentation in planning. You find that as much as we have a roads authority, we also have roads under Ministry of Works and we have roads in UNRA, roads in local government and roads in Agriculture. Better coordination is required here for better results. Otherwise, even those with no capacity are involved in supervising roads. That is why, at times, we find that our roads are very poor. There is a lot of ping-pong. Therefore, it is better for the ministry in charge of roads to have coordination. Why should the Ministry of Local Government be involved in constructing roads even when they are constructing them poorly?

On page 12, His Excellency the President stated that he regrets why Uganda Commercial Bank was privatised. We need further information about this. If the President regrets in his proclamation that selling of the commercial bank was a mistake, we expect the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to prepare a solution for that because we are saying that we need a rural bank, which has a human face or which is like an agricultural bank.

When you look at page 22, the President was talking about tea. Tea in Uganda is not regulated like coffee and cotton are. As a result, the people involved in tea growing have suffered. We call upon Government and the minister responsible to see if we can regulate tea for better results and prices.

Finally, when you look at the institutional fights in Government, these undermine Government performance. When the head of state says that Parliament or the Public Accounts Committee is not doing its work because of some people who misreport to him or misrepresent facts - The Office of the Auditor-General carries out audits in various sectors and they give the report to Parliament. Parliament then assigns the duty to the Public Accounts Committee. The queries are not generated in Parliament. However, the President takes them as if Members of Parliament generate their own queries. An example is the issue of the matooke initiative where you find that more than Shs 60 billion was invested with no results. 

Therefore, we need to be coordinated as a government because there are no bad intentions in a committee of Parliament handling work from the Auditor-General. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.22
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In 1986, when President Museveni was giving his speech here at Parliament, he said that the problem of Africa is leaders who overstay in power and when they overstay in power, they become intolerant thereby becoming dictators.

Mr Speaker, in the State of the Nation Address, what my constituents were waiting for was for the President to announce that he was not going to contest in 2016. This is because since 1986 and even 1980, the President has been talking about democracy and about how nations can develop. 

Mr Speaker, I want to tell you that during my “A” Level, I quoted a lot of what the President used to say about the economy and I appreciated it. However the challenge is, is he living by what he said? When you look at the 30 years he has been in power, most of the Front Bench has been with him since 1986. That means that if the President had left power, there would be new faces on the Front Bench today and they would have come with new ideas.

That is why, Mr Speaker, you are the Deputy Speaker right now but in the Eighth Parliament, you were not. I am specifically talking about the senior ministers not the junior ones. 

Mr Speaker, for those who listened to the State of the Nation Address, the President kept referring to the Bible and quoted several verses. This means that the President also recognises that it is high time he came back to the Lord so that some of the sins he has committed can be forgiven. We would not love to see the President espouse himself when he said that people should have time to serve their nation and then leave the stage thereby creating an opportunity for others. That is the only way democracy can prevail.

Secondly, in the NRM Manifesto of 2011-2016 under the leadership of Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the chairman of NRM and also the President of Uganda, talked of job creation – (Member timed out.)

5.27
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion to thank the President for his precise State of the Nation Address. In his speech, the President spoke about priorities that have actually helped to develop this country and among them is electricity.

Mr Speaker, when you move around this country, you realise that electricity has reached almost every part of this country, Kween inclusive. Right now, people in Kween and Bukwo are receiving electricity. Even within the communities, there are plans to have electricity extended. I think that is the way to go because we know that with electricity, we can develop; we can have small industries and even big ones.

Mr Speaker, the only thing I can add as far as electricity is concerned is that as we extend electricity to our districts, we should also look at the equalisation because when you look at the current programme, electricity is going to be extended but it is not on an equitable basis. For example, in some districts and regions, electricity has reached almost every path. As we receive more electricity, we hope that we shall have more of these lines extended within our communities.

In the State of the Nation Address, the President spoke about total peace and security. I agree with this because when you move around, you realise that there is total peace in our country. If I may give the example of Sebei region, we used to run to the forests and sleep in caves because of cattle rustling but with this Government, we can boast of security. If there is anything for which Sebei supports this Government, it is because of security and peace.

Mr Speaker, it is only unfortunate that, as I raised here the other day, we have had some experiences of cattle theft that is coming up. I call upon the government to come and address this issue immediately so that we restore peace and so that our people settle down to continue with development.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to thank this Government for the roads. At least most of our districts have tarmac roads. I now take this opportunity to call upon my government under the Ministry of Works to fast-track the road – (Member timed out.)

5.30
MS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to add my voice to those of others who have given comments on the State of the Nation Address by the President on 4th June. 

I would like to thank him for putting communication as a top priority in this country because the road network in the majority of the areas in this country has connected us to our neighbours. For example in West Nile, particularly in Maracha, we have been connected to South Sudan. When my people listened to the President’s address, that day all of them were excited and they asked me to thank him for the road that has passed through Maracha, now commonly known as, “We are driving on the carpet”. This is because our road is very good.

However, to the minister I would like to say that the roads have been worked on but I do not think that road construction has followed the tradition that was there before. This is because some of us have watched roads being made and usually when they reach a major institution or a branch to a major area, they will go at least a kilometre or half a kilometre inside so that it is seen that the road is covering. However, this road network in West Nile comes to a dead-end within the roadsides which are not carefully worked on. The bus stages were also not properly done. I think it is not the President’s fault but the minister who is the supervisor of this work. He should go and check.

I am very grateful for the road signs; for instance, when you cross the bridges in Maracha, you would think that you are on London Bridge. I would like to thank the President for that. (Applause) 

The road sides in Maracha have been laid with electric poles and we are waiting. When is it going to be switched on? I would also like to add my voice to the colleagues who spoke earlier. It would have been nice if major areas like the schools and other institutions had electricity poles extended to them – (Member timed out.)

5.34
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank His Excellency for the State of the Nation Address. I would like to concur with the President where he said that Uganda was now moving forward in development because of the peace and security. 

Mr Speaker, Karamoja is indeed a beneficiary of this peace. The community is happy and living in harmony with their neighbours. The animals are even very happy –(Laughter)– because they are no longer being taken through long distances during the cattle raids.

Although we have a few incidences of cattle theft, the UPDF is doing its best and handling the matter very well. They follow the stolen cattle and take it back to the rightful owners. The reformed warriors have even settled down and are now in business. They deal in trade within the communities like Teso and Sebei that they used to raid. Peace has really brought development to the region. Further, the lives of the reformed warriors have been changed because they can make profits in trading in less risky ways compared to cattle rustling where many lives were lost.

However, development has been hampered by corruption which has almost returned us to the insecure times which Government fought against. I call upon Government to take serious action on the corrupt so that this can change those who intend to steal public funds because these corrupt people take away a lot of these funds to develop themselves and not the country. 

His Excellency also talked about a large meat processor in Bombo and acknowledged the fact that it had collapsed. Mr Speaker, because of the peace and security, the animal population in the country has increased especially in Karamoja, Teso and Sebei. It would therefore be good if we had that meat processor in Soroti reopened so that the animals can be slaughtered there and other products like the skin, horns and hooves can be processed locally which will create jobs for our people. I thank you.  

5.37
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to make a correction to what the honourable member just said: If you are talking about the population of animals, Karamoja may have but for the case of Teso, the cattle has dwindled and the numbers are not even 1/8th of what we had in the good old days. 

During the State of the Nation Address, I was tickled by the President’s incitement of the technocrats to the institution of Parliament. I thought of this and as members, if we still feel that we should bear any relevance we should not encourage any other repeated occurrences of such. 

If we look at what is happening in the country at the moment and you talk about it, most of it touches on the technocrats. If you talk about this corruption, negligence – we are here talking about doctors neglecting especially mothers who are dying in hospitals; all these are cases that are supposed to be fought.

The technocrats in the hall during the State of the Nation Address were cheering and even overshadowed the Members of Parliament. To the Fountain of Honour who is supposed to ensure that the institutions work and there is adherence to duty and responsibility - should the President still continue inciting technocrats in this way against Members of Parliament and Parliament as an institution? This will not be good for this country. 

When you go to public offices in this country on a Friday, by 2 O’clock, offices are closed. Work ends around mid-day and 1 O’clock! So a country that is supposed to be productive cannot continue with this level of laisse faire.

Secondly, is the question of climate change. In the Financial Year 2013/2014, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, using the National Planning Authority took off time to see how to synchronise climate change and incorporate them into the budgeting process. They talked about the Ministry of Works and Transport and climate change, agriculture and climate change, energy and climate change. They really did a lot of documentation and collection of ideas. But after collecting the ideas, what next? 

When we, this financial year, progressed with the issue of the budget, I did not see anywhere – (Member timed out.)

5.40
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion in appreciating the State of the Nation Address by the President. What is the State of the Nation Address? To me, it would be giving a balance sheet. I get disturbed when where the President acknowledges that there is need for improvement somewhere and the finance minister states that, we take it as an admission of failure. 

The President emphasised key areas and I was actually impressed by the level of clarity in prioritising – that you cannot do everything at once and at ago. We all know that our failure has been that we want to do everything at ago. This is the first time that we are trying to get to know and we need to help ourselves that we cannot do the roads and all the others at ago – including the roads in different regions. 

I have 51 kilometres of road and I have to pray very hard that I come back to Parliament and sort them out with my good friend hon. John Byabagambi, if he is retained in Cabinet. But what do we want? The accountability that the President made is for 30 years and cannot be divorced from one year as my very good friend who has a number of voters from my village – the Leader of the Opposition - is saying. Every time you give the State of the Nation Address, it is a cumulative effect and it is my thinking that today was determined by yesterday and yesterday was determined by the other day. This is a cumulative effect. 

I had some friends from the US – the children of the late Oboth Ofumbi – and I asked them how Uganda is today compared to when they left in 1979. They said that there was great improvement. Even hon. Wafula, the Leader of the Opposition, knows that when he is going back to his constituency, for the first time in the record of this democratic country, we give him a lead car and bodyguards. This is improvement on democracy and constitutionalism –(Interruption) 

MR OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, the honourable member from West Budama South is aware that the Leader of the Opposition is a constitutional office put there by the people of Uganda and LOP is provided with transport to move in that capacity as the head of the other Government.

We are aware that that LOP does not have much apart from having those cars. So is the member in order to keep on referring to just a mere vehicle as power that the LOP has got?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For me to rule properly on this subject, you may have had to dispute the fact that you have a lead car and all the other things and then I would have ruled. But if you do have them, then it will be very difficult for me to rule the member out of order.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for a brilliant ruling. The point I wanted to bring is that where you have constitutionalism –(Member timed out.)

5.45
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The different organisations, particularly the Uganda National Bureau of Statistics and the Central Bank and so many independent firms have kept the figures of youth unemployment between 78 and 83 percent. This has remained a very apparent issue only escalating year after year. I had hoped that in this State of the Nation Address, we would see the President in a very special and pertinent way addressing this challenge of youth unemployment. However, to my disappointment, I had general statements. This was to the disappointment of so many young people in the country.

I am very confident that every parliamentarian before and now as we traverse our constituencies, when we meet parents, the first thing you are reminded about is a job of their daughter or son that they have been looking for a long time. The parents have done their part; they have sacrificed everything they can, sold land and other properties to educate their children. When it comes to campaigns, we write on our posters: “Modernisation of Agriculture, Industrialisation” and the same youth go out of their way to pin up these posters, compose songs and campaign for the same regime only to wait after five years to do exactly the same thing after being unemployed. 

Mr Speaker, this is a very passionate issue. I think Government needs to be reminded that young people out there are crying hard - let nobody say that they were not reminded that young people sought to have this issue of unemployment addressed. I was equally disappointed when I heard the President mention in no uncertain terms but generally on the constitutional reforms that the whole country had been talking about – (Member timed out_)

5.48
MS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice on the rest who have said that they support this State of the Nation Address. 
I want to emphasise the point His Excellency mentioned in regard to installation of CCTV cameras in major towns. If this is done then it will reduce on the petty thieves that are prevailing in our towns and cities. If it is not done then we might lose the peace and security that we are enjoying today. 

The other issue that I am so much interested in was what he told us about the capitalisation of Uganda Development Bank. This will greatly help people who want to create employment for us here in Uganda thus helping our youth to get employment and do away with these bad activities of robbery and marijuana smoking.

Thirdly, I just missed a point in his speech; he never talked about rejuvenating the cooperative movement in this country because some of us who have seen how this movement created employment and absorbing the youth, it would be very ideal if Uganda embarked on the establishment and the rejuvenation of cooperative movement to curb unemployment in this country. I thank His Excellency for his address.

5.50
MR BENJAMIN CADET (NRM, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank His Excellency for a good State of the Nation Address; it was very good on economics, peace and stability. 

A human being is first and foremost a social being before being economic. When you analyse this address there are critical sectors that were not adequately addressed, for example, the health sector. When you go on the ground throughout Uganda health centre IVs, that are the majority in the country, are lacking funding. The maximum they get is Shs 600,000 to cater for electricity bills, water bills, cleaning and everything and as a result you find wherever you go it is only Members of Parliament and other leaders who are pressurised to meet the other costs.

These health centre IVs even lack beds and buying beds for the whole country, you need less than Shs 15 billion. These are the critical issues that I believe should have been given a lot of time.

It is the same in the education sector; this is the time to begin looking at the issue of quality. We have addressed quantity but it is shameful finding students of P.7 who cannot do simple mathematics and English. We feel we have addressed the issue of quantity, but let’s also give some more time to deal with the issue of quality by trying to revisit the contribution of the parents and the PTAs because education, like food, is a consumable and by leaving it to the state - Uganda is not yet a welfare state that we can adequately fund education. Let the parents now know their responsibility than telling them to let the children go and study.

Mr Speaker, in my area, when you get a good long jumper, he can long-jump three or four homes simply because our President does not probably believe in family planning. It is because he says a huge population is good. But for me who is there, I have seen the disadvantages of a man producing children every day and the dangers. First, they can marry even 12 women, but the most important issue is that they are producing a lot and the economy cannot support them. As a result, the dependence ratio is so high that it negates even our savings because a few people are working to support very large families.

As I have said, these are the critical issues –(Member timed out.)

5.54
COL. (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to invite my colleagues to thank the President for giving a clear and precise accountability in his presentation on the State of the Nation Address.

Mr Speaker, I would like us to acknowledge the consolidation of peace, security and stability which are the fundamental pillars of development.

Mr Speaker, I shudder when I listen to colleagues especially from the Opposition side failing to honourably acknowledge the contribution that has been attained by this regime. For example, by 1986, Uganda was a net exporter of refugees, but today, it is a net importer of refugees because of the peace and stability that we enjoy in this country. 

Mr Speaker, I shudder when I hear colleagues from the Opposition condemning the government that we have burdened this country with a big debt yet they fail to acknowledge that this money that Government borrows is not for consumption, but it goes into infrastructure. For example, in 1986, Uganda had 1,000 kilometres of potholes called tarmac, but today we are reaching about 4,500 kilometres of tarmac. In 1986, we were generating 50 megawatts of power, but today we are generating 850 megawatts of power and that is where most of the money goes. 

By 1986, Uganda had 10 per cent coverage of water, but today in the rural areas, we are talking of 75 per cent of rural water coverage although Nyabushozi is still behind but it is moving. Urban areas, we are talking of 90 per cent water coverage. What are you people talking about –(Interruption). 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to my good friend, the General who I respect so much, insinuating that the Opposition does not appreciate and yet, in his own submission, he has stated that they found Government with 1,000 kilometres of potholes, and they have now 4,000 kilometres of potholes cleared after a period of 30 years. However, in Tanzania, Kikwete is leaving after ten years, but he has built 30,000 kilometres of tarmac roads.

Is the honourable member in order to continue telling lies in this House when we are seeing what is happening in other member states of East Africa?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the record of this House should not be tampered with. The member never said anything like that.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I would like to know whether it is procedurally right for the honourable member to allege or misinform the House that Tanzania in ten years has tarmacked 30,000 kilometres of roads when I am on the Committee of the East African Community and I know very well that Tanzania have got 5,500 kilometres of tarmacked roads. Is the honourable member procedurally right to mislead the House, giving facts which are wrong without substantiating them?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, facts cannot be wrong, statements can. (Laughter) 

Honourable member, now you have the correct information and the record has been cleared. Please, wind up.

COL. (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the wise guidance. I want to call upon colleagues that they should be honourable enough to acknowledge where a Government has performed and criticise where it is due, but do not be so antagonistic in their ways of doing things. Otherwise, it is not right for leaders to misguide the country.

Finally, Mr Speaker, when a colleague who is trying to be the next leader stands up to condemn the government without giving a way forward, solution or proposal to the problems we are facing, then what do we expect of him? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Chief Opposition Whip, you have four minutes.

5.59
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the absence of LOP, I take his slot.

I want to raise just a few issues and I would like to refer to the booklet entitled, “The State of the Nation Address by the His Excellency, the President” on page 2. On this page, the President talked of 50 years the NRM and its precursors have been fighting the evil of disorientation.

Mr Speaker, I have always expressed disappointment in the people who write the President’s speech. I do not want to blame the President directly because he is a very busy person. He is the Fountain of Honour, but he has recruited very skilled and experienced professionals to make him function professionally and with excellence. 

I am very surprised that these people who advise the President are not conscious of the fact that of the 50 years, the NRM has ruled for 30 years. In 30 years, NRM has consistently believed and promoted disorientation. That is shooting oneself in the foot. They should have known that out of the 50 years, 30 years have been appropriated to NRM. Anybody who writes this speech should not have done it.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, the President has consistently despised the institution of Parliament. I happened to be a Member of this Parliament and for the President to refer to us in writing that “Parliament is arrogant”, and to refer to the deliberation of the Committees of Parliament as “court criminal proceedings” is wrong. This institution respects the Presidency and the Judiciary and it also deserves respect from the President.

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, you are aware that our Rule 10 says – although it has been abused in the past - when the President is addressing Parliament, he must be heard in total silence. We on our side of the Opposition tried our best to restrain ourselves. The President did not recognise that. He continued to bad mouth the institution of Parliament. 

Coming to the economy; the President listed the priorities that included the roads, electricity, railways and others. The President knows very well that 80 per cent of the population which he rules does not live on those sectors he mentioned. That is where the budget of this country goes. 

Eighty per cent of our population depends on land. The President himself is part and parcel of the AU treaty which has prescribed 50 per cent of the national Budget to go into agriculture. The President is 16 per cent- (Member timed out_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEKER: Please wind up. 

MS OGWAL: I have been timing myself. The President is aware that even the Maputo Declaration also stipulates 15 per cent. This has not been done. 

Mr Speaker, allow me before you switch off the microphone to say this - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, I do not deal with microphones. 

MS OGWAL: Okay, I mean whoever is responsible for switching off the microphone. Allow me to say this, if it is necessary, let us congratulate the President. Let us congratulate him for ensuring that the budget on agriculture has been declining rapidly including those very people whom you get votes from. It has moved from 4.9 per cent in 2011 to 3.4 per cent in 2013 and then to 3.1 per cent in 2014, and this year 2.7 per cent. Let us clap and congratulate him and elect him as the sole candidate.

The debts situation has worsened from $7 billion to $7.3 in one year. And 57 per cent of the total debt is external and 43 per cent is domestic. For this, we must congratulate the President. This is because he was never mental. This is very serious for our economy. 

In my view, these are clear manifestations of disorientation. We must know who is disoriented. Somebody is not advising the President correctly. That person must go back and advise him. He is not only your President, but he is also my President. He must be advised properly so that he stops this Government from being disoriented and begins to allocate resources properly to sectors that are productive - the main one being agriculture. 

The youth unemployment levels must be addressed. Sixty five per cent of our population now is unemployed –(Interjection)– yes, that is the record. Check on your statistics. It may be global, but let me tell you, start with your country. If the whole world is starving, are you going to say that even your own children must starve? Let the Presidents start from Uganda. 

It is important that the youth must speak. This is because the issue of youth unemployment is going to cause us problems in this country. People are going to go on the streets. There is no way we are going to control uprising in this country. This is because the youth are the driving factor. They are the ones who are being distorted and taken to the bush to fight. We must stop this. 

I am surprised there are youth representatives in this Parliament and they have continued to keep quiet. Instead they promote the principle of sole candidature. I rest my case. 

6.08
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I note the significant support from both sides of the House that this motion has received. There is support from both sides. Thanks to His Excellency the President for a clear and comprehensive communication accounting to the country, and giving the country the balance sheet as to how we stand in that particular year. 

My first point is to thank colleagues for commending the President in respect to the State of the Nation Address that we received earlier on in the year. 

In the President’s address, the issue of infrastructure I think was well put. I am sure all of us agree that putting priority on infrastructure, roads, electricity, ICT and railways is definitely going to have a big role in effect on the positive side in as far as reducing the cost of doing business is concerned. 

In particular, I think generating more electricity is going to be the basis for industrialisation of our country. With more industries, more jobs will certainly be available. Therefore, more of our children will get jobs. I think that priority is in the right place. 

On the front of regional integration; I think here again, we are making a great stride. The statistics we have indicate that Intra-African Trade still stands at 12 per cent. 

However, in regard to the East African Region, we are above that average. We are at 23 per cent. This is because of the great efforts that our leaders have made including President Museveni to ensure that we get closer and trade more. 

We now have a common customs union, common market and special integration projects. This is the way to go. We must commend our leaders in the region for the special effort they have made in that direction.  

I want at this stage to thank my elder sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal. I think it was last month when she stood on the Floor of the House here and made it very clear - she said on the issue of defence and security that we must speak the same language. This is because without security and stability, we would do nothing even if we had all the money and ideas. 

That is the leadership that this country requires. Even if you are on the Opposition, you must identify common good points. You must give credit where it is due. Then we can differ on other issues, listen to each other and change things as we move along.  Therefore, I would like to thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal for that clear and public statement. 

On the front of peace and stability; we are making great strides. I again want to thank Parliament. Earlier on about four, five or six months ago, Parliament passed a resolution supporting mutual defence pact as part of the Northern corridor Integration Project.

As we speak now, we have a Defence Pact between Kenya and Uganda and the Republic of Rwanda. This is for the Northern Corridor Integration Project. Very soon, Mr Speaker, we will be coming to the House to request it to ratify the Protocol on Defence and Security for the East African security.

At the same sitting, Mr Speaker, with your permission, we will also bring a resolution for ratification of the East African Standby Force. These are great developments in the area of security because Uganda cannot be an island of peace. We need to work together in the region and Africa. We need to defend our people, our territory and ensure that we can use that base for peace and security, to transform our economy and people.

However, let me address the issue of employment. The issue of employment is a bi-partisan issue. It is not just a Government issue and if we are going to succeed, we need to understand the fundamentals underlying the situation. First of all, for our country, I think we have done very well to give general and mass education to our population. Many of our people are employable. The challenge now is to find the jobs. The jobs will be found with industrialisation. They will not come by slogan or blaming each other. We all must work at it with peace, electricity generated - with industrialisation the jobs will certainly be there.

As stop-gap measures, the government has gone out of its way to create some special programmes for the youth. For example, like currently as all of us are aware, we have the youth livelihood project which is running through the whole country. This is not the ultimate solution but a stop-gap – (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you my senior as well, for giving way. The clarification that I am seeking from you regards to the employment which you have been talking about, and it is in respect with industrialisation.

In USA where I was last month, some of the aspirants were giving themselves targets that within the first year, they will create 5,000 - 10,000 jobs, depending on the various parties that they subscribe to. Also putting up an industry or an industrial base takes a short time. It does not take 30 years. You can build an industry within five years. The issue I would like to seek clarification on from you is for 30 years which NRM has been in power, where has it been not to industrialise so that they create jobs for the people?

DR KIYONGA: Well, we are educating each other and I am glad that my brother, you have raised two points: One is that in the USA, where you were, each party is putting on the Floor, if they were in power, how far they would move to address the question of unemployment or employment.

Precisely, first of all, what does that tell you hon. Nzoghu? One, that it is not just the government that should give its policy, even the Opposition should say that if they were in power, how far they would move on the issue of unemployment. (Applause) 

Second, what has NRM done in fundamental terms to create employment, to create a basis for increasing jobs? I will just illustrate this hon. Nzoghu and colleagues, to just use the example of electricity generation. Thirty years ago, in 1986 when we came here, the power which was being generated was just 60 megawatts from the Owen Falls Dam. As we speak now, at Owen Fall Dams, we have two dams generating electricity. We have Bujagali and we are now working on Karuma, we are working on Isimba, Ayago and many others.

When you look at how far we have gone in generating electricity you can only give us a tick that we are moving in the right direction to create a basis for industrialisation.

We are not at zero on industrialization. In 1986, hon. Nzoghu at that time you must have been down in the primary schools, we could not even produce soap for ourselves and we could not produce sugar for ourselves. You know there are so many manufactured goods, so many essential goods that we are making now. Our exports are now no longer just commodity exports, primary products; we are exporting manufactured goods, particularly to our neighbourhoods.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you need to begin rolling up.

DR KIYONGA: Did you hear the Speaker? I need to wind up so that we do other things. There is therefore no doubt that we are moving in the right direction to industrialise the country and create the badly needed jobs for our young people.

However, also as hon. Nzoghu has said, the question of employment is a debate all over the world: the US, UK, Europe among others, the issue of employment is an issue and efforts are being made all over the world, to ensure that we reverse this situation.

On agriculture, hon. Cecilia Ogwal and colleagues, yes when we can, we should allocate more money in agriculture. However, the way the NRM is handling this issue of agriculture, if all of us can support that approach, very soon you are going to hear a different situation.

There are people out there - those of us who are representing rural constituencies, where a family cannot access seeds on their own; in some cases a family does not even have a hoe. When we have a programme that is distributing seeds to our people who have otherwise been idle because of lack of inputs, then you know that once we succeed on that front, the growth in agriculture is going to be overwhelming and will help to change the situation.

Lastly, on the debt situation, what hon. Cecilia Ogwal has said is true, that our debt has been growing. We are watching it and it is still within manageable limits. As people in Parliament here, we must commend ourselves that loan after loan, the loans we are passing are for production. We have just passed a loan for a road. We passed a loan for power generation.

First, it means that the country is credible. It can take loans; it is not everybody that wants a loan gets it. You need to be credible to get one.

Secondly, we are putting these loans in productive sectors; in infrastructure among others. That is the way to go. I would like to assure this House, particularly the Opposition that the NRM Government is conscious about debt and is very careful – you need to show one loan that we have brought here which you think that it is useless; not going to help the population. 

In summary, I thank colleagues for the active response they have given to the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President and for the recommendation they have given. I would like to assure colleagues that we are working on fundamentals of the economy and the issue of unemployment is a matter of time. 

On the fronts of security, we are reaching newer fronts and thanks to Parliament, we are now moving to an area where we are collectively going to handle our security together with our neighbours in the region and on the continent.

The debt is sustainable and we are borrowing to ensure that our productivity goes up. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members, for this debate and for bringing this to a close. I thank the Leader of the Opposition and I thank the minister who has given this response. 

Honourable members, I will now put the question to this motion that thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the Address on the State of the Nation by His Excellency the President to this Parliament on Thursday, 4 June 2015. I put the question that this motion be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will call that last week, we deferred a matter which had become a bit urgent to be handled tomorrow and that was the motion for the creation of counties. We tasked the committee to handle it expeditiously and report tomorrow. If we had proposed a debate on that day; probably we would have passed it immediately. However, it is only procedural that we handle it that way. That motion is coming back tomorrow for debate and possible passing. I, therefore, urge members to come in early at 2 O’clock.

Honourable members, we also have the debate on the motion for the Bills second reading of the Constitution (Amendment) Bill which will also commence tomorrow. However, in light of what we need to do tomorrow, do some consultations on some of the issues that have arisen. 

We will not be able to sit as we had earlier suggested that we sit morning and afternoon. Tomorrow we will sit in the afternoon only. However, from next week Tuesday, Parliament will start sitting from 10 O’clock and then we proceed like that until the schedule of the urgent matters are reduced, and then we can go back to the normal procedure of Parliament.

Honourable members, we are doing this because we want to clear way for all of you to be a little free to do other things that are fairly urgent at the moment. With those words, I now adjourn this House to tomorrow 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.25 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 23 July 2015 at 2.00 p.m.) 

