
Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.


Thursday, 11 July 2019

Parliament met at 2.07 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. Yesterday, we lost a lot of time and we were not able to proceed with the substantive business. I am hoping that today, we will be able to proceed. 

Due to the challenges we faced yesterday, we have adjusted the Prime Minister’s Question Time to 3 O’clock. He shall deal with the outstanding issues first and when he finishes them, we shall do the face-to-face with him. 

We do not want a repeat of what happened yesterday. The front bench was fuller when I entered but now it is not. (Laughter) I had seen some volunteers who had taken over the front bench but they have promptly left. (Laughter) You can start warming up. 

There was a response on the Order Paper yesterday from the Minister of Education and Sports. Since the minister did not come yesterday, we did not put it on the Order Paper today. I have, however, been advised that the minister is here and I have seen a copy of the statement. Therefore, alter the Order Paper to accommodate a statement under Rule 46 in response to an urgent matter that was raised by a Member. 

There are Members who have requested for the Floor. 

2.11
MS JULIET KYINYAMATAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have an urgent matter from Rakai.

There is a gentleman that was beaten by Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) officials. They alleged that he killed a hippopotamus. He is called Eldard Kyebambe. He did not kill the hippopotamus. He called the police to notify them that they found a dead hippopotamus. Police gave him a number of an UWA official to call and notify them that they found a dead hippopotamus. When he called them, he was instructed by the person who picked the call that he should just take the hippo out of the water at the landing site so that they would come and take care of it.

When they came in the evening, they went straight to his house and started beating him up, accusing him of killing the hippo. They beat him up badly and broke his leg. 

Then they took him to Sanga Police Station, which is in Kiruhura District, instead of taking him at least to Rakai District Headquarters. 

When he got there, he was in a very bad condition and police rejected him. The UWA officials were instructed to take him to the hospital, which they did not do. They dumped him there and left. 

The following morning, police called his relatives and they came and took him to the hospital. He has been treated but left lame and he cannot help himself.

Our humble appeal is to the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to take care of the responsibilities Eldard Kyebambe was taking care of as a father of his home. He has eight school-going children that have dropped out of school because he can no longer pay school fees. 

They have promised him help for long but they have never done anything. As a Member of Parliament, I advocate for the family of this gentleman that was made lame out after an allegation. I pray that UWA comes up to pay the damages and also take care of his home since he cannot anymore.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We actually made contact with the ministers responsible for the sector. I am a bit surprised that they are not here. Can we have a response on this matter?

2.14
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES)(Ms Mary Karooro Okorut): Thank you, for raising that issue. It is very unfortunate. It is a humanitarian issue. I promise that we shall take it up with the concerned ministry to see that something is done. It is very regrettable. 

2.14
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter I would like to raise is this; you are probably aware that Government is in the process of upgrading some health centre IIs to health centre IIIs and in some cases, health centre IIIs to health centre IV. This is an on-going process and as we talk, I think the Ministry of Health has commenced on the procurement process.

However, there is a big crisis in Sironko District where a community health centre II which had been proposed in the work plan, Mutufu Health Centre II is stealthily being removed from the plan for upgrade to health centre III in favour of another one, Buyobo Health Centre II. It is a big crisis because the community is up in arms. They want to demonstrate. 

I, therefore, take this opportunity to raise this matter and ask the Minister in charge of Health to come in quickly and urgently to avert this crisis. If this is a matter that has been decided on by the district council, who is this one trying to remove the health centre in the work plan that is due for upgrade to health centre III?

2.16
THE MINISTER,  OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro): Thank you, honourable colleague. Let them hold their fire. Let them not demonstrate. Since you say it is a crisis, we shall take it straight to the Minister of Health such that due action is taken. Of course, they have to investigate and find out why the shift in goal posts. Thank you.

2.17
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here because of a matter of national importance and it is urgent in nature.

Two weeks ago, I informed this House about the fate of my constituent, Doreen Gandi Magezi who was stranded in Oman after she was taken there by a company called Marphie International Recruitment Agency. Ghandi was returned last Friday, seriously sick and is now admitted and undergoing treatment in hospital.

However, when that girl was flown in by Fly Dubai, she was arrested on the instructions of the person who had exported her and it was only until 3.30 a.m. that she was released. We find this very bad because these labour export companies have become untouchable to the extent that they can order security organs to arrest those they want. 

Mr Speaker, most of these girls have had their rights abused but when they return, they do not have an opportunity to report because the people who take them are very powerful. 

Today, I stand here to tell you that 53 girls are stranded at our embassy in Dubai. These girls sent out a distress call to me yesterday that they ran from their masters in various homes because of mistreatment. Our girls who are exported for labour are put in bonded labour circumstances to the extent that there is a very thin difference today between what we are doing and modern-day slavery. This is because these girls are bonded. If they are sick, they are not treated. They are not fed, they are beaten, raped and suffer all kinds of torture. 

When they say they want to come home, they are told to pay back a certain amount of money ranging from $ 3,000 to $ 5,000 because their employers turn what would have been commission fees to labour exporting agencies into a price for buying our people.

Mr Speaker, these girls have been told by our ambassador in the United Arab Emirates that for him to process their travel back, they must pay back the money that was spent on them by their employers and also give the embassy an equivalent of Shs 1.5 million to facilitate their travel back.

We do not have space at our embassy in Abu Dhabi and therefore, these girls sleep on the veranda. The embassy also has no capacity to feed them. 

I stand here to request you, Mr Speaker, to order that our Government does everything possible to bring back these girls immediately.

Secondly, in view of what is taking place; that everywhere, our girls are complaining that they are mistreated – These complaints are not to me only. Each member of Parliament here is being approached by parents who have their children exported as labourers to the United Arab Emirates and other countries. 

I request this House, Mr Speaker, that a suspension of exportation of labour for domestic work be put in place, the existing companies investigated and that our Government thinks about setting up a public-funded labour agency. 

We want our children to go and find work. We appreciate that our people need to work and we all appreciate that our economy cannot employ all the human resource that we have. However, regarding where our people go to find work, we should endeavour to make these places safe for them instead of allowing them to be prosecuted. 

Mr Speaker, the stranded girls include:

Saluwa Namugga, 28 years, from Makindye
Aisha Kayaga, 23 years old, from Makindye
Faith Nalubega, 25 years old, from Luweero
Rose Kyomugasho, 27 years old, from Entebbe
Madinah Luwedde, 23 years old, from Jinja
Salim Alewuye, 22 years, from Jinja
Hajarah Isiro, 22 years old, from Jinja
Hanifah Nalunkuma, 40 years old, from Entebbe
Mariam Nabakooza, 22 years old, from Busega
Evelyn Namutebi, 29 years old, from Bukeeka
H. Nakatudde, 28 years old, from Kawuku
Veronica Nabirye, 21 years old, from Entebbe
Zurah Nabatta, 35 years old, from Bombo
Winnie Kabiira, 29 years old, from Kayenge.

Grace Alobo has been returned, with the effort of the Leader of the Opposition but she is seriously sick.

The names continue coming in. I am aware that the total number of girls at the embassy is 53 and other girls are being held in offices belonging to various companies in Dubai.

As I wind up, Mr Speaker, people put out adverts saying they want teachers and people to work in supermarkets; they advertise good jobs. The adverts have attracted applications from girls who are graduates as well as diploma holders. Some of them are charged money by the exporters here while others are not. They are given visitors’ visas. When they are taken there, they are handed over to another company that keeps them in small places in their offices where they are paraded for buyers. A person comes and bargains to purchase a girl and eventually, that girl is handed over to them. 

I do not know whether it is because of culture but these girls are made to do horrible things and some of them are raped. Others are made to climb very tall buildings to wash windows and some have fallen down. A number of them have committed suicide because at times, they get hard-pressed. They are made to wash toilets with bare hands, they are not fed. When they get sick, they are not taken to hospital.

It is very sad that in this 21st century, we send out our strong young people, who are educated, to be mistreated. We appreciate that people need to work but if they are to find work in Arab countries, let us first endeavour to make it safe and convenient for them. 

There has been an excuse that these people choose to go. However, the Government should protect a person even from himself. Even if it is the choice of these people to go, as a Government we must say, “No, you cannot go because it is dangerous for you.” You cannot let me commit suicide just because I want to die. The Government must protect its people. We must have accountability for our people; we must know where our girls are, how many they are and in what homes they are placed. It is not that we are fighting to destroy a business. 

At the moment, the ministry has licensed 151 companies, all exporting labour. There are other companies that are not licensed but are doing the same. On average, 50 girls are exported out of Uganda every day. The plane that brings dead bodies and the sick to Entebbe goes back with 50 healthy ones. Our people are very frustrated.

We have the Ministry of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance. What does that ministry do if it cannot guide our youth and if it cannot talk to our people to know what is good and bad for them?

Mr Speaker, I beg that you allow this House, through this matter of national importance – I know that my colleagues also have testimonies – to look into this matter and this afternoon and we do something that can bring hope to our people.

Lastly, I would like to beg President Museveni’s Government to do something to make Uganda a country of hope for its young people. 

When you go to immigration now, you will find long lines of people seeking to get passports to go away. The situation is very bad.

Mr Speaker, thank you for the time you have given me but my prayer is that we suspend the externalisation of labour using our girls and we investigate the people at the airport. 

In fact, there is a girl called Mwajuma from  Seeta, Mukono. This girl was in senior three. Her father passed on when her mother was a street vendor and she was evicted. That is when the girl was given to a labour exporter so she could earn money for the family. 

She was not even 18 years old but immigration department and the person who took her out of the country managed to forge a passport and claimed that she was 22 years old.  She is now actually among those girls who are suffering. 
In fact, where she was taken to work, the boss had a cheeky child who picked a flat iron and tested it on her to see if it was hot enough. The girl was seriously burnt and if I brought her pictures here, Mr Speaker, you would see. They burnt her badly and she is stranded there yet they are telling her to refund their money.

These are some of the cases, which I would like to request you to allow us to talk about this evening so that this House gives Ugandans hope. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Government, any responses?

2.29
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro Okorut): Thank you. Indeed, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has to come here as soon as possible not later than Tuesday, to make a comprehensive statement. Otherwise, we cannot go on like this. We have to know what is happening. Thank you, Mr Speaker. We shall inform the ministry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there are 53 young people at our embassy. While we wait for the statement, what happens to them?

Honourable members, I think this is not the first time we are handling this matter. Our Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and Committee on Equal Opportunities have reported on this issue and we have debated but the issues have got to be desegregated.

One is that we have a category of people who are not licensed to do anything doing with exportation of labour. Two, we have a category of people who just get themselves in this situation; they even sneak into neighbouring countries and escape from there to go for these things and they are Ugandans.

Three, we have people who go through properly licensed companies but they land in the hands of bad employers in those countries. However, by and large, a good percentage of them have got good jobs and there are living well.

Honourable members, we should not over generalise this debate but separate the issues and deal with them specifically. This time, tell the minister to come with the statistics to explain to this House. Otherwise, if there are errant companies that are not licensed to do things, yet, they are doing them and we are here watching, what should we do to them? And what do we do to people who are escaping? How do we deal with the relationship between countries to try and curb this particular aspect? How do we deal with the category that goes but unfortunately, land in the hands of companies that are not good?

The question the minister should address when she comes with the comprehensive report is: do we have the licensed companies? Do we have a system of informing our embassies where these children are taken? Do they actually have a system of knowing where they are, who has come and where they have been taken so that they can keep track of this people?

Can’t we have a system? Is it very difficult to have this system? Why don’t we have a system? We should have a system that can track that “you have taken me and I have gone.” The embassy should know where I am and I should have access to my embassy to notify them in case of problems. That is the process that should be put in place. Otherwise, over generalisation is creating confusion; we should not over generalise. We should instead desegregate issues.

Therefore, let the minister come here with that statement and it will be debated. Otherwise, the reports from the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and Committee on Equal Opportunities were debated but there was no proper response from the ministry responsible for this sector, which is unfortunate. 

This time, the minister must come with a ministerial statement, which will attract debate for us to do a comprehensive engagement on this matter so that we find a way forward. We will need to desegregate the different issues. For example, those that have been brought to book, which companies have been deregistered and which people have been arrested for doing these things. Otherwise, this issue of just talking is not going to help anyone. Can we go to the Order Paper – [hon. Elizabeth Karungi rose_] - honourable member, you do not seek clarification from the Speaker.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 157 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have 19 students on internship from the Parliamentary Budget Office. They have come to observe the proceedings of Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are welcome. 

We also have a delegation of pupils and teachers from Victory Learning Primary School, Masaka District. They are represented by hon. Mathias Mpuuga and hon. Babirye Mary Kabanda. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are welcome.

We also have students of Nakayonyi Girls School from Butembe sub county, Jinja District, represented by hon. Nelson Lufafa and hon. Loy Katali. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are welcome. 

2.35
MR MBABAALI MUYANJA (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in my consistency.

Mr Speaker, the District Land Board and the area land committee allocate public land to individuals without following the right procedure contrary -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, start with the urgent matter. What is urgent?

MR MBABAALI: What is urgent is that Mr Ramathan Bwanika and Dora Nakidde, who claim to have a joint ownership of Plot 16, Block 503, measuring approximately 48 hectares in Lwengo District in Manja A and Manja B, Kiseka sub county in my constituency are forcing people out of this village, which comprises 96 families that have stayed on the said land for over 50 years because the District Land Board and the area committees have allocated this public land to those two individuals.

This has caused a lot of insecurity in the area. People are busy fighting those who call themselves land owners yet the 96 families have been on the same land for over 50 years. 

My prayer is that Parliament halts the eviction of these people from their land where they have stayed for over 50 years.

The second prayer is that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should investigate the District Land Board Committee, which is allocating this land to individuals.

The third prayer is that the Ministry of Land, Housing and Urban Development should investigate a one Mr Bwanika who is claiming ownership of this land.

I rest my case and I have a list of all people who were affected under this kind of situation.

2.37
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (General Duties) Ms Mary Karooro Okorut): Thank you, Mr Speaker. He has righty said that the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should handle and I agree with him. Except that I would like to add that the Attorney-General should also be involved and he will get the information for further management as soon as possible.

However, honourable, I would request that if you have any information now, please, pass it over so that there is no delay. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Attorney-General is here.

2.38
ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Again from the submission of the honourable Member for Lwengo; it is a matter that falls squarely in the docket of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and my own docket so I advise him to bring us the documents for immediate action.

MR MBABAALI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the list of the names and villages, which were affected by this exercise.

MR TIMUZIGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the 15th May, I brought a petition here on behalf of the people of Kagarama Town Council, Ntungamo District concerning failure by the Ministry of Works and Transport to compensate them for their lost property and land.

According to rule 20 (7) of the Rules of Procedure, I was supposed to get the response in a week’s time. That means I was supposed to get a response either on 22nd or before that. However, since then, I have never got any response from the Ministry of Works and Transport. 

Mr Speaker, I bring my dissatisfaction about the failure by the Ministry of Works and Transport to give me response in time. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, did you say that you brought a petition?

MR TIMUZIGU: Yes, I brought and presented a petition on behalf of the people of Kagarama Town Council, Ntungamo District-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What happened to the petition?

MR TIMUZIGU: I presented the petition and then you directed the Minister of Works and Transport to bring a response within one week and I have been waiting since then. I have not got any.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. You recall that the matter was brought as a petition but we looked at the structure of the budgeting time - the committee would not be able to handle it expeditiously and so, I referred it to the minister. What has happened to it?

2.41
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Mr Speaker, I was not aware of that development but I request to benefit from the documents, which were submitted and then, we will give a written response within two weeks.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Weren’t you in the House General?

GEN. KATUMBA: No, Mr Speaker. I cannot recall having received that petition.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the petition was referred by the presiding officer, which was me and because of the time, I said that the Minister for Works and Transport should handle this petition, deal with the situation and report to Parliament on what actions had been taken.

GEN. KATUMBA: I confess that I do not recall that but-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, did we extract? We need to trace the record of these minutes and forward them to the ministry so that we can solve the problem. Thank you. 

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 157 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Government Chief Whip.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I have on behalf of the-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Opposition ready?

MR BAHATI: They are not ready.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then we are not going to do it twice if they are not ready. Let us finish with these committees. Leader of the Opposition, please, act on this so that we have these committees constituted urgently. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

A) TREASURY MEMORANDUM ON THE PARLIAMENTARY RESOLUTIONS ON THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR GENERAL’S REPORT ON ENTITIES WITH UNQUALIFIED OPINION FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

2.43
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the Treasury Memorandum on the Parliamentary Resolution on the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the Auditor-General’s report on entities with unqualified opinion for Financial Year 2014/2015.

DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS REPORT 2017/2018

2.44
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): I also beg to lay the debt sustainability analysis report for the Financial Year 2017/2018.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture these two documents. The Treasury Memorandum does not specify which Committee on Public Accounts; so, we will refer it to the relevant one because we have three Committees on Public Accounts now.

The unqualified opinion stands referred to the appropriate committee, which will be forwarded by the Clerk. On debt sustainability and analysis report, we will refer this particular document to the Committee on National Economy to handle and report to the House on what should be done. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE UNEXPLAINED REDUCTION OF THE QUOTA ALLOCATION OF GOVERNMENT SCHOLARSHIPS FOR STUDENTS IN PUBLIC UNIVERSITIES FOR THE ACADEMIC YEAR 2019/2020

2.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Mr Speaker, I beg to submit a statement on unexplained reduction of the quota allocation of Government scholarships for students in public universities for the academic year 2019/2020 as raised by hon. Ababiku.

I appreciate the Member’s concern that there has been a reduction in the district quota allocations for students sponsored by Government in public universities. 

It is indeed true that due to increasing number of districts vis-a-vis the constant number of slots available for the district quota system, it has reduced.

In 2005, Cabinet in minute No.8 (CT 2005) decided to recast the system of admission of Government sponsored students to public universities. Using this system 75 per cent of the 4000 available slots under government sponsorship are reserved for courses critical to national development and social transformation. 

The remaining 25 per cent which totals to 1000 slots is distributed as follows: 896 is distributed for district quota, 64 slots for persons with disability and 40 for sports.

For instance, in FY 2018/2019, districts increased from 122 128. Therefore, as a consequence, the districts slots automatically reduced.

Mr Speaker, if I give an example of the 896 slots that are allocated - The threshold is five students per district and this implies that when you multiply five by 128 districts, you get a total of 640 slots; 896 minus the 640, the balance will be 256 slots. These slots are then allocated based on the district population using a formula which is as follows: We multiply the district population by 256 and then divide this by the national population, which we estimated at 40 million people, using the Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) report. 

Allow me to present to Members a list of the distribution of all the district slots as per the 2019/2020 academic year. Colleagues, the list is attached to this report; I hope you will see how many slots your district will be getting or has got.

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The honourable member who raised this matter is not here but I have allowed this matter to be presented because we do not want it to continue being on the Order Paper. Since the Member is not here to raise a supplementary question, thank you very much.

BILLS
 SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL GRADUATE SCHEME BILL, 2018

2.49
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, I was absent. We were in Jinja launching the sole candidature of the President –(Laughter)–and I got communication that you made a ruling on this National Graduate Scheme Bill.

If you recall, Mr Speaker, when you sent the National Graduate Scheme Bill to committee stage – (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Majegere is my very good friend and he has been moving very well before. However, I also think that in this House, matters that are still being processed by various organisations, associations or parties should not become matters for this Parliament because those are their processes and they are not supposed to come here.

Is it, therefore, in order for the honourable member to waste Parliament’s time to bring in matters that are not necessary for the House to understand or even appreciate at this moment, when you are handling critical matters?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Usually, when Members are going to be absent from Parliament for various reasons, they notify the office of the Speaker and they state the reasons for their absence. The kind of reason stated by the honourable member has never come to the attention of any of the presiding officers. (Laughter) I am not sure whether, if you had presented that request for that purpose, it would have been granted. 

However, be that as it may, yesterday, the matter came up and we were ready to proceed. There was no particular order that was made. You were not here. The chairperson of the committee had said you had had discussions with him – not on record; when he met me, he said you had a discussion with him that the committee was not ready. However, we wanted you to move the motion for Bill’s second reading, which I now ask you to come and do. You can move from there, it is okay. 

MR MAJEGERE: Mr Speaker, I would like to make a prayer first. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you will pray after your motion. (Laughter)
 
BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL GRADUATE SCHEME BILL, 2018

2.52
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the National Graduate Scheme Bill, 2018 be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded by the Member for PWDs, Eastern and the Member for Kanungu District, the Member for Bwamba, the Member for Gulu Municipality, and the Workers MP. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this chance. When you sent this Bill to committee stage –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are justifying your motion. Why should the Bill be read for the second time? That is the justification we want.

MR MAJEGERE: Honourable colleagues, you are aware that we have very many youths who have graduated and are in the villages. Someone spends one, two or three years looking for a job. When he finds a job, the employers require working experience of two or five years. We are saying that as a nation, we need to develop this human resource. Why should this human resource be put to waste when we have vacancies in some places? 

If you read the audit report of 2016/2017, Shs 160 billion was returned and not utilised. The reason they give is that there are no staff. Some jobs do not attract personnel. We need to engage the youth. If you have idle youth who are educated, that means insecurity in this country. We should not waste the human resource we have invested in. That is why I came up with this idea that Government deploys these youth or young men and women to Government institutions and private entities. 

There are even role models. If somebody is good in business, attach youth to them so that they go and get some exposure. If a youth is in the village, like in my sub-county of Bukabooli, where will he get the network? Therefore, we need these youth to get exposure and have that network. They need to get hands-on practical exposure so that they can be empowered. Actually, we can call it employment training. These youth should not simply dive into the employment world; it should be a bridge. We believe that this Bill will act as a bridge for these youth from the education to employment life.

In brief, that is the essence of the Bill - that we enable these young boys and girls to be empowered to get exposure, get networks and get that practical part of it, so that by the time this young man is employed, at least he knows – young man and young woman but the Bible says “man” also to mean woman – We should do this so that this young man is engaged. What is important is to ensure that no graduate is idle in the village. 

Mr Speaker, I am a Member of Parliament and when I go to greet a voter, the first thing he will do is to call his son or daughter saying, “Come here so that hon. Waira can know that you have sat here for four years.” This is painful. When these people put us in leadership positions, they see us as the only solution. Therefore, Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How will the Bill achieve this?

MR WAIRA: The Bill will require that immediately youth graduate, they are deployed into Government or private institutions or businesses that would like some people to be attached to them. We expect the youth to go there for a year and we believe that after a year – There is a saying that, where a man goes is where he finds a friend or connections. (Interjection) He is a Muganda and knows this saying. This is the essence of the Bill and it is looking at only the youth who are not engaged – (Interruption)

MS SENINDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for coming up with this Bill. However, I think that as he is trying to speak to his motion, it would be important and necessary for the House to appreciate how these youths will be attached to those businesses you are talking about. How will they be paid? I do not think there is any Ugandan who would like to work for free.

In your explanation, you are saying that you would like to help the youth get employed. The question is: what about their payment? I think the House will benefit from that explanation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, a brief look at the memorandum to your Bill would assist us. If you have the Bill, you could look at the memorandum so that it guides us in understanding.

MR WAIRA: Mr Speaker, I did not come with all those details. I just came to make a prayer, which you have refused me to make. (Laughter) Just to answer the minister’s – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let the records be corrected. I said, “Move your motion and then make your prayer after.” I have not refused you from making your prayer. If you have forgotten how to pray, that is your business. (Laughter) After moving that motion and justifying your Bill, you can then pray. 

MR WAIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to answer the minister’s question. Actually, Government is already carrying out what they call the Graduate Volunteer Scheme. It is under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and they are deploying 500 graduates. The scheme is being funded by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) but we are saying, let us come up with a law to guide such a programme because right now, there is no law to that effect.

For your information, honourable minister, they are being paid between Shs 800,000 and Shs 1.5 million. A volunteer who gets that much money ceases to be a volunteer. However, this is going on. 

We are saying that we need to come up with a law to guide, first of all, this scheme, which is already in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, and others. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is saying that they are going to add another 500 graduates to make 1,000 graduates. However, where is the law guiding all that?

Mr Speaker, I think we will benefit a lot from this Bill if we allow the committee to interact with some of these stakeholders. I have interacted with Dr Muyingo, the Minister of State for Education and Sports, and he said he wants to make an input on that Bill. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development equally wants to make an input. Persons with disabilities and the youth in universities – (Interruption) – You are disorganising my prayer. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, why don’t you close your motion and then make the prayer? You might not even need to make that prayer because the chairperson has had communication with the Speaker and I might just guide on how we are going to proceed. However, close your motion by saying that you beg to move that the Bill be read for the second time. We will then see how to proceed from there.

MR WAIRA: Mr Speaker, thank you for that wise guidance. I have given the biggest part of the intent of the Bill and I request my colleagues, just like you have supported other Bills, to go ahead and support this Bill as well. In conclusion, I pray that you send this Bill to the committee during the budgeting process –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please. Conclude your prayer and beg to move that the Bill be read for the second time and leave it there. 

MR WAIRA: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the National Graduate Scheme Bill, 2018 be read for the second time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion for the Second Reading of this Bill has been moved, seconded and justified. I propose the question that the Bill entitled, “The National Graduate Scheme Bill, 2018” be read the second time. This will be the question that I propose for your debate. To start off the debate, the committee will guide us on how they have proceeded and what recommendations they have made to Parliament on how we should handle this Bill. However, we have a request from the committee that they need additional time - one week. We will then proceed with their report and process this Bill to its conclusion.

Therefore, we will defer this debate and wait for the committee to guide us on how to proceed. We will then move from there. Thank you very much. This matter is deferred. 

MR WAIRA: Mr Speaker, I have just one other issue to raise. You have made a ruling giving us one week but I would like to give you the challenges –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please. This is administrative now.

MR WAIRA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. 

PRIME MINISTER’S TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the next item would have been item No. 6 - The Institute of Parliamentary Studies Bill, 2019. The mover of this Bill is not here but the committee is ready to report. However, we will have to wait for the person who this House was gracious to give leave to present this private Member’s Bill. I thank the committee for being ready with the report, a copy of which I have seen. We will wait; when the Member is ready to move the motion for the Second Reading, we will then proceed with this matter. 

As I said earlier, we have adjusted the Prime Minister’s Time to 3 o’clock. It is now time for us to engage with the Prime Minister. As I briefed you earlier, there were issues that had already been raised to the ministers and the Prime Minister whose answers have not yet been received by the House. Therefore, the Prime Minister will start with those issues and when he finishes, we will then start the face to face engagement with him.

3.05
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As we have been advised, I will start with some of the questions that have not been answered by either me or my comrades. This is because we do not want a backlog of unanswered issues in this House. 

Secondly, I must note the strong presence of the ministers. Sometimes, it catches publicity when there is a small number but when there is a robust number, they look away. (Laughter) We should recognise that this is a very good response from the ministers.

Having said that, let me start with the issue of silos. The issue of silos has been of concern in this House. It was raised by hon. David Abala of Ngora County. I will just give a few remarks on it. The current position is that the capacity of inspected and certified grain storage facilities stands at 370,000 metric tons for silos, warehouses and community aggregation centres. 

Most of the silos in the country are mainly constructed by the private sector and a few by the World Food Programme. The National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) constructed 10 storage facilities, whose capacity ranges between 200 to 300 metric tonnes in the districts of - and there are a number of districts that have benefited from this - Masindi, Kiryandongo, Napak, Kakumiro, Mubende, Hoima, Kyankwanzi, Nakaseke, Kyenjojo and Kiboga. There are also functional silos that were constructed in 1960 along the rail line including good shades in Kampala.

Therefore, in a nutshell, we are building capacity. The private sector is playing a lead role but with full support from Government, in terms of policy.

Mr Speaker, the second question was on the food and nutrition security status in the country, a point that we have been battling with for quite some time. Generally, the population has been food secure due to the bumper harvest during the second season of 2018. Cases of food insecurity are mainly evident in Teso and Karamoja regions, some parts of Busoga region, Acholi, West Nile and Buganda. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries plans to undertake the following immediate interventions: 

In the current financial year, these are some of the interventions: 

The provision of fast maturing disease and drought resistant seeds;
Provide critical information to farmers on what to grow depending on the patterns of the rainfall in the various areas of the country;
Continuous monitoring and awareness creation on food security across the country; and
Provision of water for agriculture and agricultural production through the construction of valley dams.

Government is also coming up with a new programme of supporting solar irrigation for agricultural support.

Another question that came up was about the threat posed by aquatic weeds to the livelihood of fishermen and women on Lake Kyoga. This was raised by hon. Kenneth Lubogo, Member of Parliament for Bulamogi County. The short response is that Government constituted an inter-ministerial committee, which came up with a number of recommendations to combat the Kariba weed. Efforts are in place by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to solicit funding for the weed control.

Cabinet agreed that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries takes lead and coordinates all the activities in all organisations or Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) that are involved in dealing with this problem. Funding has been provided in this financial year for the implementation of the plan, covering operational matters and linkages with the entire stakeholders involved. Therefore, this is a problem which I am sure we are going to defeat.

There was another question raised by our sister, hon. Jesca Ababiku, District Woman Representative of Adjumani; she asked about the status of payment of gratuity to army veterans. This is again a common question that comes up and this is the response:

As at 30 June 2019 - just a couple of weeks ago - the gratuity backlog reduced from 83,000 to 74,000 veterans. The outstanding arrears are Shs 508 billion. There has been slow response in paying veterans due to a number of reasons, among which are the lack of letters of administration, the question of un-updated records, dormant bank accounts and the lack of national identification cards of the beneficiaries. 

The ministry responsible constituted a task force to conduct a verification exercise, which commenced in April 2019 and is expected to end in August 2019. That should be able to give us reliable data to use in solving this problem.

The next question was from hon. George Nsamba, representing Bbaale County. He wanted to know what the status is of gazettement and degazettement of forests. 

The Ministry of Water and Environment carried out nationwide visits of the forests and proposed land to be gazetted and degazetted. The report and a Cabinet paper are ready for discussion; actually, the Cabinet Paper is on the agenda for the Monday meeting next week. Once Cabinet pronounces itself on this matter, it will be brought to this august House for debate. As colleagues are aware, this matter has been on for quite some time - actually from last Parliament. So, we are now in the final stages of concluding it.

Mr Speaker, hon. Margaret Baba Diri, the District Woman representative of Koboko, wanted to know the status of business in hides and skins. The response is that the Government of Uganda passed the Uganda Leather Value Chain Strategy, 2015-2025 to promote the leather industry. The strategy outlines the following targets to be achieved by the year 2020:

Zero export of raw hides and skins except rejects for gelatin;
100 per cent raw hides and skins converted to wet blue;
25 per cent of total wet blue converted into finished leather for domestic production; 
Increase footwear output to half a million pairs per annum; and 
90 per cent compliance to environmental management standards. 

This is about development of local capacity to use our leather and skins.

Currently, there are 10 operational tanneries in Uganda; two of which process a small proportion of their hides and skins to finished leather. Accordingly, the country has an installed tanning capacity of between 1.08 to 2 million hides and skins per year. Over 95 per cent of processed hides and skins are exported as wet blue, which is semi processed, whereas crust and finished leather production is marginal.

Currently, there are six medium-size footwear factories and more that 800 small scale footwear entrepreneurs in the country. Uganda footwear demand is estimated at around 25 million pairs and so, there is substantial demand for leather products.

In the period 2008 to 2012, Uganda produced, on average, 1.6 million hides and 4.7 million skins per annum. In order to stimulate value addition, Government imposed a total ban on the export of raw hides and skins. The ban has contributed to an increase in earnings from export of value added products, from $25 million in 2001 to $64 million in 2013. We are getting good benefits.

Mr Speaker, I now move to the next question raised by hon. Andrew Koluo, Member of Parliament for Toroma County, on the issue of understaffing in public secondary schools. I am glad the minister responsible for education was holding the Floor earlier. I hope that this was mentioned during that time. However, in case it was not, or for purposes of clarity, the response is as follows:

The Ministry of Education and Sports has recruited 3,000 teachers in the last financial year. In the current financial year, the ministry will recruit more teachers to support 62 grant aided schools. In addition, the ministry has been conducting continuous recruitment of teachers on replacement basis so that schools must have teachers all the time.

A few more questions were raised. Let me go straight to what hon. Mathias Mpuuga, Member of Parliament for Masaka Municipality, raised concerning the alleged unfair bid conditions for a tender for supply of 2,000 motorcycles. The bid for supply and delivery of 2,000 motorcycles for LC III chairpersons was advertised in the New Vision newspaper on 25 April 2019. 

A pre-bid meeting was held on 30 April 2019 to clarify any concerns. The concern bidders may have had was on the solicitation documents. In consideration of issues raised by the bidders during the pre-bid meeting, a number of changes were made on the solicitation of documents by issuing Addendum 1. This adjusted the requirements of performance and international recognition from 10 to five years, among others, making it simpler for more of our people to bid. The submission date was subsequently extended again to make it easier for our people to play their rightful role.

Hon. Judith Alyek, the District Woman Representative for Kole, raised an issue of the closure of Unity FM, Lira, following the death of Dickens Okello. The response is as follows: Unity FM resumed operations in December 2018. However, the radio suspended some of its errant presenters in an effort to mitigate the risk of a re-occurrence of the breach.

On 30 January 2019, four employees of Unity FM sued Uganda Communications Commission (UCC), the Attorney-General, the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) and the District Police Commander (DPC), Lira for alleged violation of their rights. Since this matter is currently pending in court, I appeal to Members to allow court to hear and determine the rights of the parties concerned.

The other issue was the suspicious death of Opio Daniel at Katakwi Police Station raised by hon. David Abala. This was on 25 June 2019. The response is as follows: The matter arose from an aggravated assault on Ms Isami Jesca, a female adult of 37 years, from Ameca Cell, Usuk Trading Centre, on 23 May 2019. The suspect was traced on 28 May and locked up pending transfer to Katakwi. He was alone in the cell at the time.

In the morning of 29 May 2019, he was found dead, having used his shirt to commit suicide. Two post-mortem examinations were conducted. The first was disputed by the relatives. However, subsequent results concluded that the deceased died from suicide.

The next question was about the abduction of Nuwagaba Ronald and Tweheyo Dan from Rukarara Village in Kinkizi, and a ransom of Shs 553,000 for their release made. The question was raised by hon. James Kaberuka from Kinkizi County West. The response is that the children were abducted from Congo where they had gone to look for food. They were rescued and two suspects were arrested and remanded at Kanungu Prison.

The next question was about the extortion of money by officials of the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) from citizens being registered under the registration of citizens’ exercise. The question was raised by hon. Gaffa Mbwatekamwa. The answer is that Government has put in place measures including setting up a team to receive and follow up the complaints to mitigate these occurrences at all NIRA offices. Therefore, there is more vigilance by NIRA. We are working with other Government agencies to remove this disease of corruption.

On the shooting of Sgt Ouma Peter by a colleague in Jinja as raised by hon. George Ouma, apparently investigations on this matter are still ongoing. As soon as they are complete, we will be able to give the answer.

Poor communication connectivity and lack of telecommunication networks in Ik County, Kaabong District: The response is that there was a meeting which was held with Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) and some telecom companies to discuss ways and means of mitigating this. I am glad to report that the National Broadband Policy, 2018, among others, is to address the connectivity gaps by introducing licensing reforms to cover the whole country. Ik will therefore be properly covered.

The next question is from hon. Paul Akamba, MP Busiiki County, on continued ban on airtime scratch cards by telecom companies. The response is that following the introduction of the electronic recharge system, there has been integration of scratch cards by telecom operators. There are no instances of non-availability of airtime with a full distribution of the electronic voucher machines across the country.

The next question by hon. Akamba again is on the poor Ugandan FM radio signals in Kapchorwa District, forcing locals to listen to Kenya radio stations. Government of Uganda has intervened through the Ugandan Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) to establish radio stations serving hitherto underserved areas such as Butebo FM. However, as a matter of necessity, Government, through the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance, plans to engage UBC to enhance capacity at the existing stations to cover Sebei region and other underserved areas. 

Therefore, the people of Sebei will have a choice. They are advised to listen to Uganda stations more but they are also at liberty to listen to Kenyan stations, promoting Pan African and East African values.

Hon. Franco Robert Centenary, Kasese Municipality, raised the issue about interference by the Resident District Commissioner in operations of Uganda Broadcasting Corporation. Mr Speaker, the ministry is yet to receive a complaint from UBC on the mentioned radio station in regard to interference by the RDC. 

However, on 5 February 2019, the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance contacted the RDC of Kasese to ascertain if the allegations raised were actually correct. The RDC denied any involvement in affairs of UBC, let alone influencing any decisions on persons that are hosted. The manager of UBC in Kasese also dismissed the allegations of interference by the RDC in the affairs of the radio station. In addition, the manager indicated that the RDC’s office relates with the radio station through the one hour allocation per week, and this is on every Thursday, for sensitization. This hour has been used very well so far.

The next question is about the precarious situation of some squatters who were stopped from paying busulu on a piece of land in Mityana and instead asked to buy the land or else be evicted. This was raised by hon. Judith Nabakooba, Woman Representative of Mityana District. Mr Speaker, I will request to combine hon. Nabakooba’s issues with that of hon. Johnson Muyanja Ssenyonga, MP for Mukono County South, who raised a related issue regarding land conflicts and land evections in some parts of Mukono District. The two matters hinge on the rights and obligations of landlords and tenants to ensure that each respects the other in order to coexist harmoniously. 

There are about three options that tenants have. I think this is good for colleagues as it will help them explain this issue to the wanainchi, especially bibanja owners who may not have the resources, capacity, language, or who are handicapped in many ways when the struggle for land comes up. One is, pay busulu and be recognized by the registered mailo owner as their tenant; secondly, acquire a lease from the registered owner; or renegotiate and conclude an outright purchase of their bibanja from the mailo owner. In case tenants cannot do any of the last two options, then they may settle for payment of busulu.

I, therefore, advise honourable colleagues to inform the tenants to seek protection and legal redress by approaching the offices of the Grade 1 Magistrate. Government is finalizing the national eviction guidelines, which once approved by Cabinet, will provide comprehensive guidance on dealing with conflicts and eviction related matters.

Mr Speaker, those are some of the questions that have been raised. We have not covered all of them, but our intention is that the Prime Minister, working closely with the ministers concerned, will ensure that these questions are answered and that we erase the backlog that has tended to characterize some of our work. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for dealing with this. The challenge has been that these matters have been raised by Members to the respective departments but they do not get answers. Their constituents expect some responses to these issues but they do not get them. Therefore, we are trying to see how to deal with this. I am happy that you have been responsive to this matter and you have been able to deal with some of them. Whatever remains, we will find a way to constructively deal with them and get answers because people want to get these answers.

Honourable members, now is the time to do the face to face with the Prime Minister. I do not know how much time the Prime Minister will give us because today we had requested for a good engagement with you; if you have sufficient time, let us have an engagement. Let us use the time properly, honourable members.

3.35
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have one question about the Government policy and programme on value addition or looking for market for bananas. 

My constituency and other areas in this country have stepped up production of bananas to the extent that now we are stuck with them. 

Hon. Prime Minister, as I speak, in my area, huge bunches of Matooke cost Shs 2000. Farmers are frustrated and we have no way out. For many years, Government has been telling us that they are working on a policy and programme to enhance value addition so that we can have these bananas well attended to. I would like you to enlighten me regarding that programme and also to inform you that the time is now because we are stuck. I thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, again, this is a subject that is very well known to colleagues because the issue of the value addition on matooke and the factory in Bushenyi has been raised a number of times. 

I am happy to say that there is progress on that factory and we have actually made more money available both through Cabinet and Parliament. This factory has already produced some of the products, which I am told are samples but samples are still products. 

Mr Speaker, we are optimistic that this factory will be in full operation in due course. Therefore, Rwampara, where Ndugu Ngabirano comes from, which is near the factory, will be a beneficiary regarding what this factory will be producing. 

3.38
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, Ntungamo District and Rukungiri District were supposed to get a water project from River Kahengye. However, when the project started, Rukungiri got its own and the Ntungamo District Project was not started. 

The designs were approved by the Ministry of Water and Environment in 2013. Up to now, Ntungamo District has been waiting. There is a rumour going around that Rukungiri District got their own water because they are predominantly in the Opposition. Therefore, the people are saying that they are not getting water because they are not in the Opposition.

Hon. Prime Minister, is it true that the people of Ntungamo District are not getting water because they have not joined the Opposition?  

Secondly, if it is not true, when are they likely to get their own water because they share the river with Rukungiri District? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this is quite an interesting question because one often hears the counter accusation that there is favouritism to serve areas where the Movement people are. 

However, let me make it clear that the Government of Uganda is elected to serve all people of Uganda, irrespective of their political parties. Therefore, delivery of services to the people must cut across any political party considerations. Hence, it cannot be true that the people of Ntungamo are being ignored by this Government because of the solid and unequivocal support that they have consistently given to the Movement.

On the contrary, we will do everything possible to ensure that the people of Ntungamo and all the people of Uganda get the services that they so desire and that can be afforded. 

3.41
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Two weeks ago, we had the opportunity to tour the oil district and oil proposed city of Hoima-Kikube. We went as far as Buliisa. We were told that all the roads in those districts are going to be covered under the oil roads. 

I would like to find out from the Rt hon. Prime Minister, when will Nwoya benefit from the oil roads? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the intention of Government is to ensure that the oil producing areas are easily accessed and therefore, they must have good oil roads. If no road has reached Nwoya, it is just a question of time. We had to start with some roads but we are going to construct more roads and you will be beneficiaries in Nwoya. 

3.42
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, in 2013, upon the suspicious demise of hon. Cerinah Nebanda, Government undertook to carry out an inquest. The then Chief Justice, Justice Benjamin Odoki appointed Justice Paul Mugambe to conduct the inquest. 

However, six years down the road, there are no results. I asked this question and you undertook to respond but in a subtle way, the House has not received an answer. May I know when the report will be out? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I was just whispering with the Deputy Attorney-General on whether the inquest has actually been done or it is a question of delayed production of the report or delay in the start of the work.

I will ask the Attorney-General to come and give a proper explanation to this august House so that the country and Parliament know what is happening. Nevertheless, Government means business. When we say we will do this, it means we will indeed do it. 

3.43
MR PATRICK KASUMBA (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, tobacco farmers in Bujenje County, Masindi District and the country at large, are crying over non-payments from the companies that this Government licensed to purchase tobacco. 

The same issue has been raised in this House time and again and there is no response from the Government. May I, therefore, know from you what measures are being taken by the Government to pay tobacco farmers who have been waiting for the past five years? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I have just been informed by the honourable Minister of State for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, Ndugu Michael Werikhe, that payment of tobacco farmers is now going on. The minister will be coming to the House to make a more detailed statement on the matter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we have actually received a statement from the minister on this particular issue but because there was a delay, the Prime Minister had to come in and try and deal with it. Nevertheless, there is a statement that has come from the ministry responsible so we will handle that accordingly.

3.45
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (Independent, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, today marks 30 years since the Mukura massacre. I have been approached by families and friends of the survivors as well as those who died and they are asking for justice. They have also been asking for help for very many years but you have never helped them.

I wish you could clarify on that matter. Why haven’t they received justice? Why have they not been compensated? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the Mukura incident was obviously a very unfortunate one. If there are still cases of compensation - some compensation has definitely been paid - that were due to be compensated and this has not been done, Government will follow this matter.

3.46
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, during the recent parliamentary recess, I held consultative meetings with leaders of Kashongi County and they raised two questions about the delayed delivery of LC I chairpersons’ bicycles and when Government will consider increasing their salaries from Shs 120,000. Thank you very much.    

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, again this is a subject matter that we have discussed quite extensively. In the earlier answer I gave this afternoon, we talked of procurement of 2,000 motorcycles for local council leaders. Back to the question, I would like to say that the Minister of Local Government has been giving regular updates. We will ask him, in his next update, to respond specifically to the issues in regard to LC entitlements.

3.48
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it has come to our notice that there is a lot of mushrooming private pharmacies in Government facilities like Mulago National Referral Hospital and Kiruddu Referral Hospital. 

Hon. Prime Minister, having been a Minister of Health for several times under this administration, can you tell us the policy that guides this decision to establish private profit making facilities in Government premises? Who is benefiting from these facilities and how does the taxpayer ensure that they are not cheated? How do we ensure that this does not compromise the quality of health care service delivery in the country? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am aware that at Mulago National Referral Hospital, there are two private pharmacies. One of them has been there for quite a number of years; it is serving the population well. If a drug is not available either at Mulago National Referral Hospital or in town, you can go and pick it from that private pharmacy.

Secondly, when you build a hospital, it does not mean that that area is cordoned off for anybody who may want to develop a pharmacy. Therefore, I see no problem with private people who get permission from National Drug Authority, putting up business premises and pharmacies outside the hospital. 

The question of putting a pharmacy within the hospital premises, that one is – 

3.50
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Uganda is appreciating the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment programme. Having benefited for seven years of being in this Parliament - I witnessed the piloting of this programme. As Parliament, I remember we passed a resolution that it should be rolled out in the whole country. 

Persistently the people of Soroti have been asking me how come other districts are benefiting although in some districts, you will find one or two subcounties inspite of Parliament deciding that this should be rolled out in the whole country. When will Soroti and those other districts benefit? What is the roadmap like? Can I get what to take back to them? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, the programme is being rolled out nationally including Soroti. Soroti District will not be skipped. On the question of arrears, I think my brother from Kalungu should wait for us to start the programme before asking for arrears. 

3.52
MR OTHIENO OKOTH (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you explain to the country why the Central Government, through the Ministry of Health, is interfering with the work plans of the district? For example, Tororo District planned to start a health facility in Namwaya but the Ministry of Health changed it to another place. 

Can you explain to the country why the Central Government is interfering with the provision of decentralised services in the districts?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the National Resistance Movement Government believes in consultations. It is right for centre and local administration to consult over issues including sites of certain facilities. I expect that consultations should resolve that matter and not dictatorship. 

Again, the critical point is services to the people and I have no doubt that the Centre, through the Ministry of Health, will work with Tororo District administration to resolve that matter.

3.54
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Parliament enacted the Press and Journalist Act, to ensure the freedom of press and to provide for a council responsible for the regulation of mass media. A new regulation under the Press and Journalist Act, Cap 105 was signed on 10 February 2014, by the then information minister, Ms Rose Namayanja. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are you aware that the council up to now is almost non-operational because the council is not fully established? What is the Government’s plan to ensure that this council is operational including having its membership fully established? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, some Government institutions are strong while others are weak. Some are young while others are quite old and they have been in existence for some time. This is a relatively new institution. Government will put in more vigour to ensure that it is fully operational and as effective as possible.

3.55
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the National Resistance Movement manifesto provides for the establishment of BTVET institutions in every constituency. However, while the President was addressing the people of Ssii and Bukunja, he assured them during the 2016 Heroes Day celebrations that a Business Technical Vocational Education and Training (BTVET) school in memory of the fallen combatants in that area would be put in place. Can we get an idea on when to expect this project to be put in place?

MR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member is right that BTVET institutions are part and parcel of our educational policy. They are being heavily supported by Government to give skills to our young people. The ministry has a programme of establishing these institutions. 

I propose that the honourable member benefits from the information available in the ministry so that he knows when Buikwe will benefit from this national programme of building vocational institutions.

3.57
MR EMMANUEL SSENGO (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I had requested that I be allowed to make a comment on what the Prime Minister pointed out regarding land evictions – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That request is not granted. It is question time. Comment is limited to the Leader of the Opposition. (Laughter)

3.57
MR FRED TUMUHEIRWE (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in gross violation of our Constitution and basic human rights, government security agencies have continued to hold suspects incommunicado and in un-gazetted areas. 

For instance, a one Onesmus Rukundo, a councillor in Nyabubare, was arrested from Rukungiri in February and up to now, he has not been seen. Is he alive or dead? What advice do you give to the relatives who are looking for their people who have been arrested and are not produced in court within the 48 hour provision in our Constitution? Thank you.

MR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the rule of law is in place. If there is a departure from the rule of law as you have suggested, then the matter will be handled by the minister responsible for internal affairs.

3.59
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when I go to the bank, especially our local banks like Centenary and Post Bank, I find queues of people. One is in the bank for over five hours to make a simple transaction. Are you aware of these lines? 

As the Prime Minister, what are you doing to ensure that these banks have customers that are equivalent to their capacity to handle? Why would a bank have customers beyond its capacity? Why would a customer spend more than two hours in a bank queue? 

Additionally, most of their Automatic Teller Machines (ATM) are down and when one goes to another bank’s ATM, the customer gets charged. Why would the customer incur the cost when the failure is with the bank?

MR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we are in a liberalised economy. We have liberalised banking. If you are not happy with your current bank and you spend five hours there, I would advise you to look for a more efficient bank (Laughter).

4.01
MS LILY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my question to you is on the construction of technical schools. 

About a month ago, I interacted with the Minister of State for Higher Education and he told me that they stopped constructing technical institutes in some districts because there is low enrolment so they cannot waste money on construction. 

I would like to ask whether Government has changed policies so that some districts should not have technical institutes.

MR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the policy is for giving services to the people. When there is scarcity of people to serve, then it is appropriate that Government should adopt policies that are as relevant as possible for that particular area. 

The specific case can be looked at but it appears that we may need to revise the way your area is being handled if the enrolment is too low.

4.02
MS ROBINAH SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you being the Leader of Government Business, I would like to get an answer to this: 

In 2011, the people of Kakuuto County, in particular Nangoma, Minziro, Kakuto Town Council and Kakuto Subcounty suffered a terrible earthquake. 

Apart from the families that were affected, there were two health facilities that were badly affected. One of them is Minziro and recently, the ceiling nearly killed a mother. They were promised help. 

Now they would like to know if the promised help was a lie or if they are going to be helped. I would like to hear from you, definitely, today. Are you going to help the people of Minziro, Kyebe, the facility and the families with the support you promised them in 2011? Thank you.

MR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I do confirm what our sister said. That area suffered. A number of government officials including His Excellency the President went and visited the area. It is true that there are some pending pledges and promises to be fulfilled by Government. They will be fulfilled as soon as resources become available. (Laughter)

4.04
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime minister, it is a Government policy to have district hospitals in every district, leave alone the referral hospitals. Buhweju is one of those districts that have no district hospital and the referral hospital is very far in Mbarara. 

When are we having the Buhweju District Hospital? We have been waiting for the health centre IV to be upgraded. When is this happening? Thank you.

MR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true there is a programme of building district hospitals. It is a fairly slow programme. It will eventually arrive in Buhweju. For the moment, we advise the people of Buhweju to use the existing facilities, health centre III and health centre IV because those two are able to handle most of the health problems that are common in Buhweju. (Laughter)

4.06
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, Uganda Prisons occasionally submits lists to Government, of convicts who seek to benefit from the Prerogative of Mercy. However, there are concerns that when these lists are submitted to the Attorney-General, the applications take long to be processed. When they take long, they impact on the role of that committee.

I seek clarification from you, Prime Minister, whether the Advisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy actually exists. If so, why does it take very long to process applications submitted by Uganda Prisons?

Hon. Prime Minister, once these applications are processed and decisions taken – maybe remission or respite – it would also help Government to minimise resources. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: You have seen the gesticulation of the Deputy Attorney-General, saying, yes, there is a committee and it is doing its work well. If there is a case or two that may have delayed, we can get more information and follow it up.

4.08
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we are now singing industrialisation for job creation and shared prosperity. The people of Bundibugyo earn their livelihood from cocoa growing but we are not adding value. 

H.E the President on 29 January 2016 wrote and directed the ministries in charge of trade and finance – and copied this directive to you – to establish a cocoa factory in Bundibugyo so that we add value to our cocoa and get more money. Up to now, there is nothing happening. 

May I get feedback from you that I should take to the people of Bundibugyo on when this factory will be established, as directed by the President?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that Bundibugyo is a strong grower of cocoa. It is also true, as President Museveni said, that there should be value addition to this cocoa in Bundibugyo. When the directive came, the responsible organs of Government mobilised and are looking for the private sector to invest in such a facility. I would like to ask the honourable member to join us in Government to look for a serious investor so that a factory can be established as quickly as possible by the private sector, with political support from Government.

4.09
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in 2010 Government through Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) took over 10,000 kilometres of gravel district roads to upgrade them to national standard and this was supposed to take one year.

Hon. Prime Minister, the Odyak-Muntu-Alemere-Awelo-Etam-Namasale road, which is 63 kilometres long, is one such road that was taken over. However, up to today nothing has been done. Between 2013 and 2016 we had term contract and no work was done. To date we have framework contract and this road is not anywhere. What is the fate of the 10,000-kilometre roads, including the one resident in Amolatar district?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that sometimes UNRA does not have the required resources to effectively manage all the roads they are supposed to be managing. Nevertheless, you could link up with UNRA directly or the Minister of Works and Transport so that you can see the programme – when the road you have raised will be done. That information should be readily available in the Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA.

4.11
MR JOHN NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the impasse between the Uganda Wildlife Authority and the communities living along the fringes of Mt Elgon National Park is still alive. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development that was supposed to secure the boundaries is dragging its feet.

You are aware that you championed this process. Therefore, could you, please, see it come to a logical conclusion as soon as possible?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, he has raised a legitimate point. A lot of ground work has already been done. We are going for the final phase and the ministries of lands as well as tourism are spearheading this. Therefore, I assure the honourable member that work is going to be expedited so that this matter can be sorted out once and for all.

4.13
ZAITUN DRIWARU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister about the ex gratia for the councillors at subcounty level. In Financial Year 2017/2018, the Ministry of Local Government sent money for ex gratia directly on the accounts of subcounties. In Yumbe District, three subcounties of Lodonga, Kuru and Yumbe Town Council missed out.

In Financial Year 2019/2019, the whole district missed out. In fact it was not only Yumbe but many districts are complaining. May I know when these people will be paid their ex gratia?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I have taken advantage of good neighbourliness and the minister responsible for local government has assured me that there was a technical error and some subcounties were missed out. The minister has said that this payment will be made in August.

4.14
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank this House because Kanungu Road is now being worked on. However, when the work started there were about three subcounties where people were not compensated. They were promised compensation in November last year but the compensation never took place.

They again promised to compensate them in either March or April but the promise was not fulfilled. Recently, when we inquired from them, they told us that they would pay people in May but there is nothing up to now.

Can you prevail over them and they compensate our people so that we are extremely happy? Thank you. (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is our intention to make hon. Karungi and the people of Kanungu extremely happy. (Laughter) Payment will be followed through the Ministry of Works and Transport and Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) to ensure that the delays are sorted out.

4.16
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as the Leader of Government Business, what are you going to do to make some of your ministers attend plenary, especially when they have matters on the Order Paper so that we can have a serious flow of parliamentary work? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that question is endorsed by the Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: It is also endorsed by the Prime Minister. It is true that we will have further discussions to ensure that when a minister has an item on the agenda in the House, he or she is indeed in the House. If he or she cannot be in the House, he or she must delegate another colleague to stand in for him or her. The point is very well taken.

4.17
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, recently the President was in Kenya and I remember the Government of Kenya granted us land to build an inland port in Naivasha.

The operations of the East African Community have enabled our borders to be extended. The borders in Malaba, Busia and other areas now run their operations through Port Mombasa, which has rendered many of our people at the borders jobless. Why can’t Government discuss with the Government of Kenya to extend that inland port to our borders in order to create employment for our people, who have lost jobs because of border operations that have been extended to the port?
	
DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, first of all, I would like to express the gratitude of Government and people of Uganda to the Government and the people of Kenya for their generosity of readily making land available in Naivasha for Ugandan cargo. I think this is a good gesture on their part and support for the East African co-operation.

Secondly, the issue of Tororo-Malaba and other border areas is a detailed matter that needs to be looked at closely to ensure that it creates jobs and makes economic sense; convenience for transporters. This is a matter that needs comprehensive study and then decision making. 

4.19
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like you to assure the people of Kasese on the Ngenda-Bugoye-Nyakalingijo tourism road, which appeared in the ministerial policy statement for Financial Year 2017/2018 for tarmacking.

Mr Speaker, when the Italians came to climb Mountain Rwenzori, where Government delegated Gen. Ivan Koreta, Government made a commitment that, that road would be tarmacked because it turned out to be a continental tourism site. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, why have you delayed to implement that commitment?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is not correct that Government has delayed; Government is fully aware of the promise. It is only a question of phasing implementation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I will have members in the following order: Member for Katakwi District, Member for Kitgum District, Member for Mityana District, Member for Buliisa County and Member for Rukungiri District.

4.20
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, about two or three days ago, I was having meetings with the LCI chairpersons and the chairpersons of the women’s councils in my district.

Whereas both these structures are Government structures at the community level, LC I chairpersons get a small remuneration from Government of Shs 10,000, which they are saying that Government should consider topping it up because it is quite little.

Whereas Government has a plan of procuring bicycles for the LCI chairpersons, there is nothing being planned for chairpersons of the women councils. The question they asked me was, when is Government planning to remunerate them and provide them with bicycles since they do a lot of work in the community? I actually promised them that I would pass that information to the Government. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that is the question I am bringing forth to you; when is Government planning to remunerate chairpersons of the women councils and when is it planning to provide them with bicycles to facilitate their work in the communities? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we are still grappling with the issue of making sure that the LCs get their bicycles. Once that is properly done, there can be proper and due consideration and resource mobilisation for other requirements like the Member has raised.

4.22
MS MARGARET LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Government of Uganda has come up with a policy that all sub-counties must have seed secondary schools.

Amida sub-county in Kitgum District has been in existence for over 14 years. In 2018, money was disbursed by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development through the Ministry of Education and Sports to build a seed secondary school. However, the district local government kept on waiting until money was returned on 30th June because the Ministry of Education and Sports had not procured a contractor. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what can be done? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the Member is right that if procurement processes are not expedited and money is not utilised, the money will go back to the Treasury. Therefore, let us ensure that the procurement departments expeditiously carry out procurement. In fact, we are now trying to simplify the procurement process to make it more transparent and shorter so that we do not have situations like the one our sister has described. However, the Minister of Education and Sports is nodding in agreement that they are going to take expeditious measures.

4.24
MS JUDITH NABAKOOBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in 2013, Sekanyonyi Health Centre IV was given a theatre but it was just a building without equipment.

In 2016, the Health Management Committee met the Permanent Secretary (PS) of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and they promised to equip that health facility. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, even in 2018, I came on the Floor of Parliament and raised the same issue and I was promised that Sekanyonyi Health Centre IV would be equipped.

As we speak, referrals are made to Mityana General Hospital and yet they could be handled in the health centre IV facility. My question is, when is Government going to equip Sekanyonyi Health Centre IV?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as colleagues know, the policy is to ensure that every constituency has a health centre IV and the health centre IV for practical purposes is almost as good as a hospital.

There is a programme that the Ministry of Health has put up, I would propose that you get specific details of Sekanyonyi from the Minister of Health before you can ago to authoritatively communicate to the people accordingly.

4.26
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, the Vision 2040 talks about turning our big young population into a demographic dividend by vocationalising and skilling them, but this seems to be in danger. 

Last month’s findings in the report by the World Bank study, which they presented together with the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Education and Sports, indicate that our education system, as it is today, is having challenges right from early childhood development; it is not vocationalised.

It states that skilling only comes in after people have dropped out of school. This is a problem because the Vision 2040 envisaged the magic bullet, for turning this dependency population into job creators, was education.

Now that those findings have been released, what is the immediate Government intervention to remedy this situation in order for us to vocationalise and skill students not only in the new schools we are building but right from early childhood, primary and secondary schools? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my brother raised a serious point of skills. Government has already re-organised the skilling and re-skilling sector in Government and that the Ministry of Education and Sports will be the centre for reskilling.

Secondly, a number of other vocational centres that have been put up are equipped on ensuring that by the time one leaves the vocational centre, they are equipped with skills.

It is true that some are also learning on the job and so, we take skilling very seriously. It is good that this study has been able to indicate where the gaps are. That is going to help Government in planning to not only fill those gaps but also ensure that they will not recur. Therefore, Government is on course to ensure that we have skilled Ugandans and the young population, which is fairly bulky, the population dividend is got through skilling and reskilling.

4.29
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable Prime Minister, in May, 2018 when the President was in Rukungiri District, he visited Bwambala Secondary School and promised to give them computers as soon as possible.

Can you kindly tell the board and the students of Bwambala Secondary School in Rukungiri District when their computers will be delivered? Thank you so much.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as colleagues know, it is the policy of Government to ensure that every government-aided secondary school gets a computer lab. 

Now well over 1,000 secondary schools have already benefitted from this and Bwambala Secondary School will not be an exception in benefitting from this programme. 

For details, go to the Uganda Communications Commission, which is implementing this Government programme.

4.30
MR TARSIS RWABURINDORA (NRM, Ibanda Municipality, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I represent the people of Ibanda Municipality. The revenue collection of Ibanda Municipality is dependent on the operations of taxi-park.

Sometime this year, there was a circular from Ministry of Local Government, which affected revenue collection from parks. Right now we are collecting zero shillings from the park yet we have problems of paying emoluments to the councillors.

When are we going to have the content in this circular reversed because it is giving us problems with the elections for next year and 2021, because the councillors are not being paid?

Two -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, one question, this is not a speech.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the Member of Parliament for Ibanda Municipality has raised a question, which affects many municipalities and urban centres in regard to taxi businesses. It is true that there has been some paralysis in some way but this is going to be corrected. 

The taxi business is being reorganised and Uganda Revenue Authority plus Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Kampala City Council Authority are working out details of how money will be collected by Uganda Revenue Authority before being remitted to the specific urban authorities.

We think that this will stop the haemorrhage that has been going on in as far as collection of those resources is concerned. We also believe that the urban centres and authorities will be able to get their due share, which they have missed for quite some time.

4.33
MR GEORGE KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, NRM as a party has a manifesto that stipulates that every village is supposed to have three to four boreholes; which of course becomes a Government policy. When and how are you going to effect this because we are being questioned in the villages?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the issue is water supply; the question of boreholes is just one of the means. Some will be getting water from gravity schemes, others from the more established and sophisticated water systems. Otherwise, the policy is to make sure that there is water available for the wanainchi in every village and we are on course implementing that manifesto position.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can I now have the Leader of the Opposition? 

4.34
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to also thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for ably responding to almost all the questions raised. One of the questions I am raising is about the escalating hostel fees for our young people who are in the universities.

For example, in MUBS, you find that they do not have their own hostels so there are only private hostels. Is there any way of regulating these hostel fees for our children?

In Kamwenge, I found a health centre in a refugee settlement where four to five children were sharing one bed. You are a doctor and I am not. What is the implication of this on these children? They are four to five children; these are babies. You may find that one has malaria and another has a cough or cold. Are we really protecting these children? What are you going to do about it?

Again, on refugees, there is this to and fro movement. They say freedom of movement so they come and go. The nationals then start to live in fear of Ebola and it is the Office of the Prime Minister in charge of this. Is there any way that this can be controlled? It looks like the commandants do not have the authority to control this. You need to tell us.

Honourable Prime Minister, I know that we are the first country in Africa and I think third world over that hosts refugees. Today is World Population Day. We have been advocating for reduction in fertility but there is this big influx from – can I say – both South Sudan and DRC. It looks like about 83 per cent are women and children and social services are at stake. 

At least one of the schools I found in Hoima – that is in Nakivaale – with about nine classrooms hosts over 7,000 children. What kind of education is that and more over it looks like these refugees are not about to go back? What are we going to do about that, if there is anything?

There are very many things that I would like to ask but let me ask one thing about accountability. We have information that $539 million was raised from the Uganda Solidarity Summit on Refugees fund. We tried to ask about it. The United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) Mbarara office told us it is the Office of the Prime Minister which can ably talk about that. 

We were with the Commissioner in charge of Refugees in the Office of the Prime Minister. We still insisted on getting information on this fund but we were told it is only $1.5 million that reached the Office of the Prime Minister. That means $537.5 million is not yet accounted for. What is your take on that?

Now, for my people of Uganda, we have – I do not know whether it is because of the aftermath of war – young people, mainly boys, who stay in dark corners, smoke opium and are not so friendly but they are our children. 

People give them bad names because they cause a lot of insecurity to the people. What plan can you, as Government, make for these young people, not because it is their fault but because of the irresponsibility of the adults, mothers and fathers?

If they are orphans, they have relatives. So, when orphans are in a family that is already the responsibility of that mother and father in that family to care for them. These children are now a menace. I do not know if they are also elsewhere. In Gulu, they nicknamed them, “Aguu”. 

Many times, I tell them not to call these children, “Aguu”. All of us must put our heads together and see that we find a solution. Is there any way that your Government can give a solution to this? If we talk of remand homes, we have one in Gulu but it is not properly financed. So, those are some of the questions that I would like to ask you but they are many.

Even when you talk about procurement, it goes back to you. It is not us to speed that up but it is you as Government and the person responsible for Government business to ensure that the procurement process is fast-tracked, instead of taking funds back to Government when problems are there in the communities. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, you used some word, “Aguu”. What does it mean, for the record? Is it a name or does it have a meaning?

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I said they have a nickname but it is not – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So it is a name?

MS BETTY AOL: I have always told them not to use that but -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  So, it is just a name?

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable Leader of the Opposition for sharing her experience and exposure, when she and her colleagues visited the refugee camps. It is true that the conditions that have been described unfortunately occur sometimes and that is why Government is doing everything possible to improve the conditions in those areas.

The question of four or five children being on a bed is totally unacceptable. Fortunately, Government, working with the international community, is improving health and education facilities, mainly in communities that host refugees. 

With regard to money that was received, you said that $537 million cannot be accounted for. I can tell you that this money was raised during the Uganda Solidarity Summit on Refugees at Munyonyo and every penny can be accounted for. It is true we got only $1.5 million in Government but the different Governments in the world who contributed money, instead of paying this money to Uganda Government, paid it specifically for project development. As such, the money was used. However, Government knows how the money was used; Government was involved.

The question on procurement that you have talked about, I had earlier raised the matter that Government is, in fact, amending the procurement regulations and laws. I have already stated that we are going to start with active electronic procurement in order to expedite the process of procurement.

You talked about the World Population Day today. It is a great day today; we are celebration the population day. The main celebration is in Adjumani. That is where all roads are leading to. Uganda has handled this population reasonably well. It is true that the life expectancy has shot up. The last figure for life expectancy was 63 years. It may be already 66 years. 

Secondly, the infant mortality has come down. It is now 43 deaths in 1,000 live births. It used to be 100 deaths in 1,000 live births. Thirdly, the question of other indices like fertility rate of women has come down from seven to now about five children. The number is coming down and it is going to be four as time goes on. 

The last comment I would like to make is that the Government of Uganda has received a grant of about $150 million to support the refugees host communities, and districts to ensure that our people who have been hospitable to receive refugees but have not had benefits can also have something to help them especially with schools and health centres.

So, in a nutshell, the question of refugees is being handled. I am even reminded rightly that water supply is also one of the programmes that are benefitting from this money. 

The last comment I would like to make is that these friends are refugees now; but tomorrow or the day after, they will be back in their homes. They may even be in Government. So, as a country, we are proud to treat our brothers and sisters from the neighbouring countries humanely when they seek refuge here. We are preparing them through education and skills so that when they go back to their respective countries, they occupy positions and make their countries and the continent better. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Prime Minister, honourable members and honourable ministers. This House has missed you but we are delighted to have you today. 

Honourable members, I think you now see the benefit of having – You saw the details and depth of responses in the first leg of the Prime Minister’s Time. That is the benefit of advance notice of questions. We had recommended this but Members did not respond to it very well because they thought it would take away the engagement or that it might be over structured. However, you saw how the responses were filled with facts and details. That is what the people who have sent you to ask those questions would like to hear; not responses that are coming from a surprise question. 

So, we might have to try and find a way of developing this advance notice of questions to enable the Prime Minister respond to these issues. (Applause) 

However, we still have a list of questions that the Prime Minister was not able to exhaust. A few others were added this week. As a result, we will compile them and by Monday, they should go to the Prime Minister so that on Thursday, he deals with them.

Honourable members, this issue of raising urgent questions that are actually not urgent just to get an advantage, we could use the Prime Minister’s Time to deal with them. They are policy issues that need direct responses from the Prime Minister. If we give the Prime Minister advance notice of questions, he would even consult Cabinet where necessary and come back to us with solid answers. 

Therefore, I am delighted, Mr Prime Minister with this level of engagement. It has facilitated our work a lot and reduced on the stock that we had on our Order Paper. Slowly, we will decrease the Order Paper to be able to deal with current and substantive business. 

For instance, the issue raised by the honourable member of Mityana District, if the minister had been responsive, you would not have to deal with it today. It is because the Member has raised it many times but nobody responds to it. That is why the burden falls on you again to come back and deal with it.

However, I am happy with the trend, particularly this afternoon and how we have handled the Prime Minister’s Time. It has been very beneficial and I am sure the Members are happy with the responses - of course, when you use the word, “Aguu” when nobody understands it, it might be difficult to respond to it. 

Secondly, Madam Leader of the Opposition, you prevail over the Opposition Chief Whip to avail the list for designation of Members so that the Committee on Climate Change is fully constituted to start working. It is there in the book but it does not have its membership. We have to start next week with a fully constituted House and committees.

Thank you very much. There being no other business, - by the way, I am going to prepare some certificates to award ministers who come to Parliament regularly as recognition. (Applause) 

It might also send notice to the appointing authority that the ones who have been receiving these certificates might be the ones that are likely to –(Laughter)– this is because there are ministers who deal with questions here without pushing them to “Business to Follow”, especially the Minister of State for Internal Affairs. The Ministers of Health also do very well. However, the Minister of State for Works and Transport Gen. Katumba, used to do very well. Now, he has also –(Laughter) please General, go back to what you used to do. It used to help us a lot. 

We all know where the urgent questions come from. They are mainly on health, security issues, local government issues, and roads. There is not much from Kampala City; so, - if we encourage this level of engagement, it helps the voters to understand that their issues are being dealt with. It will make them happy. However, if questions are asked and months pass by without answers, it can be very discouraging.

So, thank you, Mr Prime Minister, for this engagement. Honourable members, there being no further business for this afternoon, this House stands adjourned to Tuesday at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 4.53 p.m. and was adjourned until Tuesday, 16 July 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
