

Thursday, 19 July 2018

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you can see there is a lot of work to be done on the Order Paper. As I already communicated, on Wednesday next week we expect the Prime Minister of India to address Parliament at 10.00 a.m. 

Parliament will not be sitting on Tuesday to allow internal preparations for receiving the Prime Minister together with his host the President of the Republic of Uganda, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. 

We shall have presentations from the Prime Minister of India and any further communication will be made thereafter. Thank you. The honourable minister had something to say.

2.12
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and colleagues. I received a letter from the Speaker asking me to come and apologise to this House. However, I beg that you allow me to also put the record right -(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, the point of procedure is either the member is here to apologise or he is here because he had been instructed. That apology will not be taken because it will not be genuine.

Is it proper for the honourable minister to stand and say that he is going to apologise because the Speaker wrote to him? Would it be procedurally correct for us to receive that an apology because he had been directed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether you have ever made an apology to anybody in your life. You start an apology by stating the reason for which you are apologising. 

Do you just come and say I apologise and leave it there, what are you apologising for? He is apologising on the record. Should he just say I apologise and we leave it there? If that is what you want honourable minister go on. 
I think it would be proper to state the circumstances under which these things arose and tender the apology that is why he is here. Honourable minister please proceed to apologise.

MR KASAIJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am apologising to set the record clear. On Tuesday 5 June 2018 media houses both print and electronic ran news titled: “Kasaija disowns new tax on mobile money.”

They even said, “Kasaija disowns the decision taken by Parliament.” I respond as follows: When I was addressing the country on the eve of the budget week, which was organised by my ministry, I was asked by journalist why we are going to charge the one per cent tax on mobile money. My quick recollection and response was that “I recall my technical officers telling me that there was a proposal to change from one per cent to 0.5 per cent but I am going to get back to you and seek explanation on how we arrived at one per cent”.

My response on 0.5 per cent came in because my technical team had not briefed me on the one per cent since I had just returned from South Korea from an African Development Bank annual meeting.

In my address, I never meant to say that Parliament passed the one per cent tax in error or it made a mistake in any way after all that was what we presented as a ministry. I cannot fault Parliament for acting in error; I am part of this Parliament; I would be shooting myself in the foot. 

In any case, in the period of challenge, I applauded Parliament of Uganda for supporting our budget process and giving us the necessary approvals at the right time in order to steer the economy together for the progress of this country. 

You remember when we passed this budget, I stood on my two feet here and thanked you vehemently and even apologised to the Speaker for bringing a few things haphazardly. 

I apologise for the statement, which was attributed to me by the media houses which never captured my argument well because they all seemed to have interpreted my message differently. I beg to submit. Colleagues, I could not have disowned this House because I am a member. Thank you.

MS OKETAYOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I followed the minister’s submission very well; to me he was more of defending himself instead of apologising to the House. I need clarification on the statement that the minister has just made. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on procedure but you are now asking for clarification. 

MS OKETAYOT: To me the statement that the minister has made is not an apology as was requested by the Speaker, so procedurally I feel that he has not heeded to the demand of the Speaker to apologise to this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you were not clear on what you wanted to tell the press and in the process the matter was reported the way it was reported. It offended this House and it has asked you to apologise. 

If it was misrepresentation of the facts that you said nobody would have requested you to apologise; bringing those circumstances that made it possible for you to have been put in the light as if you were misrepresenting Parliament because you put yourself there. You need to apologise to the House and we proceed. 

MR KASAIJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I apologise and sincerely too. I did apologise yesterday to the caucus and I am now apologising to the entire House. 

2.20
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Mr Speaker, in the ruling of the then presiding Speaker, the issue was such that the minister brings a written apology to Parliament and the Speaker of the House.

Mr Speaker, I find it a little discomforting that the issues of the House are being turned into issues of the caucus. Therefore, I would pray that the minister brings a written apology because everybody is conscious of the fact that he is kind of explaining how he was misquoted or misunderstood and in a way watering down the apology that was required of him. 

Personally, I felt used as a Member of Parliament that I participated in a process with the guidance of a minister, who stands in broad daylight and reads a budget. However, to the amusement of Ugandans, the minister says, “I do not know how that tax was arrived at.” Does the minister want to crucify Members of Parliament?

Therefore, given the reason that many Ugandans feel Members of Parliament do not value them and do not appreciate what they go through, possibly that apology from the minister would indicate that - if I were him, I would say, “I did not mean to do that and because I was misquoted - if it has hurt Ugandans in any way, I apologise.” That is the written document that we wanted.
 
Mr Speaker, I find it discomforting that the apology that was demanded of the minister is just taken casually yet it is affecting a serious matter. Can he put that statement in writing because the integrity of Parliament is at stake? Ugandans will not believe us anymore. Next time, we may not find reason to attend the budget speech.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, are we now going to debate an apology? No, an apology has been rendered and if the directive was that it should be in writing, honourable minister, have it rebuilt in writing and submit it to the Speaker’s Office for record purposes. Otherwise, accordingly this apology is accepted by the House because it has been given to it.

2.24
MR THEODRE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent public importance under rule 46(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. 

In the Sunday Monitor newspaper, there was a headline: “Ministers clash over Museveni order to give out ranch land.” Mr Speaker, it was presented in the Sunday Monitor newspaper of 17 July 2018 where a senior Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, hon. Vincent Ssempijja and the Minister of State for Animal Industry, hon. Joy Kabatsi are reportedly fighting over the giveaway of land in Government ranches. Aswa Ranch, Nshaara Ranch, Ruhengyere Ranch, Maruzi Ranch, Lusenke Ranch, Nakyesesa Ranch and Njeru Farm. 

Mr Speaker, the issue arose after ministers issued contradictory statements; one from the Minister of State for Animal Industry giving an investor five square miles of land in Nshaara. That was reversed by the senior minister who gave 10 square miles of land in Aswa to a one Tinkamanyire who was originally given a ranch in Nshaara. 

Unless this matter is interrogated by this House, there are already 19 parcels of land being lined up to be given out. This contradicts the Government policy of 1988, 1989 and the 1990s of ranch restructuring where ranches in the Ankole-Masaka corridor where I come from were parcelled out to the squatters.

However, this time around, you are seeing individuals whose credibility is in question. For instance, I know one of them; the Chairman LC III in my county, Ntusi, was given two square miles of land to carry out cattle keeping among others.
 
Mr Speaker, these are matters of public importance because these are assets of the country. They were deliberately created by a few speculators who are taking advantage of the land bonanza and they are stealing this land when we are looking on. We are here to deliberate for the President and the future generations.

Therefore, as a matter of public importance, has Government turned back on its policy of ranch restructuring? Where initially they gave out ranches, they are now creating others under fictitious circumstances?

Secondly, how is Government coordinated where a junior minister says five square miles and another says give 10? Mr Speaker, for individuals to get away with 10 square miles of land while aware that we are 40 million Ugandans is rather disheartening.

Lastly, there is the question of the credibility of these so-called investors. I have told this House that I know one of the beneficiaries personally. If members can remember the Ninth Parliament, he was the one involved with the Uganda Investment Authority land in Lwemiyaga. The same person is now in Nshaara getting two square miles of land free of charge. What is remaining for other Ugandans? This country is for all us. A few well-placed people cannot rob this country while we are looking on. 

This is therefore to call on Government to halt this process and to restore the sanctity of the country. These are national properties, they are assets, which were created consciously under the Acts of Parliament, which we cannot look on as they are being dished out in the guise of investors and farmers. We know these are fictitious people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the honourable Member of Parliament for Pader District raised this matter the other week. It was a directive from the presiding Speaker then that the Prime Minister and the minister should come back and brief the House on this particular issue. That matter is in the pipeline and we are just waiting to hear when the statements are going to be ready so that it can be done. 

The same matter was raised by the Member who was chairing the Committee on Agriculture in the last session of Parliament. I have the Hansard here so it is a matter, which is already in process. Let us wait for the response to come and if it is necessary to have a debate on it, we shall do so.

2.29
MS ROBINAH SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the people of Nangoma, specifically Lukunyu Landing Site. These people are presently suffering from health hazards resulting from deprivation of critical public services to their area. This has resulted into the populace thinking that the Government does not care whether they live or not. They even think that they could be left to become part of Tanzania.

As I speak now, I have received reports that two children have died of cholera-related signs and symptoms, and several others are suffering from the same. Unfortunately, the health centre II that is there has no drugs. I personally visited it and this morning I called the centre, but the nurse said that the only drug they have is Panadol for Malaria. So, the children cannot be treated, mothers cannot receive maternal care, because there is only one bed that was donated by an NGO, and yet there are no mattresses.  

Sadly, when you are very sick, you cannot cross the lake to Kasensero because the boats were broken by the sea-cleaning officials - Lieutenant Tashobya. They are cleaning the sea against bad fishing. So, all the boats that would be used to cross over to Kasensero to get treatment were broken. In replacement, they were given one big boat that needs an engine, which they do not have. As such, the children have to be taken by their parents to Mugana Hospital.

Going to Mugana Hospital, you have to pay Tshs 1000, if you are to take motorbike or a car. If it is an emergency and you have to procure special hire services, you have to pay Tshs 20,000, yet the hospitals charge Tshs 80,000. The citizens are saying that they cannot manage that. The only latrine that is in Lukunyu is full. I saw it myself and when it rains -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, what is the urgent matter?

MS SSENTONGO: The urgent matter is that the children are dying of cholera-related symptoms and illnesses. We, therefore, need urgent attention to that. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Do we have a health minister here or any other minister that can deal with the matter? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda.

2.33
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, we are concerned about the reported problem that our children may be dying because of diarrheal diseases. The MoH will re-enforce the district health authorities, to ensure that this matter is dealt with immediately.

2.33
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance as regards to the high levels of lawlessness in some parts of this country. This has affected the security of our people in some sections of this country, to be more specific, in the areas of Parongo, in Nebbi District. Our Constitution – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, which is the matter of national importance? Please raise the urgent matter. These are urgent matters.

MS BIGIRWA: On the 7 July 2018, Vincent Tibamwenda, aged 30 and a teacher of Chemistry and Mathematics at Aru Secondary School in Nebbi was killed and his body burnt by a mob of boda boda riders, in Parombo; that is Nebbi District.

Vincent was a son to Mr Byaruhanga Stephen of Kigwere Sub-County, in Bulisa District. This gentleman was coming from his school and had come to make some clearance on his transcript. On his way, he picked a motorcycle to drop him in Panyimur, in order to board a ferry to Wanseko landing site, later to cross to Buliisa.

Unfortunately, he was mistaken for somebody who stole a motorcycle some weeks back. On reaching Parombo, he was stopped by a number of motorcycles and was interrogated for stealing a motorcycle. He identified himself as a teacher from Aru Secondary School. After sometime, he was released. He proceeded without the motorcycle to Panyimuru, in order to cross over to Wanseko. 

As he was in the line, he was grabbed by some two gentlemen; they were also cyclist. He was taken aside and later put on a motorcycle that rode him back to Parombo. In the process, he was being escorted by hundreds of motorcycles. So, he was placed in Parombo trading centre where he was locked in a house.

Shortly after, there came a GISO named Grace in Parombo Sub-County. He was called upon to come and interrogate this young man. When he came, he entered into that house and took some time with this gentleman. On coming out, the GISO decided to tell the rowdy population that had already charged, that actually, Vincent (who is now late), was the culprit that they were waiting for, all along.

The crowd decided to beat him up; he was stoned and his body was burnt. It was a very terrible situation and unfortunately, this was happening in the presence of a security personnel, who is a GISO. After this gentleman had been killed, it is when these people decided to call the Head teacher of Erusi, who actually confirmed that Vincent was his teacher and was proceeding to his home to clear the mistakes that were on his transcript. 

As a community, we are very disheartened and we condemn this kind of act. This level of violence has been happening in this area for quite some time and many people have lost their lives. I wonder whether there is security in that area, and our prayer as leaders and Ugandans, is that the Ministry of Security takes practical measures to curb lawlessness in these areas. Many people have continually lost their lives.

Secondly, the security forces ably protect the lives and property of the people as it is their core mandate. Thirdly, the culprits should be arrested and apprehended. We have been told that one of culprits, by the names of Owiny Tito was arrested in Tonya, which is Kijangi Landing Site. He is right now in Hoima police station, but the policemen are demanding for transport money from the father of the late to ferry the culprit from Hoima to Nebbi, in order to be apprehended in the courts of law.

I think that as a nation and as leaders, we do not need to sit down and watch our fellow Ugandans and property being lost. We need to act and it is my prayer, that this issue will be handled with the utmost attention that is required. I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. There is a GISO involved. Honourable Minister of Security, your GISO presided over that kind of function – 

2.39
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Gen. Elly Tumwine): Mr Speaker, a lot of things happen; some surprising and you wonder how they even happen. Whenever they happen, they should be reported and action should be taken. I had got information of that incident. The report I got is that it was being handled and the people involved were going to be apprehended. 

2.40
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of public importance concerning the mothers and the people of Nyanga Sub County in Kinkizi West, Kanungu District. For some time, they have been suffering because of lack of a health unit in that sub county. 

Mr Speaker, this sub county neighbours Congo and Queen Elizabeth National Park but the mothers seeking for antenatal care and those giving birth have to go to Congo – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Health, you might have to listen to what he is saying. 

MR KABERUKA: Mr Speaker, the district leadership has been appealing to the Minister of Health; many letters are written. They have been requesting for officials from the ministry to go and see the pathetic situation that these people of Nyanga are facing. 

I had risen on this Floor of Parliament and I had talked about a situation where most of the mothers, who had gone to Congo to seek for medical care, had been kidnapped and their families were asked for ransom. When others are going to Congo, they are attacked by lions since they pass through the park. This is because there is no health unit for them to seek health care.

Mr Speaker, my prayer is that the Minister of Health should come and update this Parliament because they had promised to work on this health unit, as per policy; that every sub county should have an operational health unit. They should also get a team to go there and see how they can help these molested mothers that are going to Congo to seek for health care.

On 6 February 2016, when the Prime Minister was there, he also directed that the Health Centre III be established but up to now, we do not know the outcome of this. Even on the list of sub counties without health centres, I saw that Nyanga Sub County was not included. We need an explanation and way forward on how we can help these mothers and the people of Nyanga. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.43
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We acknowledge your concern over the Health Centre III upgrade and construction. 

Mr Speaker, this financial year, we have already informed the district that we shall be upgrading some Health Centre IIs in sub counties to Health Centre IIIs and the lists have gone out to the various districts. This is going to be done under a loan called, “The Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfer Loan”, which is yet to come to this august House for approval. 

However, for sub counties that do not have facilities at all, they require construction. Our request for a loan to do this is with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We are yet to have an update as to whether they have managed to secure the loan for discussion and also for approval by this august House. 

Nevertheless, the upgrade that is going to start this financial year will be carried out in phases over a four year period because we cannot undertake all that in one year. We are going to upgrade 132 Health Centre IIs in sub counties to Health Centre IIIs. 

Therefore, we recognise the challenge that the honourable member has presented. I will crosscheck and see if the facility that is in question is on that list and revert back to him. Still, we are also willing to bring the entire list to this august House. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much for that. 

2.45
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the outbreak of cholera in Bulambuli District. As I speak now, 20 people have been affected and one person is dead. This is not the first time cholera is affecting the people of Bulambuli –(Interjection) – it is actually not hygiene. 

I need to be protected, Mr Speaker. It is actually not hygiene. In 2016, Bulambuli was again affected by the outbreak of cholera and six people died. Why?  Bulambuli is in a low lying area. It has two areas: upper Bulambuli which is in a highland and then lower Bulambuli, which I represent, is in the lowland.

Now, after a heavy downpour, the water comes and lies in the lowland whereby all the water sources have been affected; latrines have collapsed and boreholes have been contaminated. Even if you are the one, I do not think you will be blamed for poor hygiene because there is no way you can construct a latrine due to the recent rains, which have affected parts of Bulambuli, including Bukedea. As we talk now, this problem is continuing. 

Mr Speaker, to be brief and precise, my prayer is:

    1. Government should help the people of Bulambuli save the lives of those who are affected. As I talk now, as per yesterday, one person died and right now, I do not know the death toll because I am here. 
    2. The water sources; Government should come to our rescue. They should dig more boreholes and treat them with disinfectants so that we help our people. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think I will not go beyond that because the point has been taken. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

2.47
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Mr Speaker, the control of cholera is a multi-sectoral issue. For the last several months, we have had heavy rains and we have had cholera outbreaks in over eight districts in the country, Kampala inclusive. We even still have cholera in Kampala. 

Mr Speaker, as has been mentioned, cholera is a hygiene issue which results from poor disposal of faeces. Bulambuli is one of the areas where we have challenges with the poor soils and the terrain so it always gets outbreaks of cholera.

Mr Speaker, we already brought in the cholera vaccine and we started vaccinating refugees in the Hoima camps. That was because the refugees were coming in with cholera. However, for the rest of the country, the vaccines are now coming in and we shall be able to distribute them to the rest of the districts. This vaccine does not provide protection for life – (Interruption) 

MR KINOBERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You see, when we are addressing an emergency, you do not talk about a vaccine or loan. Here our colleague is talking about an emergency- somebody has already died and others are dying. Is the minister in order to start referring to loans, vaccines when we have urgent issues that we need immediate interventions?

We expected her to tell us how best we can handle such an emergency but not telling us about how vaccines are going to come. I do not think it is applicable. Is she in order to come and mislead the House that we should wait for vaccines instead of talking how we shall be able to handle such an emergence?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She is in order. Proceed. 

DR ACENG: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the wise ruling. The treatment for cholera is just rehydration and antibiotics- that is the normal thing we do every day and it is being done. I do not need to re-emphasize it. However, what I am trying to tell you is what we want to do in the long term to stop the outbreaks of cholera –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for giving me way. Honourable minister, you are talking of vaccinating cholera-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Not vaccinating cholera but vaccinating people against cholera.

MR OLANYA: Yes, vaccinating people against cholera. Honourable minister, I know cholera is one of preventable diseases- it is just a matter of being clean, taking clean water- hygiene shall prevent cholera.

Honourable minister I have never heard cholera among the diseases that can be vaccinated against. I am just surprised because I remember when we were in primary and secondary school, we never thought about cholera being vaccinated against- this is my first time to hear it from you. That is why people who are watching and listening to us especially the school-going children need to get this clarification.

DR ACENG:  Mr Speaker, I am glad that members know that cholera is a hygiene issue and short of proper hygiene, we shall continue getting it. That is why I started by saying it is multi-sectoral issue. It needs different ministries to come together to address it. Once you have cholera, it means you have eaten faeces- as simple as that.

However, there is a vaccine against cholera and the honourable members from Hoima can testify. We have just concluded vaccinating refugees and the people in Hoima- those are hot spots where we get outbreaks so frequently that we cannot control it until we have addressed the hygiene issues. 

Therefore, for the eight districts that I have mentioned, we need to address the hygiene issues but in the interim, we shall vaccinate them so that we stop the high mortality that we get from cholera.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, next item.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) NO.2 BILL, 2018

2.55
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I want to move that a Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) No.2 Bill, 2018” be read for the first time. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table the certificate of financial implication.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, this matter has been in the public, the Office of the Speaker has been awash with letters of different kinds and petitions. After it has been read for the first time and as I refer it to the committee, I would also like to refer some of these matters that have been addressed to the Speaker, since the committee is going to look at these things again to have this matters handled by the committee directly instead of again going through a petition and so forth.

There is a letter from mobile money fraternity Kampala central business district. They have written and they have made some explanations. I direct that they should also go to the committee. We also have a letter from the Students’ Guild of Makerere University who have also raised some issues. I will also be referring this directly with the Bill to the committee. 

This Bill stands referred to the appropriate committee for handling and reporting back to Parliament. The issue of taxation is urgent. However, honourable members, as you recall, this matter has been a hot debate and therefore, I am referring it to the committee to enable the committee have an interface with some people like those who are dealing with mobile money and other actors in the sector. This should be done so that they can have a more informed discussion. When they come back, we can have this matter debated and a proper decision taken on the issue that is raised by the Bill. Therefore, the mater is referred to the committee and all these letters and petitions. Thank you.

MR MUGUME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is an outcry in the public, what happens now? This tax is being deducted therefore we want to know in the meantime, what happens? Maybe the minister should clarify on this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on procedure, now you are asking the minister to clarify. Okay, this is what happens; if you are properly assessed for taxation and you were unfairly taxed, there are processes of tax refund, those are standard procedures, we do not have to go into that debate. Once it is done, it will be handled.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising, given the fact that there is a lot of outcry about this tax and our rules give committees 45 days to report, is it procedurally right that you as the Chair give a specific number of days within which  the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development should handle this Bill? Maybe within five or 10 days because of the urgency so that people do not continue to be taxed more than they can afford.

Mr Speaker, that is the procedural issue, I am raising.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, the discretionary powers of the Speaker apply where the rule does not cover the subject. However, where the rule is express, I would be substantially amending the rule which authority I do not have. About this matter, I think the committee is abreast of the issues. We cannot wait for the 45 days and the chairman is here and he knows. Anyway, we still have no committees and that is part of the problem. 

This matter will be handled quickly and they will report to the House because it is a burning matter and cannot delay in the committee for too long. Once the committee is constituted, we will proceed to give further instructions on how they should handle this matter and report back to the House. Thank you.            

MR MUGUME: Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right to take this issue for discussion to the committee when the committees are not in place? This is an urgent matter and we don’t have committees in place. Mr Speaker, you need to clarify on this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The committees are in place. It is only the members that are not there. (Laughter) The committees are in place, do you want me to read the rule? The committees are there except the members have not been designated. I have referred it to the committee responsible, which committee is in the rules. The members will be constituted and they will handle the matter. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker –(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable.

MR MUGUME: Mr Speaker, my point –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Generally, let me give this guidance. The equipment in Parliament has been upgraded and the microphones are now new. It is not the old ones where you could press as many times as you wanted. This one, you press once to make the request. Once I have allowed you, the technical people will immediately activate your microphone. You do not have to press it many times.

When you press once, you ask, when you press the second time you cancel the request and that is what happens. (Laughter) That is why we are having these difficulties; you press once and it shows on their screen that microphone number so has requested. When you press the second time, it cancels and they cannot see.

Please, this one is on, you can now proceed. 

MR MUGUME: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I agree with you because technology is not easy. Those people outside and here, who are smiling or laughing, you know what happens with technology. We need orientation because no one has told me what happened and I am not in Government to know what is going on. 

Therefore, it is good to always inform us. Mr Speaker, I understand these people were told yesterday in a caucus. However, for us, we are unfortunate. You know because you are in Government but tomorrow when you are on this side, you will know what happens. I would like to be clear on this point -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please honourable; this matter is not for any government but for the Parliamentary Commission. This equipment was procured by Parliament and it has nothing to do with any side of the House except the whole House. (Laughter)          
        
MR MUGUME: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the guidance. My point is clear that right now as I am speaking, our committees are not constituted and that is the point, I am talking about. If you can advise me, this issue is urgent and I am saying since it is urgent, what can we do in such a situation? 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, you gave a very instructive ruling on what our rules say; that there is an institution of Parliament and how it is constituted, the committees can never expire. It is the members that expire. That ruling was very clear to even take away any slightest piece of ignorance from anyone’s mind. Is the Member in order to rise on the same matter purporting to challenge your ruling without any substantial ground, he is standing on? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member cannot even be caught thinking of challenging my ruling without following procedure and that does not arise. What is in issue which the Member wanted to say is that he wanted to explain himself on something that I had already guided on. The committees of Parliament are there; we know the number and their names.

As we speak now, we have not put members in them and that is the process that is going to happen. I have referred this matter to the committee responsible; that is the committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development except it still has no members. The members will be brought and they will handle this matter.

Therefore, what kind of ruling, would you want me to say, that I now appoint ad hoc committee and name the members to handle the Bill? I cannot do that. Let us wait for the process and have the members of the committee put in place and then they will deal with this matter quickly and report to the House. 

We are not going to wait for 45 days to have this matter handled. Whoever, will come in this committee is aware that this matter is urgent. They will deal with this urgently and come back to the House and we proceed. Please, let us proceed with business.           

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON POPULATION RELATED ISSUES

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT) (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Every year, the international community observes the World Population Day on 11th July. In Uganda, this year's celebrations were held in Omoro District in Northern Uganda. The theme for this year was “Leaving Nobody Behind: Improving Service Delivery and Accountability.”

Looking back in our history, Uganda over time has put population issues at the centre of its development plans and programmes. Government of Uganda passed the first National Population Policy in 1995. That policy highlighted the then rampant poverty levels in the country. Fifty six per cent of the population was living below the poverty line. The policy stressed the importance of integrating population factors into the implementation of the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) at national and lower levels.

After 13 years of implementation, the National Population Policy was revised in 2008. The revised policy recognised the need to tackle the persistent high fertility and high mortality in the country.

In this regard, Uganda increased its spending and emphasis is on preventive rather than curative programmes. Priority was placed on programmes such as immunisation against childhood killer diseases, maternal and child health, HIV/AIDS, nutrition, water and sanitation as well as household hygiene. 

In addition, in order to address high fertility challenges, reproductive health and family planning were emphasised. These programmes were augmented by the introduction of Universal Primary Education (UPE).

Relevance of the theme to Uganda's Development

It reminds us of the importance of inclusive growth as we work towards achieving Uganda's Vision 204O and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and is also a call upon all of us, as leaders to commit to ensuring that responsive programmes are put in place.

Progress in Population Health and Development

Mr Speaker, we have made substantial progress in regard to population and health issues. As a result of these programmes, Uganda has made commendable progress in a number of population and health related areas. This progress is reflected in the census of 2014 and Uganda Demographic and Health Surveys. I would like to cite just a few examples:

    a) Uganda has registered an impressive increase in longevity of its population. For the first time in a long time, our life expectancy in Uganda has increased from 43 years in 1991 to 63 years in 2016.
    b) HIV/AIDS prevalence rate in the general population has declined from 18.5 per cent (and 3O per cent in some specific sub-populations) in 1991 to 6.4 per cent in 2016.
    c) Uganda has also seen an improvement in the immunisation programmes. Immunisation against Diphtheria Polio Tetanus (DPTs) currently stands at 79 per cent according to Uganda Demographic Health Survey of 2016 although full immunisation, that is, children immunised against all the killer diseases, stands at 55 per cent. This has led to improvements in child survival. Infant mortality (children dying in the first year of life) dropped from 122 deaths per 1,000 live births in 1991 to 43 deaths in 2016, representing a 63 per cent drop.

    d) Maternal mortality also declined from 506 deaths per one hundred live births in 1991 to 336 in 2016, representing a decline of 34 per cent. Fertility has also declined from 7.4 children per woman in 1988 to 5.4 in 2016, a decline of 24 per cent.

    e) In the education sector, Uganda has, since 1997, seen tremendous increase in the enrolment of our children under Universal Primary Education (UPE). In 1997, we had three million children enrolled under UPE. This has increased to 8.7 million by 2016. In addition, we have also achieved parity in terms of boys and girls enrolling for UPE. As a result, literacy rate in Uganda increased from 54 per cent in 1991 to 75 per cent, currently.

    f) Poverty in Uganda has also reduced. It stood at 56 per cent in 1991. This means that in 1991, for every two Ugandans, one was living below the poverty line. The good news is that poverty levels have declined to 21 per cent by 2016. 

The increased child survival, coupled with high fertility and increased life expectancy, has led to a surge in total population. At a population growth rate of 3.0 per cent per annum, Uganda's population grew from 16.7 million people in 1990 to 34.6 million in 2014. Uganda's population is expected to reach forty million by the end of this year. The majority of this population is predominantly made up of young people. I need to add that 78 per cent of our population is below thirty years of age.

This surge in the population presents the country with both challenges and opportunities. Uganda's Vision 2O4O recognises that this young population is an important resource that should be invested in to harness the Demographic Dividend and attain socio-economic transformation. The Demographic Dividend is the economic benefit that can arise out of a country's taking advantage of the changing population structure and adopting clear, focused and sustained policies that empower a country's working population (15-64 years) to become the engine of economic growth.

Population related challenges, actions needed and appeal

Mr Speaker, allow me to mention a few challenges as I conclude. In spite of this progress and prospects, we still face population related challenges. Let me mention a few examples.

Our children still die from preventable diseases as well as those diseases that can be prevented through immunisation and better hygiene. A few minutes ago, Dr. Jane Aceng mentioned something to do with hand washing. 

It is very shameful that washing your hands with water and soap after visiting the toilet still stands only at 27 per cent. Out of 100 Ugandans who visit the washroom, only 27 come out and wash their hands with water and soap. Colleagues, we must use our platforms as Members of Parliament to go on the radio and educate our people -(Interjection). Well, even Members of Parliament are Ugandans. 

As the minister of health will tell you, we can prevent these diseases by just doing this. This is because out of the diseases that kill us, 80 per cent are got through poor hygiene. As leaders, we need to support policies and initiatives aimed at developing and utilising water, hygiene and sanitation facilities.

Teenage pregnancies in Uganda have remained a major problem. The teenage pregnancy rate has stagnated at 25 per cent for the last 10 years. This means that in Uganda, one out of every four teenage girls is either pregnant or has had a baby before they reach 19 years of age. This is a matter of national concern. We call upon parents, teachers, health workers, cultural and religious leaders as well as political leaders to fulfill their callings and role in addressing this problem. Men should stop impregnating young girls. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker, when we went to your home district of Omoro during the commemoration of the 2018 World Population Day, we found similar population related challenges in the district. I must state that we are grateful for your leadership and the leadership of the district and the people of Omoro for welcoming us there with a number of colleagues who attended. For example, In Omoro, teenage pregnancy rate stands at 28 per cent, which is higher than the national average.

In Omoro District, crop production is the major economic activity, employing 95 per cent of the population in subsistence agriculture and this has implications for poverty. 

In addition, latrine coverage in Omoro District is low as at 39 per cent and access to safe water is at 53 per cent. The poor health conditions are mainly due to a high disease burden in the district due to malaria, which is rampant and stands at 41 per cent. 

Omoro is not alone. There are quite a number of other districts in a similar situation and the Government is working, long and hard, to reverse some of these situations.

In conclusion, I would like to state that Uganda joined the rest of the world to observe the World Population Day on 11th July 2018 in Omoro District and we were warmly welcomed by the people of Omoro. The theme for the day was: "Leaving Nobody Behind: Improving Service Delivery and Accountability."

We are grateful to the large contingent of Members of Parliament who joined the chief guest and the people of Omoro during the celebrations. Uganda has made some progress in areas of poverty reduction, life expectancy, child survival, literacy and HIV/AIDS prevention. 

However, Uganda still faces challenges such as high teenage pregnancy rate, inadequate access to free immunisation of preventable diseases as well as inadequate household hygiene, nutrition, water and sanitation. 

In addition, Uganda needs to pay more attention to lifestyle diseases such as diabetes, cancer and high blood pressure. Government will continue strengthening awareness creation, community mobilisation and programmes to address the above issues.

All in all, Mr Speaker, I can boldly state that because of the progress we have made, we can proudly stand here and say that for all Ugandans this is the best time to be alive. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. You have articulated the challenges in Omoro District very well – (Laughter) - and I am sure when the Woman Member of Parliament for Omoro raises these issues, there will be no objection coming from you in terms of support. (Laughter)

Honourable members, the minister’s statement attracts debate; let us have a debate. Can we agree on a timeframe? Can we take three minutes each? We will limit it to 45 minutes. I will start with the Woman Representative for Omoro District.

3.23
MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Omoro): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for the statement presented. On behalf of the people of Omoro District, I would like to extend our gratitude to the Government of Uganda for choosing Omoro District to host the World Population Day, which fell on the 11 July 2018.

However, I would like to address myself to the population-related challenges that were raised by the minister. It is my appeal that the different line ministries concerned with those related challenges take up their roles to ensure those matters are addressed.

Mr Speaker, I would like to comment on the coordinated planning by Government. The World Population Day was celebrated on the 11th July yet we had the LC I elections on the 10th of the same month. I think it is very important that Government ministries plan in a coordinated manner. 

Why I am raising this? During the celebration, the attendance at the function was not as expected of a national function, especially for the other districts from the region that were supposed to join in. While the attendance of Members of Parliament was fair, for Government officials, the attendance was not very good.

Mr Speaker, the day when we had the LC I elections was a public holiday and most members were in their constituencies. This as well affected the pre-activities for the day. There were quite a number of activities that were supposed to be implemented before the celebration. However, because we had the 10th of July declared a public holiday and the communities were also very busy engaged in electing their LC I officials, some of the activities were not properly implemented in the district.

Therefore, my appeal is that in the future, we should coordinate our planning for us to have a celebration that will have impact on the lives of the common people in the community.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, a number of other activities were also not completed, one of them being the handing over of computers, connected to the Internet, to schools that had been selected in the district. Just this morning, I got reliably informed that Awere Secondary School, in Odek Sub County, has not yet benefitted. The information was that the National Population Council failed to complete this exercise because of the mix-up in programmes for the two days - the LC I elections on the 10th and the World Population Day celebrations on the 11th of July.

However, Mr Speaker, I would like to re-echo that as a district, we - (Member timed out.)

3.26
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join the rest of the colleagues, on behalf of the Uganda Parliamentarian Forum on Food Security, Population and Development, to commend the Government and partners for the preparations and arrangements for that day. It was successful and we are happy for colleagues who were able to attend. We thought we should add a few issues to the Government’s agenda for consideration as we deal with population dynamics in Uganda.

While we support the use of family planning methods, we have discovered that the population is hazy about the different methods of family planning and somehow there is resistance – cultural, religious and otherwise – against the methods of family planning. Our suggestion is that Government and other stakeholders should emphasise the natural methods of birth control first because they are easy to adapt to by our people. The other methods can be added for those who may not easily adapt to the natural methods.

We all know that the other methods of birth control have side effects and that is why we call upon Government to mitigate the effects with these other methods of family planning that have already been witnessed in the communities.

The other point is to encourage those involved in preaching birth control messages to take note that the localisation of birth control in our languages is intimidating to the extent that it scares off many people from using such methods. If I ask many colleagues here what they call family planning or birth control in their local languages, they will realise that terms used cause worry, especially among women. 

In Luganda, for example, birth control is commonly referred to as “kizaala ggumba” and no woman wants to be told that she is mugumba or she is ekizaala ggumba. It causes resistance among many of our local people, especially in adapting to the natural birth control methods.

The other point, Mr Speaker, is that we commend Government efforts in the fight against infant mortality rates but it is our contention that more effort is needed because it appears that more children are still dying at infancy. However, more importantly, while we commend the efforts to make sure that no woman dies while giving birth, more efforts need to be stepped up especially in our health centres IIIs where – (Member timed out.)

3.29
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Once again, I would like to thank the minister for this belated statement, which I believe should have come before the commemoration of the day. Nonetheless, it is commendable that on such a day, Parliament discusses the statement from Government on the status of the population in the country.

Mr Speaker, I will concentrate on the education aspect. We all know that Uganda has the youngest population in the world. As statistics indicate, 57 per cent of our population constitutes children. While these children are supposed to be in schools, on the contrary majority of them end up dropping out of school before completing the primary cycle. That is where the problems of this country emanate from; where we risk population explosion. 

I am saying this because most of the children who drop out of school end up into the procreation cycle at an early age. That is why the fertility rate in the country is very high; it is because when these children dropout, especially the girls, they become wives. Some of these girls end up as wives as a result of defilement. It is one of the reasons we have many cases of early child marriages.

Therefore, I would like to appeal to Government to put in place measures to make our children to stay longer in school. This is because research has indicated that the longer a girl child takes in school, the less productive she becomes in her lifespan. For example, a girl who has completed university education will not produce more than four or five children but a girl who drops out in primary four will produce as many as 12 children.

Mr Speaker, we have a case that has been circulating on social media, where a woman at the age of about 36 years, has already given birth to over 40 children –(Interjection)– yes, go and - (Member timed out.) 	

3.32
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity. When the minister was trying to talk about enrolment in schools, he said it has been increasing. Yes, we thank you, honourable minister for that. However, among the challenges, you have not mentioned the high level of school dropouts in Uganda.

According to Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) report, in 2000, we had 1.5 million pupils enrolled in primary one. However, in 2007, when we expected them to sit for Primary Leaving Examination (PLE), only 600 of them sat those exams. Why haven’t you accounted for more than 800 pupils? Are you happy to talk about people who enrol but do not sit for PLE? 

Mr Speaker, how I wish the Government could address how best we can minimise the high level of school dropouts and –(Member timed out.)

MR SSEMPALA: Mr Speaker, I would like to give information to the House. My colleague has mentioned that in 2000, the number of pupils who enrolled in primary one was 1.5, and only about 600 of them sat for PLE.

However, as an educator and somebody who manages a school, I would like to inform the House that Uganda National Examination Board (UNEB) has never registered more than 310,000 students at senior four, four years after primary seven. That is another school dropout rate of 50 per cent.

In senior six, only about 110,000 students have registered, which is terrible. This means that from primary one to senior six, 90 per cent of the students that registered in primary one drop out. That way, we will never get out of the population problems we have. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member was giving information. Hon. Mbwatekamwa, have you finished your submission? It is okay, if you are done.

3.36
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA	(NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. However, I would have expected this statement at least to have an outline of the strategies Government is employing to ensure that we have a quality population. For example, coming up with strategies to ensure that the law on defilement is implemented, keeping children in school, as hon. Atiku has mentioned, increased supply and uptake of family planning so that we have spaced births; to have our children start and remain in schools. Such these strategies would help us to raise awareness in the population as to what they should do. 

Anyway, I would like to thank the minister and the National Population Council for trying to raise awareness. I also would like to thank hon. Abbas Agaba who mentioned issues of family planning, because they are important. How are we going to ensure our people have sufficient information on family planning and that the supplies are available, for them to control their births? 

Mr Speaker, at a recent workshop, we were told that the cycle beads are very effective. In fact, I did not know that the cycle beads are one of the family planning methods that could be used; it is a simple method, which our women can use to space their births.

Finally, on the issue of teenage pregnancies, I think educating our parents to talk to the girl child in order to prepare them to handle such issues is very important. These girls fall into problems because no one talks to them about what to expect and so they end up being duped into early sexual relationships. Therefore, the parents should be sensitised. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.38
MS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for the statement presented on the status of the population in Uganda.

My concern is the high teenage pregnancy levels in this country. On 11 April this year, I made a very powerful statement on the Floor of the House, requesting the Ministry of Health to come and inform this country about the strategies they have in place to curb the high teenage pregnancy levels in this country.

I said that because it has been found out that most of our girls who get pregnant end up seeking for abortion, there are many signposts in this country advertising abortion services yet abortion is illegal. I do not know whether the Ministry of Health and other concerned ministries, have seen these adverts. If they have seen them, what have they done about them?

That is important to note because our girls have died trying to abort yet nobody seems to be bothered about this issue. Otherwise, if we are to develop as a country, the issue of high teenage pregnancy levels must be dealt with.

In that statement, I talked about a 27-year old lady who is already a grandmother – (Interjections) – yes, in Busoga. Therefore, Mr Speaker, we need the Ministry of Health to first of all tell us how far they have gone with the policy on reproductive health. As we speak, there is no policy in place to guide stakeholders to deal with such issues.

Secondly, I would like the Minister of Health to inform us about the reproductive health guidelines. These are very important. Civil society and other stakeholders have been crying for these guidelines to help them advise in policy formulation so that we can bring down high teenage pregnancies and early marriages. This is important because if girls continue to drop out of school because of pregnancy and other related cases, we shall not curb the problem of high maternal – (Member timed out.)

3.41
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the minister for the statement presented. I was one of the few Members who attended the preparations. However, even during that preparation meeting, I told colleagues who were there that I did not know whether this Government will one time stop to just think about people in hard-to-reach areas and instead come up clearly to know the challenges those people go through.

If people in at least better areas can complain, how about the islanders where one cannot even talk of condoms? They said it is worse because that is where whoever is infected runs to. You can imagine! Mr Speaker, one time I brought here a matter of national concern about having only one seed school at Koome Island, which has a population of 40,000 people and up to today, the issue of the English teachers has never been resolved. In the entire school, we have eleven teachers. This is a fully-fledged secondary school. There is only one primary school. We are talking of school drop-outs but even in that school, their toilet got full over a year ago and Ministry of Education and Sports has never been bothered. How do you expect the students or pupils to go to such schools instead of going fishing? The early pregnancy issue we are talking about is not even a concern at that island?

It is high time that we considered not only hard-to-reach areas – because even as we talk about hard-to-reach, we have never solved any problem there. As we talk of high population, our concern - on an island like this one that used to have 150 people now has over 10,000 people. They do not have a clinic. They do not have toilets. The only private school that was left by my colleague, hon. Peter Bakaluba, starts from nursery to primary three only. From there, children drop out of school unless they are ready to go out of the island, which is impossible.

Therefore, we should consider the people in hard-to-reach areas in a very special way in that report as I requested. Let there be sensitisation to our people if we are to really consider all Ugandans equal. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.44
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank you, honourable minister, for the statement. Honourable minister, yes we have continuously talked about the demographic dividend. This sounds so well and we always want to quote it every now and then. However, I would like us to be very serious, as a country and as a Government, and really state whether we are reaping the demographic dividend as envisaged in our vision.

Mr Speaker, we know that the economy is growing at about five per cent. The population is growing at more than three per cent though the food percentage is growing at less than two percent. This in itself shows that the facts cannot translate into a quality population that we envision in our vision.

Honourable minister, we have got eight million children in Universal Primary Education (UPE) but together, we have about 12 million children in primary schools in this country. This therefore, means that we are going to reach a time where we are going to have a population with more than three million babies born every year. Right now, I think we are at over one million and that should be a matter of serious concern to this country.

This has mounted a lot of pressure on the land yet in many places we do not have enough land for people to grow food. It has mounted a lot of pressure on social services like schools and so on. There is a lot of widespread unemployment in this country. Why be pride of unemployment yet many bad habits come with such a bulging population. 

The population actually has almost tripled in the last 15 years. If it is growing at this rate, it means in about 25 years, we are going to have over 120 million people. This calls for serious planning. Somebody may say this is good but I do not think it is really that good, if we do not plan very well.

Right now, you know that the country is creating about 8,000 jobs for more than 400,000 students who complete tertiary education. This means that the balance of more than 390,000 students, who complete tertiary education are not getting jobs after – (Member timed out.)

3.47
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to extend my appreciation to those Ugandans who shunned the crusade on family planning and joined the one on family planting. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I support all Ugandans who are there to increase our population and I will encourage Ugandans to do the same. NRM is in power because of numbers. We are here because of numbers. The giant countries we are talking about have grown up because of numbers in their population. The issue should not be –(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, we are all concerned about the quality of our population. We are fighting to let families have sufficient food and an income generating activity so that the children can go and finish school and be able to access the basic amenities of life. In order to do this, we have to control the family size. We all know that if we let families produce as many children as they want and whom they cannot look after, we cannot have a quality population.

Is the honourable member, in order to state that we are here because of numbers and that Ugandans should produce as many children as possible? Is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is it true we are in this House because of numbers?   A difference in opinion does not make a person out of order. The honourable member just has an opinion different from yours. Please, do not use the Office of the Speaker to become a suppression instrument. (Laughter)

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your excellent ruling. 

Mr Speaker, there is no empirical evidence that families with two or three children are doing well. We have many families with many children doing well and going to school. Our responsibility, as Government, should be to do proper planning but not stopping Ugandans from producing, and we should discourage family planning as much as possible. We talk about China and America because of numbers. We would like to see Uganda reach 100 million people.  I request Members to join me in that crusade so that we can move on.

Mr Speaker, the minister has talked about life expectancy; that we have moved from 43 to 63 years. I do not know the parameters he used because every other day, we see many people dying from different causes. Honourable minister, could you really clarify which parameters you used to get those numbers?

Finally, Mr Speaker, we have talked about the lifestyle diseases. Unless the Government puts in place recreation centres easily accessible even in rural areas - even here in Kampala, people are looking for various facilities - and unless one has paid for them - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the honourable member for Kawempe would have done better if he had given full disclosure of what has been his contribution in that direction. However, that one is for another day. (Laughter)

3.53
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to thank the minister for the statement presented but I have this to say. When you talk about the population - I know we have been talking about children and grown-ups but life starts at birth. 

Mr Speaker, we need to interest ourselves, as Government, in the infants and more so, the nutrition of children in this country. Many parents do not pay attention to the nutrition of the children and they forget that brain formation is between one month and five years. More often than not, in most of the villages, some parents take a big share of all the nutritious food that could have been good for the children. As a result, there is stagnation of the brains of these children when they are very young. When the children miss out on the nutrition and become stunted and deformed, the parents reason out that they resemble their uncle who was in a certain place, forgetting that even the uncle had the same problem.

So, we call upon Government to take nutrition of children to be very important, more so at the infant stage though it shouldn’t only be the responsibility of the parents because, for example, in schools, Government should come up with a policy to guide these nursery schools on how to take care of the nutrition of our children.

Mr Speaker, there is no guarantee that when you have few children, therefore, there is quality of life. I would like to be a testimony - I am the tenth in a family of 13 children. Just imagine if I was not born, there would be no Member of Parliament I that is standing here. (Laughter)

What we need to contextualise is that – Mr Speaker, even when we talk about land use in Uganda, it is at 15 per cent. There are enough resources for all of us in this country. I think the problem is utilisation and resource sharing. So, we should not use this as an opportunity of neglecting our responsibility. I know there are very many single mothers out there. There are also men in this country who have fathered children but are not bothered to take care of them and at the end of the day, these single mothers have no capacity to take care of these children but –(Member timed out.)

3.56
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join colleagues in thanking the minister. I would like to thank Government for choosing Omoro District, which is in northern Uganda for this year’s celebration of World Population Day. 

I would like to address my mind on the theme, which is “Leaving Nobody Behind.” I am very pleased that northern Uganda that appears to be left behind was chosen because the statistics speak for themselves. 

The minister gave us those statistics and they have been aggregated but once you disaggregate them, you will see that northern Uganda is lagging so much behind. 

If you investigate the area of education; go to Makerere University, for example, from West Nile to Busia, you will find less than ten students admitted to the School of Law. That shows you how far we have lagged behind in the area of education.

The minister talked about the quality of life arguing that the life expectancy has increased. Again it is because the statistics have been aggregated. Otherwise, if one went to the north, they would be able to notice that there are other factors that enhance the quality of life. For example, we only have two main roads going to the north, which are tarmacked. You do not find, on your left or right, tarmac that is branching. Now, those ones in the villages that are consuming dust every day because the road is poor cannot live to that 63 years the minister has mentioned here. 

That is why I am saying that there are so many factors that for us in the north make us also reach the statistics that have been provided here. 

I would like to particularly bring to the attention of this House the schools that used to propel students from the north. If one went to St Joseph’s college Layibi, St Joseph College Ombaci, Sir Samuel Baker School, Ngai Senior Secondary School, Comboni College and Lango College; enrolment is hardly more than 300 students in each of these schools yet these were schools that would provide a platform for children in the north to access university education.

So, while we are reporting very good statistics that appear satisfactory, I think Government should look more in these areas for us to feel being part of this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.59
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to respectfully disagree with those who are advocating for a bigger population. I have personally had the experience to live in middle income countries within Africa where you see better planning by Government for its population, for example, Botswana, Namibia and South Africa. While we are grappling here with providing social services for our people and I listen to colleagues advocating for an increased population, I respectfully disagree.

Mr Speaker, I would like to raise two issues. The first one is that the minister has given very impressive figures particularly on poverty reduction. However, I would like to say that at committee level, we have disagreed with Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) on the definition of poverty and its reduction.

In fact, when these figures are mentioned in the villages where we represent the people, you might earn yourself a beating for nothing because the reality on the ground is different. Let us try to leave these massaged figures in Parliament here.

My third important point is that the minister did mention the kind of progress made in relation to the kind of preventable diseases. We are all aware that the six killer diseases were a priority of this administration when it came to power. The President is on record for saying that the population has grown because this Government has emphasised immunisation.

Mr Speaker, a colleague last week raised the issue of the Polio vaccine and indeed the Minister of Health referred this matter to the finance minister. I would like the minister to bring a statement in relation to when the Polio vaccines will be available.

I just had a baby girl born yesterday and right now –(Applause)– I am now looking for the Polio vaccine. I might be forced to fly this very young girl to Nairobi and yet we have had a Government in place for the last 32 years which cannot plan properly and causes shortages. How do you – (Member timed out.)

4.02
MS LOWILA C.D OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity and the minister for his statement. I would like to agree with my colleagues on the issue of poverty. We appreciate the reduction in the poverty rate but I do not want the national poverty rate to mislead us.

Like the theme of the celebration says, “Leaving no body behind” some parts of this country still have an unacceptably very high poverty rate. I am glad for what the minister pointed out in his statement on the situation in Omoro District where the main economic activity is crop production which stands at 95 per cent subsistence level.

Honourable minister, our appeal to Government is that it is high time the Government started balancing between the resources allocated for infrastructural development and resources allocated to the productive sectors. 

There is no way we will transform the agricultural sector if we still allocate 2.9 per cent of the total budget to that productive sector. We will still continue seeing what you saw in Omoro District honourable minister and it will not only be in Omoro but many other parts of this country.

On the issue of teenage pregnancy, I would appeal to the minister not only to stop at calling upon the stakeholders to fulfill their calling because there is need of expressly coming up with deliberate strategies to address this problem. I agree with you honourable minister that we all have a stake and roles to play as far as this challenge is concerned.

However, we would like to see deliberate strategies that Government will put in place so that we address this problem and change the trend. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity.

4.05
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very, Mr Speaker and the minister for the statement. I would like to add my voice by commenting on the issue of teenage pregnancy. 

I have been reading this statement but it disturbs my mind. Teenage pregnancy has been at 25 per cent for the last 10 years. As Government, we should not sit and watch this percentage like it has been for the last 10 years where it has stagnated. 

As Government, what have we been doing? Don’t we look at these statistics? These statistics are prepared for you people, especially the Executive, to help you in planning and see where you will direct the resources. 

However, for the last 10 years, this figure being as high as 25 per cent and you sit and relax! Where is the gender minister? What are you doing in those offices? This is a very pertinent issue. These are the people who are supposed to replace us tomorrow when we are not there.

On the issue of poverty, during the budget speech, I don’t know why we have differences in these figures. The minister clearly stated even in the booklet that poverty levels were going up. I am surprised again to read in today’s statement that they have declined. 

In his budget speech, it was 25.7 per cent if I recall so well. Therefore, I do not know between June and when this population day was celebrated, what sort of miracles took place to reduce the poverty levels to that figure he has stated.

These poverty levels have resulted into increasing cases of domestic violence, high school dropout rates and all those other issues related to poverty. Unless we direct our resources to address issues of poverty and empower people economically, we shall talk and talk and construct roads but people will not benefit and will never be happy. I beg to submit.

4.08
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I heard the minister clearly say that the Government is concentrating on preventive rather than curative programmes in hospitals. Now this gives some thought and I am wondering whether that could be the reason why the hospitals are in the state in which they are.

All over the country, we see dilapidated facilities, doctors have not been paid, hospitals are understaffed and there is no equipment. Don’t you think that this is also a contradiction that if you are concentrating on curative programmes, you also need to handle this other side very well so that just in case things do not do right in the other programmes, we have a second option to go to? I would like to have that explanation. Thank you.

4.09
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I thank you. From the word go, I must say I am very conservative in thinking on this issue. 

As hon. Mwiru said, by the Grace of God, I am the ninth in a family of 30 of whom 25 are graduates.

Therefore, the question of population control and poverty should be carefully debated by the African elite. You are making a mistake for buying into the western doctrine of thinking toward Africa. 

The African elite are forgetting their noble duty to raise quality clever children. It is very unfortunate that a doctor in Africa who has studied medicine marries a lawyer and they have only two children. Whereas somebody in the village who has never gone to school has 10 children; and the graduates marry each other and have only two children. The possibility of genetic engineering of clever people increases as two clever people marry each other.

African elites must not have a buy-in in producing fewer children. We are able to pay higher school fees and raise better children than leaving it to the less privileged. 

Therefore, Members of Parliament should have many children. It is unfortunate that somebody of my capacity - and I mean my father, a humble driver, had 25 children but me, a Member of Parliament wants to have four? It cannot happen. (Laughter). You get a Speaker of Parliament who says I want two children and parades them -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, leave me out of that debate as I have done very well. (Laughter)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Yes, you have done very well. The other point of contention is that in Africa, the debate that people have about poverty is largely being driven by two factors: the first is poverty and the second is bad governance. 

These two factors are causing population crises in Africa. For example, in Uganda our National Development Plan identified 39 projects that can deliver - (Member timed out.)

4.13
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to appreciate Members for the contributions, comments and advice given. We will certainly take into account these views seriously.

Most of the issues that were raised concern health, with your permission I request that the Minister of Health makes one comment. 

I wish to clarify on the first issue of poverty; according to the Uganda Bureau of Statistics, our poverty levels stand at 21 per cent and it is consistent with what we mentioned in the Budget. It is actually the same.

We said that it reduced from 56 per cent to 19.6 per cent but in the last financial year, it went up because of the reasons we gave including the drought. 

Hon. Kenneth Lubogo sounded the alarm that was sounded in the 17th century by Rev. Thomas Malthus that the population is continuing to grow at a geometric rate while food production was growing at an arithmetic rate.

Therefore, in the future, we are likely to see the population over stripping the production of food causing calamity. We have learnt over the centuries that as population grows, mankind is putting into place innovations to make sure that production of food is increasing at the rate that the population is increasing.

The use of science and technology is one of the ways to help this. Use of fertilisers to increase the fertility of land is one of the issues that we are looking at as we work on wealth creation.

Colleagues, the population is growing and children have already been born. We are not saying that we take them back to the womb as it is not possible. However, those that have not produced should plan properly and produce children that they can look after. 

They should plan for them well and for those that God has given to us as a gift, can we put in place services that can guarantee the quality of their lives. 

While we respectfully agree with different opinions including hon. Sebaggala’s, a blanket push of producing can put us into trouble. We should produce children that we can afford and plan for. For those that are already out as a gift from God, we should invest in education and health that can improve the quality of their lives.

Thank you very much for this debate. Now I would like to request the Minister of Health to comment on a few issues that were raised. I appreciate. 

4.17
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to add something to what hon. Bahati has said. I would like to start from the issue of family planning. 

Mr Speaker, you realise that many people confuse family planning with not having children; the essence is that you have a family that you can look after and they become people who can contribute to the economy of the country. It is not just about having 10 children whom you cannot look after. 

Secondly, it is about allowing the body of that woman who is your wife to recover from the effects of pregnancy and child birth. If you do not do it, there are several risks including having a raptured uterus and dying during labour and childbirth.

The third is about giving her body time to regain on the aspect of nutrition. It is not just about production. I appreciate what hon. Sebaggala was saying but not everybody has four or five women because some people only have one and they would like them to look young and beautiful, So, give their bodies time please.

On the issue of teenage pregnancy, allow me to inform the honourable members that teenage pregnancy is not an issue of the health sector alone. There are many other sectors that need to come in to address the issue of teenage pregnancies because it is more of a social issue.

In 2014, the Ministry of Health and many other MDAs launched a campaign against teenage pregnancy with the First Lady as our champion. She has been moving from region to region trying to talk about the control of teenage pregnancy.

There is a lot that needs to be done in this area; we need to involve our cultural leaders and other sectors. I can inform you that the Ministry of Education and Sports already launched the National Sexuality Framework to educate children in school not only on HIV/AIDS but also on how to avoid teenage pregnancies. 

Teenage pregnancies also go –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude.

DR ACENG: Teenage pregnancies also go alongside early child marriages. Those are issues that we need to address together.

The policy on reproductive health is available. It only needs final approval by Cabinet and then we shall share it. You will recall that the launch was stopped because of several issues. We shall make it available to the honourable members when it is finally approved. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the distinguished strangers’ gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of staff from the National Assembly of Tanzania. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause) 

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers from Kidawalime Preparatory School, Namungoona. They are represented by hon. Moses Kasibante and hon. Nabila Naggayi. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

We also have pupils and teachers from Rukungiri Universal Primary School represented by hon. Ronald Mugume and hon. Betty Bamukwatsa. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Thank you

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT IN RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. ABALA DAVID, NGORA COUNTY, ON THE PROGRESS OF AGULE-ALELESI BRIDGE IN NGORA DISTRICT

4.22
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This response is in respect of an urgent question raised under rule 46 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

During the sitting of Parliament on 17 July 2018, hon. David Abala, the Member of Parliament for Ngora County, raised concerns related to the delayed construction of Alelesi Bridge, connecting Pallisa to Ngora District. During the same sitting, hon. Anthony Okello, Member of Parliament for Kioga County, raised a matter relating to the urgency attached to the reinstatement of the services of MV Kyoga.

Mr Speaker, allow me to respond as follows:
The proposed bridge crossing, located 25 kilometres from Pallisa Town, will connect Alelesi in Pallisa District to Kdike-Kobwin Road in Ngora District. Considering that Saaka Swamp is now motorable, connectivity at Alelesi would afford a much shorter route for traffic from Kampala to the Teso sub-region and beyond. 

There is currently no motorable access at Alelesi and the local people have to use canoes that are navigated through a canal dug out in the papyrus swamp, whose width at the location is about 100 metres. The swamp essentially constitutes a “neck” connecting two Lakes, Lake Nyasala and Lake Nyaguo. 

An attempt was made during the Community Access Infrastructure Improvement Project, Phase II (CAIIP II) implemented by the Ministry of Local Government to bridge this swamp. However, it was later established that the associated scope, complexity and cost of the intervention could not be accommodated within the project. Accordingly, in 2017, the Ministry of Works and Transport was requested to plan for construction of an appropriate crossing at the location.

Progress

Reconnaissance visits have been carried out, following which a number of field surveys and investigations have been made and all this has been concluded. In the meantime, however, preliminary (conceptual) engineering designs have been developed but a final decision of the engineering design to be adopted awaits full results of the requisite field investigations.

Project Timelines

It is envisaged that the final designs will be ready by the end of September 2018 and the tendering process is expected to commence in October 2018. Award of the contract is expected by March 2019, while actual commencement of works is expected in April 2019. Again, due to the envisaged scope, complexity and cost, the construction period is anticipated to be 12 months, hence completion is expected by June 2020.

Mr Speaker, allow me also to make a statement on the progress of the reinstatement of the services of MV Kyoga. The ferry route on Lake Kyoga, that is, Zengebe-Namasale, is open and we are providing ferry services using MV Kyoga 1 ferry, which is managing the traffic at the moment.

Normally, we operate two ferries - MV Kyoga 1 and MV Kyoga 2 - interchangeably because traffic is not sufficient to operate them concurrently on the route. However, the latter’s operations were stopped on 9 April 2018 due to the breakdown of one of its key components, the propeller. 

Initial repair interventions were undertaken but were not successful and it was concluded that a replacement of the propeller was necessary. The breakdown happened after the expiry of the warranty period and therefore, its replacement is the responsibility of Government of Uganda.

We were advised by the component manufacturer that this type of propeller is not readily available in stock and therefore, has to be manufactured. Procurement of this propeller was started and we envisage delivery of the component within three to four months. The repair to restore the ferry will be undertaken immediately upon receipt of the spare component. The ferry is expected to resume operations by the end of October 2018. Orders for the propeller and related parts have already been placed.

As a long term solution, we initiated a procurement process for critical ferry spare parts, including complete propulsion units, to be supplied under a framework contract arrangement. This procurement is at bid evaluation stage. The framework contract, once signed, is expected to avert any delays associated with the supply of ferry parts.

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, I wish to assure honourable Members of Parliament that the plans for the construction of Alelesi Bridge and reinstatement of the services of MV Kyoga 2 are on course. I commit myself to ensure implementation in line with the above timelines. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, there were two questions except that they have listed only one. There was a question, which was handled the other day raised by hon. Abala.

It was handled by the Minister of Works and Transport. The question that was pending was the one of MV Kyoga raised by the Member of Parliament for Kioga. I am wondering if he has a supplementary question.

4.36
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you. Allow me to thank the Minister of State for Works and Transport for his response on the issue of MV Kyoga 2. 

I also want to put it on record that the statement you have given to the House about MV Kyoga 2 is an assurance from Government. So, we shall be monitoring it very closely. You have stated here that by October, this ferry will be moving. We shall be monitoring very closely to ensure that the statement you have made is not in vain.

Mr Speaker, it has taken us very long - more than a year - to get this statement. I am ashamed that the ferry has been stagnating for more than a year just because of lack of a propeller; just a propeller made this huge facility stagnate for more than a year yet we are in Government. 

I think the problem was the design of the ferry. Probably, we should learn from this design to inform future designs. Already, this is an indication that we are going to have challenges operating this ferry, because it looks like the spares are not readily available. Designing a facility for which the spares are not readily available – A propeller is something that is supposed in the water. It is not even an engine but a propeller causing the failure of a facility like this for more than a year.

Mr Speaker, I think this is a case study that Government should learn something from and probably, it should help us for future interventions. For now, I welcome the explanation of the honourable minister. Thank you very much.

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT IN RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. KENNETH LUBOGO ON THE STATUS OF A LOAN FROM THE AFRICA DEVELOPMENT BANK

4.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Mr Speaker, during the sitting of Parliament on Wednesday, 11 July 2018, hon. Kenneth Lubogo, MP Bulamogi County, was concerned about the way the $100 million loan from the African Development Bank had been handled, leading to its mismanagement, and wanted to know the status of this loan.

Mr Speaker, the response is a follows:

Background

On 4 November 2015, Government signed a loan agreement of US$ 100 million with the African Development Bank (ADB). The loan became effective on 26 January 2016 and the closing date for the grant is 31 December 2020. 

The project will benefit the following districts: Nakasongola, Luweero, Alebtong, Amuria, Soroti, Mbale, Manafwa, Serere, Ngora, Bukedea, Kaliro, Luuka, Iganga, Buyende, Gulu and Nwoya. The network coverage will be about 1,305 kilometres of medium voltage and 1,102 kilometres of low voltage.

Mr Speaker, the major causes for the delay in the dispensation of the project were as follows:

    (i) The African Development Bank did not approve the tender documents submitted to them by the Rural Electrification Agency (REA) in October 2015, soon after signing the loan agreement. This had earlier been agreed upon during the loan negotiations. In other words, they instead wanted the documents to be reviewed by a consultant who obviously was not on board by then. It took one year to procure this consultant.

    (ii) The consultant, M&E Associates, after being procured, proceeded with the review of engineering designs and preparation of the tender documents. Works on the tender documents had to be reviewed and then they were sent to the bank on 4 October 2017. The evaluation of the bids was completed on January 23, 2018.


(iii)	The evaluation report was sent to the ADB on February 23, 2018. So far, Lot-1 has been cleared and the other five lots are still under consideration. It is hoped this will be finalised before the end of July 2018.

Mr Speaker, I wish to appreciate the support of this House in steering meaningful development that our country yarns for. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Lubogo, do you have any supplementary question to ask? 

4.36
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, honourable minister, for the explanation you have given to us, although I noted that some things were not really consistent. Whereas you have told us that the loan was signed on 8 November 2015, you have also told us that the tendered documents were rejected in October 2015, after signing the tender documents, which actually were not yet signed at that time. I am wondering whether you have seriously engaged the people of Rural Electrification Agency who handled the evaluation process. 

In your communication, you did not indicate that there is actually a serious problem with this loan. You have told us that Lot-1 was approved and the other lots are also being considered and that the whole process will be concluded by the end of July.
I would like to just make it clear to you that there is something seriously wrong with this loan, which you have not brought out. This is because there was mismanagement of the process of tendering and evaluation, although you seem not to know anything about it. 

Honourable minister, I just would like to draw it to your attention so that you could follow it up after here such that we do not think that we will conclude this month when the loan has been cancelled. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR D’UJANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member as well. Yes, the other five lots had queries from the financiers and they have since been addressed and the lots have been returned for further consideration. 

I assure you that the ministry is following closely and by the end of July, these lots will also be cleared.

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT IN RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. PATRICK OSHABE NSAMBA, KASSANDA NORTH, OVER THE RISING POWER TARIFFS DESPITE INTERVENTIONS BY THE HOUSE BY RENEGOTIATING THE BUJAGALI DAM PROJECT

4.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Mr Speaker, this response is in respect of Rule 46 of the Rules of Procedures. 

During the sitting of this Parliament on Wednesday, 11 July 2018, hon. Patrick Oshabe Nsamba, MP Kassanda North County, wanted an explanation as to why there has been an increment on the power tariffs despite the fact that Government had extended a corporate income tax exemption to Bujagali Energy Limited, and the reason was to bring down the cost of electricity.

Mr Speaker, permit to respond as follows:
In July 2017, Parliament approved the waiver of corporate income tax for Bujagali Energy Limited for the period of 2017/2018- 2022/2023. The corporate income tax waiver decreased the Bujagali tariff from an average of US 13.83c per kilowatt-hour (kWh) to an average of US 10.62c per kWh.  

The impact of waiving corporate income taxes on Bujagali generation tariff for the period 2018 to 2032 is shown in figure 1, which is a graph that you will see in the statement that is uploaded on your iPads. 

The Corporate Income Tax (CIT) waiver benefits were applied across all the customer categories, which helped to reduce the end user tariff by an average of 18.3 per cent. This is clearly shown in table 1 in this document. The table illustrates a comparison of the current end user tariff level and the one without the tax waiver. If I can just mention here that the weighted average of tariffs without the waiver is Shs 626 and without the waiver is Shs 528. 

In June 2018, which was just last month, financial close for the debt refinancing of Bujagali Hydro Power Project costs was achieved. Following the refinancing, the Bujagali generation tariff reduced further from an average of 9.6 US cents to 7.9 US cents per kilowatt hour. This is now for the period of 2018 to 2032. 

The average monthly capacity payment for Bujagali also reduced from US$ 13 million to US$ 10.5 million. 

The impact of the combination of the corporate income tax waiver and the debt refinancing of Bujagali Hydro Power Plant tariffs is shown is table 2 and figure 2 respectively. Again, we have a table which shows the drop from 9.61 to 7.91 and a graph which shows the tariff over the period. This is illustrated in figure 3. 

The Impact of Refinancing on the End User Tariffs
Mr Speaker, in order for our industries to be more competitive, it is prudent to allocate all the benefits arising from the debt refinancing of Bujagali to the extra-large industrial customer category. This is in line with the directive by the President to ensure that our manufacturers are competitive in the region. Consequently, the tariff for the extra-large industrial customers has now been reduced by 15 per cent, with the off-peak tariff reducing to five US cents. 

In paragraph 10, I have the adjusted tariffs for the extra-large industries, which include the following:
    a) Peak tariff - US 13.4c
    b) Shoulder – US 10.3c 
    c) Off peak – US 6.7c

This was before. After applying this refinancing, we have the following: 
    a) Peak tariff – US 11.6c
    b) Shoulder – US 8.6c
    c) Off peak – US 5c

Mr Speaker, the benefit from Bujagali refinancing is allocated to the extra-large industrial customers for the following reasons:
 
i. 	The extra-large industrial customers are large manufactures who are under threat of competition from the region for the export market. Therefore, a reduction in the tariff will enhance their competitiveness.

ii. 	Most of the manufacturers in this category produce inputs for other sectors of the economy. Therefore, a reduced tariff will lower production costs and make inputs for other sectors cheaper. We are looking at cement manufacturers, iron bar manufacturers, iron roof manufacturers and large industries which feed into the other sectors of the economy. 

iii. 	The increased demand for electricity through the extra-large industrial customers will result into additional sector revenue, which will be used later to reduce the tariffs of the other customer categories in a phased manner during subsequent tariff reviews.
 
The Third Quarter Adjustment (July to September 2018)

In this third quarter of 2018, the Electricity Regulatory Authority approved a 1.7 per cent weighted average increase in end user electricity tariffs, in accordance with the quarterly tariff review methodology. In other words, Mr Speaker, indeed, there was an increase of 1.7 per cent. The tariff was determined in consideration of the following:

1. 	The Uganda shilling has depreciated by 3.5 per cent against the US dollar, from Shs 3,634 in November 2012 to Shs 3,763, as at 31 May 2018.

2. 	The annual Consumer Price Index (CPI) increased from 164.15 in November 2017 to 165.07 for the month of May 2018, representing an increase of 0.56 per cent.

3. 	The international fuel price for crude oil as at the end of May 2018 was US$ 74.11 per barrel compared to US$ 60.74 per barrel used in the determination of the 2018 base tariffs. This represents an increase in the international fuel prices of 22 per cent from the base period.

4. 	The electricity export to Kenya reduced from 48.69 Gigawatt hours (GWh) in quarter 1 to 24.72 GWh in the second quarter of 2018, reducing export revenue by Shs 39.18 billion.

Mr Speaker, it is worth noting that the depreciation of the Uganda shilling against the United States dollar is one of the major challenges affecting the financial sustainability of the electricity supply industry. Eighty-five per cent of the total electricity industry revenue requirement is denominated in United States dollars. This is attributed to, among others, the need to provide for debt service obligations for the independent power producers in US dollars and provision for procurement of network equipment that is imported in dollars. Ours is not a dollar economy but the investors borrowed dollars and when we import network equipment, we pay in dollars. 

The movement of the exchange rate between 2016 and 2018 is also indicated on Page 7. This little adjustment resulted in the end user tariff for July to September 2018, which is represented on page 7, paragraph 13. 

Thank you for the opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable member for Kassanda, do you have a supplementary question?

4.50
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to further engage on this matter. I would like to thank the minister for trying to explain why they took the decision they did.

The document shared with us, which he has just read, is not right on the average cents. On page 1, the honourable minister indicates that the waiver contributed to a reduction of up to 10.6 US cents. On page 3, you say it contributed to a reduction of up to 9.6 US cents. You are not even sure of the contribution of the waiver.

I would like to remind you that when Government came to Parliament to request for a waiver on corporate tax, the assurance was that power tariffs would reduce from US 11c - hon. Bahati said that the tariff from Bujagali was US 11c - to US 7.1c. The assumption then by Members who were present was that the reduction was for Ugandans across the board. That is what transpired in Parliament and that is how Government convinced us to take the decision.

The income tax we are talking about was for all Ugandans. Now when you come here -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is your supplementary question?

MR NSAMBA: Mr Speaker, why didn’t the minister give us the information that the waiver he was looking for or the calculations that they had done at that time would only benefit extra-large industries and not the rest of Ugandans? We would have taken the right decision -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, just ask the question, honourable member, please.

MR PATICK NSAMBA: Mr Speaker, please allow me; this is a very important matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ask the question so that he can respond. It is not a debate.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Am I entitled to only one question, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have asked a question and if there is a second one, ask it.

MR NSAMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that guidance. Honourable minister, I think that by coming with half the information, you had the intention to dupe Parliament about the deal on Bujagali. 

When we come to the priority to give the extra-large industries alone, I would like to assume that many industries in this country, especially those owned by indigenous people, may not fall directly in that category of extra-large industries. We have small industries coming up. If the priority was for industries, I would like to know from you why you preferred extra-large industries at the expense of these upcoming industries.

Mr Speaker, my last question is on the excuses given on the third quarter. The reason I raised this matter is that you indicated here that the increase was due to an increase in fuel prices and the increase in the dollar rate. I would like to ask the minister to remind me of a time when the power tariffs went down when the dollar rate went down. I have the statistics for every quarter since 2015; at least tell me that in this quarter when the dollar rate went down, this is how we reduced the tariffs and when the fuel prices went down on the international market, there was a reduction in power tariffs for the people of Uganda.

Otherwise, I would like to remind you that the trend since 2015 has been to increase power tariffs in every quarter and the biggest -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member.

4.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’ Ujanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for the supplementary questions. 

Mr Speaker, there are two things we have done. First, there was the waiver of the tax, and my statement is clear that this waiver is applied across the board to all consumers - the benefit applies to all consumers. It is only the refinancing whose benefits have been given to extra-large industries.

We are looking at the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of the country. The large industries are in Uganda. We are not looking at who owns them but we are looking at the GDP of the country; therefore, the contribution of the large industries to the GDP is what we are concerned with.

As I mentioned here, these large industries feed into the other sectors of the economy. Therefore, it is better to nurse them and give them comfort so that the prices of other inputs in the other sectors of the economy could -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, maybe you could guide us; what is an example of an extra-large industry, medium-large industry, normal-large industry and a small-large industry?

MR D’UJANGA: An example of an extra-large industry is Tororo Cement. They are very few and yet they consume most of the electricity. There is also Roofings, Hima Cement. All those are large industries, which really produce mainly raw materials. Those are the ones which benefited from the Bujagali refinancing.

Mr Speaker, my report has given some numbers. I am glad we talked about 10.6 and 9.6. They do not seem to rhyme but one figure was calculated before refinancing. Refinancing has extended this period of loan repayment to 2032 and that is why the average has come down. However, before, we had only up to 2023 to pay all the debt. Obviously, our instalment was bigger. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR MUKITALE: I would like to thank the minister for responding to this, and I thank the honourable member who raised it as a matter of national importance when it was a headline last year.

Mr Speaker, for the last seven years, the cost of the Bujagali tariffs has been a pain to the citizens and this Parliament. The President, in the State of the Nation Address and in the Budget Speech, referred to and gave hope to the country about this refinancing - actually a closure, which has turned out to be a rescheduling. A refinancing is a rescheduling and the country will pay more. It is just a matter of extending it.

Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence; wouldn’t it be proper for the minister to come with a comprehensive statement to this august House so that we debate the energy mix in this country? This involves the Karumas which are coming on board, the cost of other thermal generators that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development have also been rescheduling. We have just given money in a supplementary request which some Members may not have noticed, for those thermal generators –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: what is the point of procedure?

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence; if this Parliament is going to be relevant to the citizens, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for you to direct the honourable minister to bring a comprehensive statement for all Members of Parliament to debate this matter, which has been rescheduling our investors to our neighbours instead of settling at home? I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the issue of the energy sector has been here. There is nothing which you have not raised on the issues on the energy sector. Ad hoc committees have been created and the actual standing committees of Parliament have been debating these issues. There have been debates on it.

Honourable minister, how much time would you need to come back to this House so that we can have one full debate, and hopefully a final debate, on this matter and we rest this matter? 

MR D’UJANGA: Mr Speaker, as you have rightly said, the matter of the energy sector is diverse. It would also help us if we could have specific areas which Parliament wants -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is now going to be a ministerial statement on issues of energy. You will come and outline them and we will give you the time you need to present the statement and then we will have the debate. It is up to you to come and brief Parliament. 

MR D’UJANGA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. We will need a month. If my colleagues want to debate the matter thoroughly, we will need a month to prepare and present the status of the network in Uganda and the status of the power sector in Uganda. My colleague says on Tuesday but he was not here when we were told that on Tuesday, there is no sitting. Therefore, we still need a month. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we want all issues tackled in this particular statement. We do not want gaps. Honourable minister, that statement is a ministerial statement which will attract a full debate and there should be no gaps. We will give you one month to prepare and come back and we have the debate. Thank you.

MR D’UJANGA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

STATEMENT IN RESPONSE TO A QUESTION RAISED BY HON. KOMAKECH LYANDRO, GULU MUNICIPALITY, ON THE STATE OF SECURITY IN THE COUNTRY

5.05
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Jeje Odongo): Mr Speaker, on the Order Paper, it is indicated that the Minister of Internal Affairs, the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the Minister of Security will each be given 15 minutes to make a statement on the state of security. 

As colleagues involved in a similar engagement, when we met, we realised that the subject matter of our statements would be identical. Therefore, we sought to present a joint statement and, Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence that I present a joint statement on behalf of my colleagues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is this joint statement that you are seeking to present still in response to a matter that was raised in the urgent matters or are you now presenting a joint statement from the three ministries as a joint statement?  

GEN. ODONGO: Mr Speaker, the joint statement is in response to the specific matter that the Speaker directed on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us see how it goes and then see if we can make some waivers.

GEN. ODONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the course of debate in this House last week, concerns were raised about the state of security in our country. I think this was on Thursday last week. The Rt Hon. Speaker determined that the said ministers make statements and as I have said, on the basis of our discussions, we thought it prudent to make a joint statement to explain the situation of our security. 

Today we are happy to report to you that the country is generally calm and stable. Honourable members, you will recollect that during the State of the Nation Address, His Excellency the President discussed the state of our security. Following the Budget Speech, in the comments that he made, His Excellency again talked about the state of our national security.

On 11 June this year, the three ministers in charge of internal affairs, defence and veteran affairs, and security together with the Chiefs of Defence, the Inspector General of Police and the Commissioner General of Prisons in a televised dialogue discussed the state of our national security.

On 20 June 2018, His Excellency the President addressed Parliament on the status of our national security during which he announced a 12-point security plan. On 27 June 2018, His Excellency the President met Parliament during which he responded to about 100 questions and concerns that Members raised to him regarding the status of our security. 

Since then, the crime rate in the country has significantly dropped, thanks to six immediate security measures that have been put in place: 
    1. Intensified police patrols and visibility across the country. 
    2. Intensified security operations to curb crime. 
    3. Intensified joint intelligence operations. 
    4. Increased mobilisation of the public to be vigilant in order to detect and deter crime.
5. 	Setting up 24/7 emergency response units where timely information is received and acted upon.
6. 	Strengthening specialised units of all security agencies.

As a result of these measures, honourable members, the country recently scored the following:
    a) On 10th July, we held very successful and peaceful Local Council I (LC I) elections across the country.

    b) We have all been watching the FIFA World Cup recently. Honourable members, you will recall that in July 2010, this event turned a disaster when we lost 76 innocent lives at the hands of terrorists. I am happy to report that since then, we have picked very important lessons and developed more capabilities to protect our people. I wish, therefore, to salute our security forces for providing the adequate security that made it possible for the country to watch and enjoy the FIFA 2018 World Cup without any major incident.

    c) Obviously, this is not to forget that early in June, we had almost 3,000,000 Ugandans and others congregating at Namugongo for the Martyrs’ Day and there was no incident to report. It was very successful.

Mr Speaker, it is of paramount importance to further inform you that our borders remain safe and secure with no major incidents to report. I want to particularly applaud His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda for his tireless efforts in ensuring regional peace and stability especially in South Sudan. As you all know, security in South Sudan has a significant bearing especially on our northern frontier.

Regarding Somalia, that country has continued to make significant progress thanks to the efforts of our forces and those from fraternal troops contributing countries under the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). The security that has been provided has allowed the political process to unfold and the UPDF will soon be deploying Battle Group XXV and the United Nations Guard Unit V to sustain the efforts that are in place in Somalia. We shall endeavour to keep you updated on this matter.

Before I conclude, Mr Speaker, allow me respond to the concerns of security threats which circulated on social media platforms of an "armed attack" on Uganda that was to take place on 16th and 17th July this year. 

I am sure by now we all realise that these were mere empty threats by elements that do not wish our country well and should therefore be treated with the contempt they deserve. Obviously, this purported attack could never have happened in Uganda given our robust capabilities and the readiness we have built to counter and deter any threats. 

I now wish to take this opportunity to sound a warning that such media related abuse contravenes the law - the Computer Misuse Act, 2011. 

In relation to the media circulated threats that I have just mentioned, our security agencies have appropriately analysed the contents and source of the same and have established that this came from Dr Aggrey Kiyingi. It may be recalled that Dr Aggrey Kiyingi, currently living in Australia, has cases to answer in our courts of law here in Uganda. We shall continue to work closely with the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) to monitor such messages that cause fear and discomfort to our population. 

Let me also take this opportunity to inform you, Members, that five cases have to date been investigated for computer misuse and abuse and suspects have been taken to court. We wish to caution all citizens here and abroad, especially the young people who easily get excited in crafting, sending and forwarding these irresponsible messages, to stop it forthwith. They should not scare our people. The law is very clear on culpability; once you receive and send to others "as received", you will be investigated and prosecuted accordingly.

Mr Speaker, allow me conclude by assuring the country that Uganda is very safe and the 12-point security plan enunciated by His Excellency the President on 27 June 2018 will go a long way in strengthening our security system and filling any existing gaps therein. The process of implementing this plan has already begun. We shall continue to regularly update the House and the country on the status of the implementation of this plan and the status of our security as a country.

Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is a statement from a General. I could see the communication actually coming from a General. This statement was raised under rule 46 but the circumstances of this statement are so large that I might have to make the application under another rule and we entertain a small interaction with the ministers on this matter, because it has been here with us for some time. 

Now that we have received this joint statement from the three ministries, we should have a short debate and conclude this matter. Let me start with the shadow minister - No, we are talking about military Generals not some secretary-generals of – (Laughter)

5.18
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I have five critical issues of concern. 

The Inspector General of Police released a report a few days ago that indicated that the crime rate in Uganda has and is increasing. The minister has not alluded to that fact. 

I am also aware that as we speak, there is quite some heavy deployment along the Uganda-Congo border around Bundibugyo and Kasese. What are the pushers, drivers and facilitators of that deployment? 

I also read reports, especially in the Daily Monitor – unfortunately, I do not have a copy with me - that in Kibaale District, there have been arrests of people of Rwandese origin in particular. The country is concerned and would like to know the relationship – as of now – between Uganda and Rwanda that is leading to these random arrests of people perceived to be of Rwandese origin.  

Of great concern to me, as an advocate of the rule of law and constitutional governance in this country, is what happened last month when the former Inspector General of Police, Gen. Kale Kayihura, was arrested. The cardinal law of our country is to the effect that anyone arrested for whatever crime in nature and substance must be arraigned before the courts of law within 48 hours. It is sad to note that since then, the former Inspector General of Police has not been arraigned before the courts of law. 

We would like to know the state of his arrest. He is such a prominent Ugandan and his arrest raises grave concerns. This brings me to matters close to home. Now that the state of our security is very conducive, as the minister has alluded to, what justification then do we have to order sharpshooters and armoured cars with personal armed bodyguards to guard Members of Parliament? The general public would like to know what the effect would be of exciting a country by having 550 armoured personnel carriers accompanying their representatives and how that will influence the state of investment in our country. 

I do not think there is any country that can attract investment when Members of Parliament of that country are guarded by armoured personnel carriers and every weekend you push 500 patrol cars across the country. What will the peasants and humble people of Uganda think? They will read this as the highest state of insecurity in the country. Therefore, we would like to know what informed the mind-set of the people in security to justify that kind of intervention. 

More critically, the other day we saw the Director General of the Internal Security Organisation, Col Kaka, parading suspects before the cameras. He said, “These have confessed that the Opposition in Uganda, particularly Dr Kizza Besigye with the help of a one Ingrid, are engaged in subversive activities”. 

I read an interview in the Red Pepper in which the Inspector General of Police was warning others that Besigye, I and others are involved in subversive activities and he will do everything to crush us. We would like to know from the Minister of Security what informs his mind-set. At least I am here; I would like him to tell me what subversive activities I am involved in that justify a whole Director General of the Internal Security Organisation (ISO) to make a pledge to crush me. It is of grave concern and it was not just a report but a face-to-face interview.

Mr Speaker, we would also like to know the strength of the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF). Previously, this country was informed that the ADF was reduced to a mere three or five people somewhere deep in the bushes of Garamba. However, we are being told time and again that the ADF is operating in the inner city. What is going on? Tell us the strength and capacity of the ADF. In particular, is the intelligence organisation of this country on top of the game to name the group that is brutally murdering leaders in this county? I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

5.25
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for presenting the joint statement from the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, and the Ministry of Security.

Listening to the articulate statement from the minister, one would be convinced that as a country, we are peaceful. However, he also quoted the very many meetings that His Excellency the President has held with Members of Parliament, which is okay. By the way, if you want to know, these meetings were demanded for because of the security situation in the country that Members of Parliament thought was wanting. 

When the President came and addressed the House on 27th June, Members were not convinced about the 12-point programme that you are insisting on. That is why a subsequent meeting was called. In that subsequent meeting, it was evidently clear that Ugandans were worried about their security. That is even the reason His Excellency the President said that he was going to give Members of Parliament the armoured vehicles which hon. Muwanga Kivumbi talked about. It would, therefore, be wrong for the minister to come here and say all is okay.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, in the State of the Nation Address, His Excellency the President indicated to us that the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and the United Nations (UN) are the ones harbouring wrong elements that disturb Uganda. I am surprised that you are contradicting the President’s State of the Nation Address by saying that our borders are safe. At the beginning, I looked at it as a diplomatic embarrassment for the President to bring the UN into matters of security of this country and publicly declare that Congo is harbouring criminals for Uganda. Now, in the statement of the minister, we are being told that we are okay with our sister countries, yet the President said Congo is harbouring criminals for us.

Thirdly, on the 14th of this month, three people were gunned down by security personnel in Kasese - one in Kidodo, another in Maliba and the other in Lukoke. Kasese saw heavy deployment and we were told it was because of the information on social media that you have talked about. There was speculation that His Majesty the King of the Rwenzururu had gone to Kasese and, therefore, was going to be the one to cause insecurity in Kasese. 

I know that the king is under the close watch of the security of this country. He is not allowed to be visited by anyone, not even us his leaders and not even his close relatives. No one is allowed to visit him. They said he had escaped to go and cause chaos and insecurity and that is what led to heavy deployment that led to the killing of innocent Ugandans, including a 16-year-old P.7 pupil.

Up to now, we would still like to know the circumstances under which these people were killed. One of the people that was killed was an officer of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces who had returned from Somalia and had come home for leave. He was gunned down by his fellow officers. When you tell the country that Uganda is peaceful and secure, we find every reason to doubt that the country is secure. 

Mr Speaker, last night, His Majesty’s residence was attacked by officers from Uganda People’s Defence Forces. At midnight, they broke into his house, forcefully searched everybody and took his phone, without a search warrant. Therefore, if we believe the country is peaceful and secure, why would all this happen even at midnight, moreover to a person who is under close watch and supervision of the armed forces? 

We still believe that the country is not safe and secure. We would like to know the circumstances under which our people were gunned down and the reasons they were gunned down. Otherwise, if the country is safe and secure, why should they harass his majesty and his people? His children are traumatised. The wife was equally harassed as if she is a criminal. We cannot know that they are criminals because you have failed to produce them before court – (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.31
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM,	Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank the minister for the statement he has presented and the security team for the work they are doing to improve the security of the country. The minister has presented a statement of hope and we can only live in hope if we are to see the next day. 

Mr Speaker, the minister has talked about our borders being secure and safe. I was the chairperson of the Committee on East African Community Affairs and I moved across all these border points. One of the serious concerns that have been raised by the border communities is porous borders which allow illegal immigrants come into the country in hundreds every day. These immigrants come from Rwanda but later disappear into the country. Sometimes they are registered and given our national identity cards, and then they change their names and move around but nothing is being done about this. 

The question is: Why do we allow these people to come and disappear within the country without taking any action? The National Identification Registration Authority (NIRA), which is part of the security system, allows these people to get national identity cards. We do not know the intention or purpose of these people coming to settle in the country and yet we are not bothered by it. I would like to request the minister to respond to this question because the border communities are seriously concerned about people who come into the country illegally.

The President wrote to the Speaker of Parliament saying that Members of Parliament should be provided with armoured security vehicles. I would like to ask, should we still continue with the project of getting the armoured vehicles or are we abandoning it? If we are not abandoning it, what are the modalities? I am tired of answering questions about armoured vehicles and yet I do not know anything about them and how they are going to operate. 

Can the minister be clear so that Members know how the system is going to operate, so that we give clear answers to Ugandans? - (Interjections) – of course, issues of allowances, fuel, management and whether we shall keep armoured vehicles at our homes. These are some of the issues which you should make Members understand so that they can prepare to deal with it. Otherwise, even Members would get scared in that situation.

Regarding the issue of fake news on social media and computer misuse, last week news spread all over the place that Gen. Kony was arrested and that Government was trying to work with whoever arrested him. Can you let the country know whether it is also fake news or a true story, so that we can boost our hope of a secure country? Otherwise, for some of us from the northern region, as long as Gen. Kony’s whereabouts are not known, we still feel some bit of insecurity in our mind. We would like to request that you make that clear.

Recently, a group of cattle keepers were removed from northern Uganda, from the regions of Acholi and Lango, following the orders of the President. Can the honourable minister tell us where these people were taken? Have they been taken from Lango and been settled in another place? It is going to cause insecurity in those areas.

Mr Speaker, we are talking about the security of all people. This will stop people moving from one place to another, causing insecurity in the country and yet we fail to account for them. We need to deal with this issue as a nation and settle these groups of people at once so that they stop moving from one place to another. Some of these cattle keepers graze their animals with guns. We would like know who they are. Are they part of the illegal people causing this insecurity, honourable minister?

Finally, we have been getting news that there have been accusations and counteraccusations between Uganda and Kenya over Migingo Islands, and the Ugandan army is arresting the Kenyan police and destroying schools. What is the situation there and what is Government doing about this matter because it has been long? Isn’t it going to cause problems between Uganda and Kenya, which will eventually affect the regional integration in East Africa? Can the minister tell us the Government’s position? Why should we move to arrest the police of another country in a disputed area instead of resolving this issue amicably?

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you and request the minister to respond to these issues. 

5.37
MR JOSEPH KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for presenting a comprehensive statement on the security of our country.

My concern is about our international perception, especially the perception from the tourists that come to our country. Tourists fear to come to our country because the websites in their countries indicate that the security situation of Uganda is bad, and that travelling to some parts of the country like northern, eastern and western Uganda is a risk. Actually, the tourists who travel to these parts of the country do so at their own risk - their insurance is not valid when they travel to these particular areas.

Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the security agencies whether there is a way Government can work with the embassies abroad so that they can update their websites. If they update their websites, many tourists will come to our country and we shall benefit a lot in terms of foreign exchange. Thank you very much.

5.39
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the joint ministerial statement on the state of security in the country. 

Mr Speaker, I think the minister has made a very serious omission. I vividly recall your Chair required the Minister for Security to respond to the irregular access by Internal Security Organisation operatives of MTN installations, which amounted to a raid. This has projected our country in a very bad light, both locally and internationally. We want this same statement to give us the how’s and why’s of accessing or raiding this MTN installation, which actually makes us degenerate back to the dark ages of the 1970’s and 1980’s when insecurity was state inspired. 

Mr Speaker, shouldn’t they also include responses to the questions that were raised in the correspondence from your Chair about the raid of this august House by the Special Forces Command (SFC) late last year during that controversial –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has it been established that it was SFC?

MR NAMBESHE: Oh yes!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who established that? When you are on the record of the House, please state what you know to be true. I have looked at the correspondences and I have not seen where they said it was SFC that was in Parliament here. I have not seen it anywhere. If you are saying, “the persons who came here”, it would be a better way of stating your facts than saying things that you are not sure of.

MR NAMBESHE: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. That is why it is important for this statement to include a response to that very important correspondence that emanated from your Chair. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.42
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wanted the minister to clarify to us three issues.

Firstly, in Kasese and generally the Rwenzori sub-region, the security has wanted to justify the killings of the people there by falsely labelling them as royal guards. Whenever they kill someone without any clear explanation, they label that person a royal guard. That is the justification for killing the people in the Rwenzori. The minister should explain to us whether being a royal guard is criminal in its nature and why they are using that to kill innocent civilians.

Secondly, there is a tendency in the region now, especially in Kasese, for people to be coached to falsely accuse innocent people and try to make false allegations against them. Those people are being tortured and arrested without any clear explanation. The people who are actually pointing fingers at them have their contradictions and the people are now on tenterhooks because of these false accusations.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, there is the issue of the young man who was gunned down in Maliba Subcounty, which I take responsibility for as their representative. The young man who was gunned down in a trading centre was called Bright Baluku Johnson, a corporal, RA 193982. This person who was gunned down was a soldier who had gone on leave. He was found in a trading centre. The police were doing their normal operations and they called him from his house and gunned him down.

The people in the area are asking what this is because he was a serving army officer. He was on leave and he was killed by the forces. What is it that the people of Kasese have done that justifies their killing, whether they are in the armed forces or they are civilians? What is the problem? What crime have the people of Kasese committed, honourable minister, that justifies killings anytime, anywhere and anyhow? 

5.46
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for trying to give us the security situation in the country and to answer some of the questions we raised. However, I really find his statement very shallow, given the nature of insecurity going on and the worry Ugandans are living with. I would like to ask some questions and I demand answers. 

Firstly, what is going on between Uganda and Rwanda? Why are we all the time reading in the press about this and it threatens us each time? What is going on? We need to know as Ugandans because we live with Rwandans here as refugees and others as normal people who work with us. What is going on? We need answers to this. There seems to be some sort of competition that we do not understand.

Secondly, I would like to find out from the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries or whoever is concerned whether northern Uganda is under occupation by cattle keepers. Recently, the President gave orders and they were moved. However at night, you find them going back. Where are they going? 

One time, I drove from Kampala at around 2 o’clock and I passed over 50 lorries of cows going that side. Where were they going? They passed Gulu and then they were going towards Atiak. I understand they headed towards Achwa Ranch. What is going on? They move at night; I wonder whether they go with movement permits. They break all the laws. I really do not know whether there are some people who are untouchable in this country.

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the Minister of Security that the insecurity in this country is not only personal insecurity or threats of being killed; there is insecurity of properties. We live in this country under threat of losing property like land. We have seen an unprecedented number of land conflicts in this country. What is going on? In every part of the country, people are being evicted. They do not even fear to evict people. 

The people who are perpetuating this are Government officials – armed people in uniforms, people who are in Government offices and people from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. What is going on? We want to know whether Uganda is not for commoners anymore, or if it is only for some people and we should find out how to exist in this country. It is becoming very difficult. We fail to answer some of these questions. It is bringing a lot of insecurity and worry.

Finally, the minister said that Uganda is secure at the borders. However, it is like we are living at the mercy of the raiders from across the border. Last week, we lost someone in Kitgum. We have raiders who come, raid, kill people and they go at will. We are living in fear, and mind you, this is the greatest achievement of the NRM. Now, if the greatest achievement is going out, are you really not getting out of power yourselves? Mr Speaker, thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have the minister deal with these ones and then we see how to proceed?

5.55
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Jeje Odongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg that you allow the three of us to come and respond to all these questions at intervals. I will respond to some and my colleagues will come to respond to the rest.  
 
First and foremost, I would like to thank Members for the interest they have shown in the information we have shared with you this afternoon. This is a very good attitude and I think all of us - those of us charged with the responsibility and those of you who are supposed to be beneficiaries - will benefit from this kind of conversation. I would like to thank you.

There was a question raised about the statement of the Inspector General to the effect that the rate of crime has increased. Rather than being worried, I would like us to be excited about this because it shows that our people are vigilant and now have the courage to report any activity. It may not necessarily mean the level of crime has increased but that the level of participation of our population has certainly increased and it shows us this is happening.

The question of arrests in Kibaale directly contradicts the question of our porous borders - people entering and nothing being done. If nothing is absolutely being done, how come the people of that nature in Kibaale are being arrested? 

The Member also asked about the 48-hour rule that affects the former Inspector General of Police who was arrested earlier on in June. I would like to really appeal to all of us; much as there is this requirement, sometimes by the nature of the matter at hand, it may not be easy to fully fulfil that requirement. Therefore, sometimes we will request your indulgence and understanding - (Interjections) - Let me just answer this question. As I said, this is a conversation. 

Colleagues, you have also raised the question of a story in the newspapers. I would rather encourage that we take the newspaper stories with a pinch of salt because we do not entirely depend on them. Their efficacy sometimes can be doubtful.

You have raised the question of sharp shooters, pickups, costs and all that. I would like to share with you that this is a proposal - it is not a directive - that is still being discussed. We are all involved. It is not a mandatory requirement for you but a choice. So, it is still an evolving question.

Mr Speaker, my colleague, the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, will comment in greater detail on the question of deployment on the border of DRC. He will also comment on the diplomatic question, which the honourable Leader of the Opposition raised, concerning the statement of the President on the presence of rebels and the actions of the Government of DRC vis-à-vis the security at our border.

You have also asked the question about people being killed in Kasese. First of all, I must apologise for the death of any Ugandan at the hands of Government and its agencies. However, the circumstances in as far as the three are concerned, including the individual that hon. Nzoghu pointed out, have been identified and the persons involved have been arrested. They have been tried, because they are soldiers, before the unit disciplinary committee. Their case has now been referred to the division court martial and the people of Kasese have been encouraged to be in attendance so that they can see justice being done.

There was a question on cattle keepers being removed, and the question was: “Where are they?” If we could ask the same question the other way round: Where did they come from? If they have now gone, where did they come from in the first place? They must have gone to where they came from. (Laughter) 

I take note of the concern raised by the colleague from Toroma, and we will work closely with our foreign embassies. We will inform them of the security situation so that in the travel advisory at our embassies, we reflect the current situation. It is because most often, you will find the security situation advisories are a little bit outdated. I take note of that and I thank you.

On the question of UCC and the invasion of the MTN facility, I would like to take this opportunity to inform you, honourable colleagues, that UCC has taken up this matter. They are investigating it and once they have done that, we will have the opportunity to bring that report and share it with you. As it is, it is still being investigated.

At this juncture, let me ask my colleague, the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, to respond to some other areas I have not responded to. 

5.58
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to associate myself with the statement of my colleague, the Minister of Internal Affairs, and answers he has given. I have a few areas to clarify. 

The deployment of UPDF along the Uganda-DRC border is not a new phenomenon; it has been on for a long time. The honourable Leader of the Opposition will recall, because she lives in the Rwenzori region like I do, that in 1998 the terrorists who abducted students from a seminary in Bwera -her constituency - and the terrorists who killed students at Kichwamba all came from DRC in the form of the ADF. Some of these abducted students were eventually found in DRC.

For a long time, the territory of DRC has been used to train, recruit and harbour enemies against Uganda. It is therefore only logical and proper that the UPDF has been deploying and continues to deploy troops along the Uganda-DRC border.

In addition, the Government is developing a specialised brigade - the Alpine Brigade - specialised in fighting and combating terrorism in mountain areas. The base of this brigade is the Rwenzori Mountain, along the border. Therefore, it is true that there is deployment but for a very noble cause - to safeguard the territorial integrity of Uganda and secure the lives of our people, not only those who live along the border but those who live in Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, at one time you recall that ADF was not just operating at the DRC border. They were here in Kampala, Busoga and many parts of the country. However, because of the vigilance of our forces and the population, ADF was flashed out of the city, Busoga, the Rwenzori region and it got a safe haven in the DRC because of the weaknesses in DRC, specifically eastern DRC where as far as we are concerned, there is no presence of Government. 

I think that answers the second leg of the question, which the Leader of the Opposition raised concerning the comments the President made about enemies of Uganda operating in DRC. This is public knowledge; it is acknowledged not only by Uganda Government but also the DRC Government and the UN. That is why we have the United Nations mission in Congo, specifically stationed not only to keep peace in DRC but also to monitor what we call the negative forces operating in DRC against nations in the Great Lakes region.

We have also formed a forum, which is called the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region. This is a security forum comprising of eight nations in the Great Lakes region to have a joint effort and force to hunt down and fight ADF. As a matter of fact, the coordinating office to fight ADF in eastern DRC, which is manned by what we call the Joint Follow-Up Mechanism constituted of senior military intelligence officials, is based in Kasese. We have an office in Kasese, which coordinates joint intelligence gathering and follow-up of ADF based in Kasese town. This office is composed of forces from Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda and Uganda.

Mr Speaker, regarding the strength of ADF, I cannot be precise in terms of numbers but all I can say is that ADF is no longer operating on Ugandan territory; it is in eastern DRC. Some remnants of ADF have been hiding in some parts of Tanzania and Kenya but the main nucleus is in eastern DRC.

However, as I said, we have a mechanism in the Great Lakes region to fight ADF. The ADF was fundamentally degraded and that is why it quit Ugandan territory and found safe haven in eastern DRC where, in our view, there is absolutely no law and order.

Mr Speaker, that is the furthest I can go. If there are other clarifications, I will be willing to answer them.

6.05
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Gen. Elly Tumwine): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this wonderful time we have had on this wonderful subject of security. I really like the interest that Parliament has had on this subject and the openness of His Excellency the President who gave us enough time to discuss this subject. He also answered many of our questions when we insisted that we wanted the security situation explained. However, we are now here as a team.

I would like you to note that aspect of acting as a team. We were here previously when that was an issue - in this Parliament and in the recent past. We would like you to trace our record of how we have built the security of this country - steadily, surely, continuously and successfully.

How have we maintained this country from threats from neighbouring countries, which have been destabilised most of the time? How have we managed with porous borders? All of you know that our borders are without walls or water, with easy flow of guns, people, commodities and animals. Therefore, this is not something that we should be looking at as if there is something new that has happened. What seems to be happening is that we now have more ways of communication and interaction. Instead of using them negatively, I would like to appeal that we use them positively. 

This morning, I was addressing a group on everyone’s role in security because where you have a right, there is equally a responsibility. We are very specific in the message of our report. When we say “generally calm and stable”, that does not mean that there are no incidences of criminality. Wherever human beings are, even here, there are some criminally minded people. That is the nature of human beings. In the Bible, Genesis chapter 6, God said, “Should I wipe these human beings who have evil minds? Should I wipe them out?” He only allowed those in Noah’s Ark to live and flooded the rest because he said, these human beings are evil minded and that is their nature - (Interruption)

MR ODUR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Minister for Security mentioned that in this House there are criminally minded persons. Is he in order to impute and accuse Members of this House without substantiating that we are criminally minded? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable minister said, wherever there is a human being, there is a tendency to do evil. If you want to indulge in some philosophy, you will find that in any human being, there is something called the “Id”. I would like you to go and find out what it means.

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am going to do more research on that as well. I would like to add that if you are positive minded, it reduces that evil side of you. When you become negative minded, it increases evil.

Like I was saying, we have an opportunity to discuss any matter in regard to our security situation because it has been our belief that if there is any matter concerning security, put everything down, let us discuss it and find a solution. Let me refer, as an example, to the movement of people along our borders. People are concerned that there are people coming in and going out. One of our principles has been Pan-Africanism but that does not mean that we allow criminals. No, we should separate good people from bad ones. 

How have we done it? We are in the process of issuing identity cards. It is actually true that some people have forged identity cards at Nasser Road, which look like our national identity cards. However, we know that when those cards that have been forged are tested in the NIRA machines, those people are exposed. 

In addition, when we say that the situation is generally calm, there are indicators, and I can mention a few. For the whole country to carry out local council elections in a peaceful environment – wow! What a situation, what a wonderful country. If there were any incidents, they were isolated. 

Similarly, I would like to refer to some of the accusations raised that some soldiers commit crimes. As the honourable Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs has said, yes, some of our security forces commit crimes. However, we are on record that we take serious action against whoever has committed a crime against the people of Uganda. We still hold the law, which says when you kill a citizen of Uganda, we try you and when we find you guilty, we execute you, and this has brought peace. We have no compromise with any security personnel who commits a crime against the people of Uganda and we would like you to support that.

On the issue of information, let us not be moved that whenever something goes on social media, the whole country shakes and people propagate it and post it to their friends. You should know that this is a crime. Find out from the relevant authorities; we are available. Crosscheck information; do not just post it. We have been using this opportunity to inform our young people not to post messages that they are not sure of because it can be held against you. It is a crime and some people are already in prison.

In the case of Kasese and the question of the guards, it was a serious anti-government and treasonous movement of Kilhumira Mutima. This movement wanted to create another nation called the Yiira Republic and had armed people. They were deployed with sectors to command and boundaries. This was a serious matter. Do not take some of these things lightly. It was handled firmly and we have been working to see how the few elements, which may have remained, will come back. 
 
Recently, one of them killed a person and had to be arrested. I would like to appeal to Members not to make incidents, which happen –(Interruption)

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Every other day, we have asked this House to discuss the report of the security committee of this House that went on the ground in Kasese to find out what exactly happened that led the UPDF combined with the police to shoot people in the kingdom of King Mumbere and in the king’s palace. This issue has never been settled by this House, even after you ordered that this report be discussed. It has always been argued that the matter is before court and therefore cannot be discussed. I am surprised that the Minister of Security is now becoming a court to say that there was a group of Kilhumira Mutima who had decided to form a rebel Government.

Is it in order for a minister to talk about a matter that they have consistently told us is sub judice and even make pronouncements that we think are supposed to come from court before this House?

My questions were clear. I asked the minister to tell us the circumstances under which people were killed on the 14th and possibly the circumstances under which the king’s residence was raided last night. I am surprised that the minister is coming up with pronouncements on issues that they have run away from. Is he therefore in order to begin discussing matters that he has continuously told us are in court? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I thought you raised the matter; it came through a question. I do not know what else to rely on because the minister who was speaking is the Minister for Security and if what he is saying is not true, I do not know which other information to use to counter that. Therefore, I find it difficult.

On the issue of the parliamentary investigations, you will remember that we called the chairperson then and the vice chairperson said they had finished the report and were waiting to report to the House. When the chairperson came, we asked her to explain and she said, “No, we were advised that because some of the elements of the investigations were in court, we could not proceed with our investigations as a committee. Therefore, there is no report.” That is what the chairperson reported. As such, there is no report from the committee of this Parliament.

However, there have been previous engagements by Parliament in that area. Those reports have come back and we have had discussions on them.

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you. I only wanted to end by assuring the honourable members here that while you are sleeping and resting in your homes, know that there are people who are either in the trenches, in offices working or doing whatever it takes for your security. For the security of Members of Parliament that is now becoming an issue, to show how there is insecurity in the country, it is a choice; it is not forced on you. 

You pressurised the President that there is insecurity and he explained. After that, he offered to assure you, and it is his responsibility and that of Government that wherever there is need and the question was, “if necessary” - You can quote him. Is that a serious word? “If necessary, what sort of security could be given to Members of Parliament?” The options are escorts, armoured cars or shooters. All those are being studied and it should not therefore be an indicator that the country is in danger. 

Whenever you have asked for resources, support or help, Government has tried to do everything possible. “Possible” is the word. Therefore, that is the morale and spirit in which we are discussing this. I would like to assure you that we are doing everything possible to ensure that everyone in Uganda is safe and secure. 

As I have said, if you look for the negative side of somebody, you will find quite a lot. However, if you look for the positive side, there is also quite a lot. Let us balance that and we move forward. Tusonge mbele.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of security has been in this House. We have debated, had reports and engaged the President not once but twice - Once formally here in the House and the other one informally, when questions were being asked. This is because our rules prohibited an exchange between Members and the President or even a discussion and an arrangement was made and the discussion was held. 

The problem I see is one or two. There is a slow response system by the duty bearers in Government to come and brief Parliament each time things happen. As such, speculations arise and we have to bring these issues as urgent matters, because there is no immediate response on the occurrence of an incident by the Government. There is a gap, which parliamentarians now try to fill.

Can I suggest that you should develop a response mechanism to this House because this is where you belong. This is your first line of call to brief the country because these are people’s representatives. Once they are briefed, they know what messages to pass on. Many of them are on the radio on the weekends. They may say, “This matter has come but this is the information we have from the Government on what is happening.” These responses, messages and statements should be coming.

Secondly, the issue of security has become major. I would also suggest that you develop a system of routinely briefing Parliament instead of waiting for issues to arise. This issue has been tough on Ugandans for the last five years. You could evolve a system of coming up, after a period of time, and saying, “We would like to brief Parliament on where we are on some of these issues.” That way, you will have parliamentarians supporting you all the time rather than for us to scratch for information from social media because we have to fill the gaps. 

That is a suggestion from the Speaker; it is not a directive. Take it the way you would like to but it would help how we handle matters in this House.
 
Honourable members, we will pause this here. We should have risen earlier but this would be a proper time for us to rise. I have briefed you on the events that are going to take place next week. On Wednesday at 10 o’clock, we have the Prime Minister of India coming to address us. I have made a call that we should come and receive that message from the Prime Minister - all of us together. Of course, the Prime Minister will be brought in by His Excellency President Yoweri Museveni as his host. The President will be occupying his chair of the presidency with his guest who will address us. 

The rules are clear that we will not have discussions but we will find ways of taking these things and handling them the way we always do. When matters are brought that we cannot talk about immediately, we always find avenues of dealing with them even later.

Therefore, there will be no Parliament sitting on Tuesday to allow for preparations for Wednesday’s meeting at 10 o’clock when we will be here to receive the President and the Prime Minister of India. This House is adjourned to Wednesday at 10 o’clock.

(The House rose at 6.27 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 24 July 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

