Tuesday, 5 July 2011

Parliament met at 2.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s sitting and I hope you had a good weekend. I would like to remind Members that last week I informed you about the registration process for the National Identity Card.

I also informed you that the facilities will be available since yesterday until Friday, but as of this morning, only six Members had registered. I want to request you to accord the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration the necessary courtesy and go and do the registration so that we can conclude it on Friday, 8th July.

I also wanted to remind the Members of the 8th Parliament who had already registered that you can now collect your cards from the same team. They are located in the Conference Hall of Parliament. The team has come here for our convenience and so, let us finish it so that they can move on and deal with other citizens. I thank you.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

(I) REQUEST FOR GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US$ 50 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR GENERAL BUDGET SUPPORT FOR THE FINANCIAL SECTOR DEVELOPMENT POLICY OPERATION

2.12
THE STATE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Jachan Omach): Madam Speaker and hon. colleagues, I beg to lay on Table a request for Government to borrow US$ 50 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group for general budget support for the Financial Sector Development Policy Operation. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the request is committed to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

(II) TREASURY MEMORANDUMS ON THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE FOR THE FINANCIAL YEARS ENDED 30TH JUNE 2002, 30TH JUNE 2003 AND 30TH JUNE 2005

2.13
THE STATE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Jachan Omach): Madam Speaker and hon. colleagues, I beg to lay on Table Treasury Memorandums on the Public Accounts Committee for the financial years ended 30th June 2002, 30th June 2003 and 30th June 2005. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I hereby commit the Treasury Memorandums to the Public Accounts Committee for perusal and report back.

(III) TREASURY MEMORANDUMS ON THE REPORT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE FOR FINANCIAL YEARS ENDED 30TH JUNE 2001, 30TH JUNE 2002, 30TH JUNE 20003, 30TH JUNE 2004 AND 30TH JUNE 2005

2.13
THE STATE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Jachan Omach): Madam Speaker and hon. colleagues, I beg to lay on Table Treasury Memorandums on the report of the Local Governments Accounts Committee for the financial years ended 30th June 2001, 30th June 2002 and 30th June 2003, 3Oth June 2004 and 30th June 2005. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Treasury Memorandums on the Report of the Local Governments Accounts Committee are committed to the Local Governments Accounts Committee for perusal and report back.

(IV)	THE 13TH ANNUAL REPORT 2010 - UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Justice? The next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE FORMATION OF A PARLIAMENTARY FORUM ON MALARIA

2.15
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a motion and resolution of Parliament under Rule 43.

WHEREAS Malaria is the leading cause of death in sub-Saharan Africa with more than one million cases recorded each year;

AND WHEREAS the economic impact of Malaria in sub-Saharan Africa is currently estimated at more than US$ 2 billion, constituting a major obstacle to economic development in Uganda where the growth rate could have increased by an estimated 32 percent had Malaria been eradicated 35 years ago;

NOTING THAT a Malaria Indicator Survey conducted in 2009 revealed high prevalence of Malaria parasites ranging from 5 percent in Kampala to 63 percent in mid Northern region, with a national average, and further that 320 people die of Malaria every day, revealing that Malaria is still endemic in the whole country except in a few areas of low transmission that are prone to epidemics;

FURTHER NOTING that reported Malaria cases have increased over the years representing 28 percent in 2001 and 45 percent in 2010 and that the proportion of parasitological testing for malaria remains low (5 percent in 2001 to 24 percent in 2010) with a 45 percent positivity rate;

ALSO AWARE that due to unavailability of in-patient Malaria data, the Malaria Programme Review is unable to describe the impact of Malaria control interventions on severe Malaria and deaths;

CONSIDERING that under the Abuja Declaration 200 on Malaria to which Uganda is a signatory, the signatures committed to taking appropriate measures to strengthen and sustain health systems so that by 2015, at least 60 percent of Malaria patients have access to prompt, adequate and affordable treatment within 24 hours after the onset of symptoms of Malaria, and further committed to granting at least 60 percent of those at risk, including pregnant women and children under age of five, with the most effective combination of personal and community-based protective measures, such as insecticide-treated bed nets;

FURTHER NOTING that African leaders in 2001 signed-off on a statement committing themselves to allocate at lest 15 percent of their national budget to health;

REALIZING that almost a decade later, only six countries have followed through on the 15 percent of their national budgetary commitments and more specifically, Uganda currently allocates only 8 percent of the national budget.

AWARE THAT Parliament needs to improve the understanding and the role that Parliamentarians can play in scaling-up and aligning national priorities on health in accordance with the Global Malaria Action Plan (GMAP) 2010, and the Abuja Declaration set targets, by adhering to good governance, accountability and transparency practices, as well as ensuring that an adequate allocation of resources and proper oversight on health in general, and to the fight against Malaria in particular, is guaranteed;

CONSIDERING that Parliamentarians can through advocacy, legislation, and budgetary oversight and accountability measures scale-up sustained Malaria control efforts and demand to have a stricter oversight role and control over policies, programmes and domestics and international financing for health;

FURTHER NOTING that as a leader and decision-maker, a Member of Parliament can promote and encourage informed debate on issues related to Malaria; 

RESPONDING on the needs for a parliamentary forum aimed at engaging and mobilising parliamentarians – a key decision-making group that is often overlooked from the malaria advocacy effort despite its potential role of positively influencing the country levels, strategies and funding for the health initiative;

NOW THEREFORE, be resolved that Parliament do authorize the formation of a Parliamentary Forum on Malaria. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Yes, hon. Nyakikongoro.

2.18
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sheema): Madam Speaker, I stand to second the motion. I am doing this because malaria is still the leading killer disease. It is also the major cause of immobility and mortality. In Uganda now, though there is some improvement, at least 300 lives are lost every day with 60 million people dying due to malaria.

In terms of economic sense, US$ 655 million is lost annually as a result of malaria. You also know it very well that Uganda is a signatory to the Millennium Development Goals and that malaria affects all the six major objectives of the Millennium Development Goals.

When we talk about reducing hunger and poverty, you realise that people frequently fall sick and when that happens, they cannot work. Given these figures, it means hunger and poverty will continue haunting our nation.

Ensuring Education For All, which is MDG No.2 – malaria causes absenteeism in schools; though that is not only in pupils and students, it is also in teachers. 

Improving Maternal Health: I would like to say that malaria is one of the causes of maternal death among the pregnant mothers. Therefore, when we talk of reducing maternal death without fighting malaria, I don’t think we shall move any further.

The other thing I want to talk about is combating HIV/AIDS. This also contributes – much as we talk about it – we should know that when malaria attacks a person whose immunity is already weak, that person is likely to die very fast.

And on Developing Global Partnerships and Ensuring Access to Essential Medicines, which is MDG No.8, we should know that numerous private partnerships are working to improve access to treatment of malaria. These two initiatives can serve as a model for improving access to essential drugs.

Madam Speaker, I believe that if Parliament establishes itself into a parliamentary forum focusing on malaria, it can help in terms of advocating for a better budget to fight malaria. It can also compose campaigns against malaria in our constituencies. This will let us fight and eradicate malaria.

I would like to give one example, Madam Speaker. In Katakwi District where malaria was decisively fought - and the Members of Parliament from that district will really support me on this one – they would not only test the parasites in the body – remember those parasites are always within our bodies and the mosquitoes just help in transmitting them – but also spray. It was until that was done that malaria was completely wiped out of that district.

So, I believe that if we focus on eradicating this malaria through home-based care, we shall reduce malaria attacks with our country spending less on malaria, which can see our people save a lot of their income; they will then enjoy improved health.

MR OBUA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Our guiding principles in this Parliament are the Rules of Procedure. I have perused through these rules from the first to the last page, in relation to the establishment of a parliamentary forum, but I have not found any specific rule supporting the formation of such forum.

In that regard, Madam Speaker, I would like to inquire whether it is procedurally right for us to do that. I am saying this because what I have seen in this Parliament is that the standard practice is that if there are Members who share the same beliefs and they intend to form a forum, they can mobilise themselves, move to the Office of the Speaker and seek permission to elect their leadership, which is formally recognised by Parliament as an institution.

My point here, Madam Speaker, is that is it procedurally right for us to really debate a formal motion for the establishment of a parliamentary forum on malaria in contravention of the standard practice?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think that as leaders of Uganda, there are issues that we must take as being of public concern. I think the country would be happy to hear that the Parliament of Uganda is taking a keen interest on the issues of malaria by creating a voice to speak about it. I consider this to be a completely harmless motion. In fact, it is a very friendly motion – yes, it is a friendly motion. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There are several parliamentary fora with almost all of them addressing pertinent issues. For example, we have one on climatic change and you know that lightning is now striking people. We also have UWOPA that deals with women issues. We have one on MDGs, which covers part of what you are trying to do. So, are we going to move resolutions for all these fora or shall we just restrict ourselves to malaria. 

I am saying this because malaria is just one of the many problems that we face. And once we make a resolution, would it be binding on Parliament and Government to facilitate these fora? I am asking this because if we just do it to make people happy about us addressing these issues, when there is no facilitation by Parliament or Government, then I don’t think we will be addressing the real challenges the way we should. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Balyeku, please justify.

MR BALYEKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members, I happened to represent the Government of Uganda in Zambia in a conference concerning malaria. It is a world concern that malaria has become the leading killer disease. You will realise that malaria is also killing people in Uganda. Records show that we register over 400 deaths per day; annually, we have over 43,000 deaths per day. This is a matter of national interest; it is not just about forming a forum.

The Members from some of the countries that attended this conference told us that they register almost zero malaria cases. Countries like Botswana, Algeria, Mauritius, Egypt, Eritrea and Zambia register zero malaria cases. But how did this happen? It was because parliamentarians took a leading role in the fight against malaria in their various constituencies. 

In Uganda we have children dying of malaria almost every day. I wouldn’t expect a Member of Parliament to argue against the formation of the parliamentary forum for malaria. We should stand up and be remembered as the Ninth Parliament for eradicating malaria in this country. I beg to move.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do appreciate the concerns of the mover of this motion. I think it deserves very strong support from this House and I do recall, Madam Speaker, that when we debated the formation of the HIV committee, we did expand the role of that committee to include Malaria because we realised that Malaria was a big concern and it caused a very big debate here. We even went a step further to discuss the issue of DDT vis-à-vis other insecticides to control Malaria. So, in the Eighth Parliament, we were very concerned about Malaria and we put in place a committee. 

But the reason I am seeking guidance on a procedural matter is that I think the movers need to be guided on how they can bring motions of that nature to the House. I think they have done a very innocent thing and we do not need to harass them or criticise them. They have just opened our eyes to understand that Malaria is a big concern, but the manner in which they have done it - if we adopt this motion and make it a parliamentary motion and responsibility, then we must accept that responsibility. We must accept that we will be able to form a quorum to take care of any issue of concern and I don’t think Parliament has the capacity to do that. 

Madam Speaker, without wasting much time, I wish to move that the movers of this motion withdraw it so that Parliament can go ahead with its business. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, one of the areas of concern in the Seventh and Eighth Parliaments was that Members of this House travel on Government funds to attend meetings abroad and never report. The country never knows why Members have travelled, but they just hear that they have gone out. 

In the Ninth Parliament, we want to set new standards. Members must account for what they have been doing outside this country and this is what these Members are doing. These are the first Members that I sent out when I became Speaker. They are reporting about what transpired in Zambia and what they agreed to do and I see no harm in taking a resolution that we form a forum, and those who want can join it and those who do not want do not have to join. But let us account to the people of Uganda why these two Members went to Zambia. 

2.31
MR VINCENT MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You realise from all sides that Members are raising genuine issues. First of all, even as we speak, there is a document inviting Members to register as Members of the Parliamentary Health Forum. There is the HIV/AIDS committee and the Malaria forum; I think this House needs to be guided because we shall have the Tuberculosis forum, the Diabetes forum and many other fora. 

Madam Speaker, you will agree with me that as a matter of procedure, whoever moves outside the country on official duty has a duty to make a report. I think it is only prudent that these Members that have come from Zambia submit a report of what actually was in Zambia other than making a forum for which we may willingly or unwillingly subscribe. It would be from that that Members would decide whether it is necessary to form an independent Malaria forum or a health forum that would address issues related to health.

Madam Speaker, I want to note that there is a general breakdown in the health system as we speak. I would better subscribe to a health forum than a Malaria forum. I am from Rwampara and out of the 43 health workers that we should have, only 13 are there. We do not have a doctor, we have three Health Centre IVs and the operating theatres are not operational. What does that mean? We must address issues of health together. We must actually form a forum on health. Let us look at the impediments in the health sector other than doing it in isolation. I beg to move. 

2.33
MS GRACE NAMARA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I remember in the Eighth Parliament, there were quite a number of fora that were formed and I wonder why this forum needs a motion. I think we need to be guided on whether even those that were formed in the Eighth Parliament will be recalled so that we can first move a motion for them to be considered. We are not specifically bashing the idea or saying no to the idea of the hon. Balyeku, but we are saying that this House hasn’t been guided even before on how these fora should be formed. So, Madam Speaker, you need to guide us on how to move because there are quite a number of them in the corridors of Parliament. I have just seen a paper on climate change; how do we move? I need to be guided. [MR NDEEZI: “Information”]. I will allow the information from hon. Ndeezi. (Interruption)  

MR NDEEZI: Madam Speaker, I have been struggling to catch your eye. What we are debating is a very important subject and has a lot of impact on our procedures. Procedurally speaking, this is the first time in the history of this Parliament that we are passing a motion of this nature. This is the first time that Parliament is creating a forum by a resolution of Parliament. We are now thinking of forming a parliamentary forum on Malaria. There are many fora that have never been blessed with a resolution of Parliament. What happens to them? Tomorrow they will be in your office seeking to be included on the Order Paper, for them to be baptised by Parliament. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I think you are setting a very serious precedent.

Secondly, our friends have very good points that they could have included in the resolution, but all they are asking from us is a forum. I thought they would be interested in issues like what the government is doing to handle the problem of Malaria in this country. I thought they would talk about problems like lack of resources and facilities in hospitals. But I am disappointed that even if we pass this motion, it will not help the mover. 

I request the movers of this motion to get more time to redraft it. We should not dismiss it all together because it has many important points. We should give them more time to go and draft it and bring it back tomorrow with more sound proposals and conclusions that can actually help us to eradicate Malaria in this country. Give them one or two days. If you dismiss it, it will be bad and we shall be misunderstood. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER:  I think I should ask the Members to explain what the other parliaments did because you are the ones who went there.

2.38
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO: (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In Africa, more than 15 countries have established malaria fora with the mandate of Members of Parliament. This has gone very far in fighting malaria. It has been realised that a lot of funding – they were questioning why Uganda was not having such an initiative because a lot of funding has been sunk into fighting malaria. There is no focused committee that traces how much funding is coming into the country in terms of fighting malaria; how much funding is spent on fighting malaria and what is not being done? 

In the other Parliament, why the use of DDT and other indoor residual sprays phased out was because of that lack of mandate; that focused forum that would push for those issues –(Interjections)-. Hon. Members, you will realise that as we are sitting here, much as we are saying malaria – next time, people will be talking of forming a thunder forum; 

Lightning committees: You remember the other time when all of us were up in arms talking about lightning- but remember that malaria kills almost 300 people daily. Each of us lives with a person directly affected by malaria. In your constituency, someone is calling or sending you a message, “Send me money to go and pick my child, he has malaria.” We thought that having heard the experience of these countries which have fought malaria, including Zambia - it is at 80 percent by the way and these countries - we believe these initiatives will go a long way in fighting malaria in the country –(Interjection)- leave alone this mixing up of words, initiatives and forum. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nsereko. (Hon. Nsereko rose_) Of course I anticipate Nsereko and then Tumwebaze. 

2.40
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Nsereko you can hold on. (Interjections) Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is about the substance and the intention. That is why I want to welcome the movers of the motion.

The procedural concerns, Madam Speaker, you have guided us and I do not doubt your guidance. True, in the past, we have not formalised fora through motions maybe because our rules are not explicit about that. But now that the movers, aware that they have just returned from a working trip where they have been benchmarking certain good practices and honestly; it does not do harm to introduce this with your permission. 

But, Madam Speaker, why you read some kind of fatigue among Members regarding these platforms with due respect to the motion – yet sometimes platforms or fora have been suggested, but they do not really stand up for the cause that they sought formation, for you to have a forum on MDGs. 

Rule 28 provides for the presentation of papers by the Vice-President, Prime Minister, minister, commissioner, chairperson of a committee or a Member –(Interjections)- If I am a promoter of a certain forum, promoting a certain specialty area, it means I have expertise. I do further reading; I pick interest; I follow the discussions. So, at one time, I should be able to come and seek space on the Order Paper to present a technical paper; to invite other Members to appreciate the dynamics of that sector they do not understand.

Three years ago, I enrolled for a Masters in Public Health at the School of Public Health in Makerere. Before you are admitted, you go for an interview. One of the professors asked me, “You are not a doctor; you are not a social worker, why do you want to study public health at a masters level?” I told them I am a policy-maker and I would try as much as possible to advocate for good health practices and policies. On that ground, I was admitted. 

So, when I hear  such a motion from a Member of Parliament, it is wonderful; it is commendable. But again, we should set a standard that when a forum has been set, it should justify the interest -(Interjections)- its existence. Thank you so much for that. Otherwise, we shall be forming fora for the sake of perhaps leadership; travelling abroad. I am happy you are seeing that. 

If you travel abroad, and have a forum recognised by Parliament, allocated space in this building; you must show cause why you are there. If it is MDGs, come and tell us how we are performing in complying with the MDGs. How are other countries performing or what are the MDGs? Some people talk about MDGs when they do not know these MDGs in order or whether they are five or seven. So, let us not form fora for the sake of fora. (Mr Banyenzaki rose_) Hon. Banyenzaki formed PNoWB. We went to the World Bank and he demonstrated why the forum was there.

I support the motion, but I also submit that forums or fora - whichever correct word of English is allowed; either forums or fora, you can pick the correct one - should be responsible for the causes they state in such motions. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the last Parliament - I do not know whether you know hon. David Ebong, whose other name is climate change. We gave him opportunities - I do not know how many times - to come and speak about climate change and educate the Members of this House. Why do you want to anticipate that the forum will not be allowed? This is the Ninth Parliament; this is a new Parliament.

2.44
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (NRM, Central Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker and hon. Members, let us look at the spirit of the movers. The movers travelled and saw or witnessed something from other parliaments. They came here with a good spirit, envisaging in their minds, the issue of malaria in Uganda. Whereas we agree that there is a committee of Parliament that handles HIV, malaria and other related issues; the cost going on malaria from the taxpayers’ money and from donors is high. I think the movers of the motion have no ill motive and given time, we should not be restrained from supporting this motion.

They have done a wonderful job. Please move the motion. You have moved it and we shall support this motion to even show the great PR that we have with the people of the Republic of Uganda and sub-Saharan Africa. I think the issue of tackling malaria is very pertinent to the common man. If it is seen that the Members of Parliament also came up with a motion to create such a forum or create even other fora, there is no harm in this. 

I think honourable members ought to understand that we should look mainly at the motive in adjudging where we take our decisions on such motions. We understand their issue on procedure. But I also equally agree and understand that we should look at the practice and the faith with which the movers of this motion have come to the Floor of Parliament. I beg to move.   

2.47
THE SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do not think there is anybody in this House who is against the spirit of the substance of this motion. We are all concerned about malaria. In fact, according to statistics, malaria is the biggest killer in this country. There is no doubt about that. The problem is that I do not want to walk the path of hon. Nsereko, where we admit, “Yes, we have rules, but we can work outside the rules.”  That is dangerous because it will be overthrowing our own Rules of Procedure. These rules assist us to perform our functions here and we must guard them jealously because they are a creation of the Constitution. If we pass this motion, what next? Does this forum become one of the organs of this House? What are their functions? Because, when you look at our rules, what is envisaged are committees, and their constitution and establishment is well catered for within our Rules of Procedure.  If we do pass this motion, what is the implication to other fora that are already in existence; because we have one that is now a creation of the House - the one on malaria?

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you hon. Katuntu for giving way. Madam Speaker, I do support the interest of the mover of this motion. I am one of those people who have been attending international meetings concerning very pertinent issues to the country and the population of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, even if you went to your archives, you will find very many reports from me on the UN Habitat on Climate Change, urban migration and the environment. When I came back from Nairobi, in the first meeting, I shared with Members of Parliament the spirit of promoting climate change, urban migration and the environment, and we agreed to form a forum. We did not come to the Floor of Parliament, but we went to the Members’ Lounge and we fully subscribed to the forum and we elected leaders. Hon. Chris Baryomunsi is our President in Uganda. Many other countries have these fora and they have not gone through that procedure or process of coming to the Floor of Parliament. But we discuss outside Parliament and in various committees and we lobbied for the interests of that particular forum.

So, Madam Speaker, the information I am giving to the honourable member is that we do not need an endorsement of this Parliament to form a Parliamentary forum. I am very ready to go and sign up for membership to that forum outside this Floor of Parliament. Let us follow the precedent that we have set in this Parliament and we should not abuse our Rules of Procedure. Thank you, hon. Member. 

MR ONYANGO KAKOBA: I am one of the people who would support very much the formation of this forum, but given what has been said by my colleagues, I think we have to follow the right procedures. I know we normally travel and I have been travelling also to a number of conferences, but I think what the mover should have done after coming back was to present to us a report and this is provided for under Rule 30 of our Rules of Procedure. Therefore, I would advise that the movers of this motion should go and prepare a report and present to this Parliament then we can get the information they would have liked us to get. That should be the way forward. I thank you.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues for the information. You see, if for example the movers of this motion had come up with a report, it would have assisted us better to discuss this matter in detail and share the best practices they have picked from all those countries they have been to. 

What is the way forward? I think they now raise a very fundamental question about forums in Parliament. We now need to study how we can constitute or form forums in Parliament. In that spirit, Madam Speaker, if we can shelve this debate and we study further how parliamentary forums can be formed; maybe if we entrench them in our Rules of Procedure. In Zambia or is it Malawi, I don’t remember where he cited, it is possible their Rules of Procedure actually provide for it, but ours don’t. 

We should be careful not to duplicate functions of committees. Because if we already have a committee that is mandated by our Rules of Procedure to handle issues on malaria and so forth, and then the House sits and adopts a resolution to establish a forum, I can see a little bit of either conflict or duplication. 

So, my view is that the fundamental question raised by the motion now is that we need to look at these forums which we have in Parliament. This afternoon I saw a notice about “Parliamentarians for Global Action” to which I belong, but we have never been there. Madam Speaker, you sent some delegations last year to the United States to represent Parliament on that global forum, but it is not part and parcel of our Rules. 

So, let us shelve this motion. Let us study how these forums can be reconstituted and then eventually we can come up with reports of forums, like parliamentary committees do. If we proceed the way we are proceeding and adopt this resolution, then tomorrow one will come with another resolution if there is an epidemic of gonorrhoea –(Laughter)- I don’t know why hon. Mallinga is very excited about it. He might run here also and say he wants – (Interjection)- hon. Nambooze is shouting behind me that, “Jiggers” (Laughter) Yes, it is possible. So, we might be opening a Pandora Box. So, in good spirit, we request our colleagues that we shelve this motion, study all the forums and then we can discuss the practices. I thank you.

2.56
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank you, first of all, for providing an opportunity for Members of Parliament to debate issues to do with health, including malaria, and I also want to thank the Members who travelled and were very eager to come and inform our Parliament. 

And like the other Members have noted, probably they should have moved under Rule 30 to present a report. But I am sure they are doing it in good faith because they attended a meeting on our behalf and they are very enthusiastic to bring the issues to the Floor of Parliament. 

I am also sure everybody here is committed to the issue of fighting malaria in this country. Therefore, the questions that are being raised are just issues of procedure because there are very many parliamentary fora. Some of us head a number of them and they were formed outside the plenary. If we pass a parliamentary resolution to authorise this forum, it would mean that maybe the other fora are not legitimate or they have to be brought here to be formalised. 

In light of that, I wanted to suggest that we amend the motion, particularly the prayers which are being brought by the movers, that instead of asking Parliament to authorise the formation of the parliamentary forum, Parliament expresses itself on its commitment to the fight towards eradication of Malaria. (Applause) We can even urge Government to bring a statement outlining the strategies and interventions which are in place towards the fight against Malaria, so that the movers achieve their intention of informing Parliament, and we express our commitment, and then outside the plenary, there can be mobilisation if we have to form a forum on Malaria. That will be a win-win situation because the public might misunderstand us as not being committed to the fight against Malaria, and yet we are.

So, I move that we amend the resolution as I have suggested. I can work with the movers to put it in a better language so that we express ourselves as Parliament on the commitment. (Applause) I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Does Dr Omona want to add something?

2.58
DR KENNETH OMONA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I entirely agree with my professional colleague, Dr Baryomunsi. First of all, I want to let this House understand that Malaria did not become an emergency today. Malaria was an emergency 10 years or so ago. 

I also want to inform honourable members that to let us live the threat of Malaria, we should know that Malaria actually kills a child every five seconds in sub-Saharan Africa.  We have had so many interventions on Malaria and I am sure the last Parliament heard a lot about Malaria. 

We have had a policy on indoor residual spraying which was began very well and my honourable colleague, Dr Baryomunsi, will witness that it actually almost caused the closure of paediatric wards in Kanungu where he comes from. Where has this ended?

I would support my honourable colleague that, in good spirit, let us not lose the interest expressed by the movers of this motion. Let us resolve as Parliament that it is important that we stress that there is a need for this Parliament to fight Malaria, and also, if the minister responsible is here, he may brief us on how far we have gone with all these interventions, including actually very effective and very good drugs that we now have.  Why is Malaria still a problem here? Why are we not putting to task the responsible minister to explain how far we have gone? 

In good spirit, I agree with my honourable colleague; let us stress that this Parliament demands that our minister comes out very clearly on how far they have gone with this.

Madam Speaker, kindly allow me to mention just one issue of urgency if it is possible.

THE SPEAKER: No, no. 

DR OMONA: I thank you very much Madam Speaker. 

3.01
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I appreciate the spirit of this motion, but I also think that as Parliament, we have not really thought, over the years, to refocus on very crucial sectors like Health and Education. You find a committee on Agriculture. Agriculture gets little money compared to Health and Education. Then we put these three ministries, Health, Education and Gender under Social Services. Now, this would not give our committee enough time and space to monitor and to play oversight roles over these ministries. And while this motion comes in good spirit, I think that what we should be thinking of is to separate Health and Education so that we give them committees where Members would have clear focus and enough space to do follow ups.

Secondly, the issue of forums is almost like caucuses. There are so many forums and caucuses here. My colleague talked about leadership; some of the forums come out of leadership. I have not had leadership here; I must be somewhere. And at the end of the day we have a lot of problems and conflict. First of all, there will be conflict of space within Parliament because this forum would want office space -(Interruption)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Madam Speaker, is it in order for a Member to say we come here to look for leadership? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, no; hon. Members, do not impute ill motives on Members. 

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, we leaders should not deny leadership roles -(Laughter)– and I know everybody here is ambitious to lead. That is why we contested elections and won to come here. We even paid nomination fees to become leaders. (Laughter) So, it is not an ill-motive; anybody can be that. 

But what I am saying is that over the past years, what I have seen in Parliament, if we do not tame forums, then committees of Parliament will not be effective. Because, if for example you have a committee on climate change, why don’t you work under the Committee on Natural Resources? If you have a committee, you want to create a forum on Malaria, why don’t you work with the Committee on Social Services? Why must you come here to raise the motion so that Parliament adopts - forums are informal arrangements within Parliament. Many of such informal motions will come with the interests that come and my personal opinion is that we either strengthen the committees of Parliament to be effective, or if we find that the areas we are covering are too broad, then we create, the way we created the committee on HIV/AIDS. It became a crucial issue and, therefore, Parliament decided to create a standing committee on HIV/AIDS and they have done wonderful work.

So, really, my view is that we could postpone debating this matter until when we are ready to set up additional committees of Parliament, and my support would be that the movers of this motion should actually, first of all, insist that the health sector be separated so that we have a committee that handles Health alone and a committee that handles Education alone. They will be much more focused and we will be able to move forth. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, I have been discussing with the whips since the Ninth Parliament began and one of the areas we wanted to look at was splitting some of the committees. I will not tell you which ones, but really from institutional memory, I do not remember the Committee on HIV/AIDS giving us a report on Malaria in the Eighth Parliament or even in the Seventh. They have never. So, it is a fact that Malaria has been buried by other things. But I would want to go with hon. Baryomunsi’s proposal that the House recommits itself to fight against Malaria and then the forum can be created. Do you mind, Members? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No.

THE SPEAKER: I think that is a good way out. I put the question that this House adopts the motion as amended by hon. Baryomunsi.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PRESENTATION OF NAMES OF MEMBERS DESIGNATED TO BE MEMBERS OF THE PAN AFRICAN PARLIAMENT (UGANDA CHAPTER) IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 12 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, last week we did not complete this process. The NRM brought certain names, the Independents brought one name, but the Opposition had not brought a name for the Pan African Parliament.

3.09
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Winnie Kiiza): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I bring to the notice of the House, through you, the nomination from the Members of the Opposition to the Pan African Parliament. We wish to present the hon. Atim Cecilia Ogwal.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members, under Rule 12, the House is required to approve Members based on the distribution in the House. The Opposition has brought one name, the Independents have brought one and NRM has brought four names, but we are supposed to send five Members, according to the Protocol.

3.11
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Madam Speaker, this is the third time Uganda will be sending Members to the Pan African Parliament. You will remember in the Seventh Parliament, Uganda started on a very high note in that we had able people sent there, including the current Shadow Attorney General, the Minister of State for Finance (General Duties), Miria Matembe and hon. Mike Ssebalu. These people really made us proud to the extent that when they reached South Africa, they made us even much more proud by being elevated to leadership positions. 

Thereafter, in the Eighth Parliament, Uganda sent a very thoughtful group, albeit with a few weaknesses. This is now going to be our third time to send a contingent there. My honest appeal is that we send people of substance, who will not go there to represent parties or regions, but the country. When they reach South Africa, the rest of the other African countries will be able weigh us, saying, “If this is the cream that Kampala has sent, what about those that have remained behind?” Therefore, we have to measure up and make sure that the cream we send there are the people who will be able to stand up and talk. 

I am not a person who insinuates; I talk my mind freely. Some of us have heard names of people, in the corridors of Parliament, who have been here for the last five years, but have not been recorded anywhere in the Hansard. Now they want to go and represent us there in South Africa in the Pan African Parliament. Please, when we are making these important decisions, let us not work on the basis of regions, but capability. Let us look beyond political parties and ensure that we fly high the Ugandan flag.

NASASIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my former colleague for giving way. I want clarification from him whether by his statement he is disqualifying new Members of Parliament who have not yet been recorded in this Hansard that they cannot represent Uganda in PAP. I think we have to be careful about - let us look at people for many reasons and not only for being recorded in the Hansard, because 60 percent of this Parliament will be disqualified from going to the Pan African Parliament. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I have the following to make of the clarification that hon. John Nasasira is seeking from me: In no way do I intend to injure the chances of the new entrants to this Parliament. There are some Members who have just joined this Parliament, but from the way they stand up to articulate their issues you can see that they are men and women of substance. There is even a saying that goes: “Among your chicks you can spot which of them will be a cock.” (Laughter) So, we already know the capability of new Members of this Parliament. Moreover, I was very specific; I made reference to names of people that I have heard, but have been in this Parliament for the last five years –(Interruption)

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to my colleague and he has continuously mentioned the issue of Members having no substance. And yet I know that for one to qualify to be a Member of Parliament, they must have substance. That is why his or her electorate entrusted him or her to come here and deliberate issues on their behalf. 

Now, for the honourable member to say that we should not send people who lack substance to the Pan African Parliament, means that we have Members in this House who lack substance. Can he substantiate on that and is he in order to refer to Members of this august House as having no substance? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: All the Members are people of substance. Now, hon. Members, I had hoped that we would not have to have an election; I had hoped that we would get only five names, but now we have six. Rule 12(1) says - Oh, it was an order? Okay. Hon. Wadri.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You see, if we had not come to a logical conclusion, people would have gotten lost while reading the Hansard. I am grateful that you have given me the opportunity to complete the sentence. 

In no way am I underrating anybody in this House, but at the end of the day, you need to know that out of the 385 Members, not all will have the same first position. That is the reason why, when you look at the AFLI scorecard, we are not all at par. There are those who get 100 percent; there are those who get zero percent; and there are those who get 5 percent.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, hon. Wadri, for giving way and thank you so much, Rt hon. Speaker.  I discussed with hon. Wadri on the subject matter that he is raising at length and our rules don’t allow speculation, but that is not in any way speculation.  

Madam Speaker, without being reckless or scandalising any constituency or any elected leader, the information I wanted to seek is that we have reservations on the candidature of certain individuals from the ruling party’s side and we had informally without embarrassing anyone or scandalising this House tried to consult at length, and there are very many people we talked to on that side of the House; I can see over 60 of them -(Laughter)- yeah, and we agreed that the candidature of one Member going to the Pan-African Parliament be withdrawn in national interest.  So, we thought that an amendment would come before this Parliament today to avoid us mentioning names.  

But if the NRM Whip has not reconsidered our informal suggestion, then he will make us do the most difficult thing and say, “As Members of the Opposition, we don’t allow hon. so and so to go to the Pan-African Parliament because it will be an embarrassment to this country.” So, the information I am seeking from hon. Wadri is that is it still the same hon. Rusaniya -(Laughter)- you are talking about or you have changed your position? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER:  Order Members. Yes, Government Chief Whip. 

MR NASASIRA: Madam Speaker, we are good friends with hon. Odonga Otto and I am really surprised that among the people – as my colleague, hon. Wadri said, we have sent Members of this House to the Pan-African Parliament and this will be the third time.  The culture or the practice is that the Opposition brings one person and the ruling party brings four people.  We went through a democratic system in our caucus to select those four people and those are the people I presented before this House last week.  I am sure that you must have also used your democratic means to select one. 

Now, the Speaker told us last week that one Independent wrote to her expressing interest in representing us there. (Interruption) That is all I know. So, I am not here to judge people’s capacity to debate. I think people change and debate depending on the time. I know that we are all qualified to debate in this House. So, this is something that we have to approach very carefully. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Government Chief Whip for giving that information.  Madam Speaker, these are Members of Parliament representing Uganda in the Pan African Parliament and that is why we are having a say on it today.   They are not representing a party; hon. Cecilia Ogwal is not going to represent FDC, no.  She is going to represent Uganda in the Pan-African Parliament.  We have the ultimate veto to say, “No.” We are not just coming to say, “The parties have resolved.” 

And I am reliably informed that even in the NRM Caucus that for some positions there were no elections because the whole idea of contesting for one of those positions went unopposed. Which means even the party was not given an opportunity to clean themselves internally.  

So, I stand here; I want to be on record. I want to publicly object the candidature of hon. Rusaniya to the Pan-African Parliament and in case the House feels they should take her there, it is with the reservations it takes from this august House.

3.23
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Rt hon. Speaker.  I think our major dilemma now is that whereas Uganda is supposed to submit five Members to the Pan African Parliament, the Opposition generally has nominated one name, hon. Cecilia Ogwal and the Independents have also submitted one name. Mathematically, the ruling party would have no option, but to submit three names to add up and make the number five. In that way, we would, therefore, implore the Government Chief Whip to get back to the drawing board and review the names that he submitted last week and come up with only three names so as to solve the challenge rather than having to subject this to rigorous debate. I don’t see any other way forward but for the ruling party to submit only three names. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER:  The young children there come from Hormisdarllen Day and Boarding School in the constituency of hon. Semujju Nganda.  You are welcome. (Applause)

3.24
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Rt hon. Speaker, thank you so much for giving me this chance to speak about this - when you look at Appendix D(5) - Nominations and Election of Members, it states that: “The Political Parties or Organisations represented in the House shall submit names to the Speaker...”  So, Madam Speaker, we cannot deny that we have a multiparty system. So, the Opposition has got a right to send their own person through their own whip and so does the Movement have the chance to submit its names. So, is it in order for the Opposition to infiltrate our camp up to the extent of wanting to choose Members for us? 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, no one is disputing the right of either the Opposition or the ruling party to nominate. The issue is that we have six names and we have five positions; that is the problem we have.  

3.26
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to bring to the attention of this House Rule 12 of our Rules of Procedure - “Election of Members of Pan-African Parliament - Members of the Pan-African Parliament representing Uganda shall be elected in accordance with the rules set out in Appendix D, and such a representation shall reflect the proportional party membership in the House and take into consideration the numerical strength of the parties, gender and the interests of the Independent Members.”  

Already, the Opposition has brought one Member and the Independents have brought one Member. So, this leaves my party with three slots to be elected from among us.  I also wish to submit that unless there is contention that the Independents are not represented in this House, we go back to our caucus without embarrassing anybody here and sit and come up with the three names. 

3.27
MS ROSEMARY AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I just want to add my voice that, in order to avoid embarrassing moments like these in future, where a Member is nominated and then when we come to the House and there are objections, I think there is need to guide Members on the specific criteria. What are the real reasons or what is required of a Member of substance? We are all of substance, but what is that other addition that is required of a Member in order to qualify for PAP or any other position? 

This is really terrible; we are discussing a Member who represents a constituency and this is live, and the constituency is hearing this. So, in future, this kind of debate should be avoided and to do so, we really need to know the criteria above substance. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.29
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Although my colleague has given way, it is easy for any person to know who a person of substance is. For instance, if you have to be given a job, you are evaluated mainly on two basic things that is knowledge and experience. We can agree that you have the required knowledge by virtue of your level of education or you qualify as a Member of Parliament and, therefore, you can stand to go to the Pan African Parliament.

But when we look at your contribution, for instance, my honourable colleague, hon. Wadri was describing a person who cannot be traced for a complete five years in the Hansard sustainably -(Laughter)- and he or she is designated to go to the Pan-African Parliament. To keep quiet again? (Laughter) For heaven’s sake! I know that he was given order, but we must all accept that not all animals are equal; some are more equal than others - Animal Farm written by George Orwell - I read it in Senior 4. You will accept that the way I articulate my issues is not the way any of my honourable colleagues will speak to them. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I would also accept the idea proposed by one of our colleagues that as a party, we go back and sort ourselves out, and bring you three names because Rule 12 of our Rules of Procedure and part 3 of Rule 5 clearly provide that we must provide for other parties and Independents. There is no way this Parliament can run away from that responsibility. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.31
THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have a proposal because this is not the first time this Parliament is handling representation of Uganda outside Uganda. The precedent we have set in the past has always been that we generate a consensus here so that those Ugandans, who go to represent us, actually go as representatives of Uganda and not of the parties they belong to.

The other day, I did address the East African Legislative Assembly on this point and I am happy to report to this Parliament that the Ugandan team in Arusha, representing this House and the country in the East African Legislative Assembly, has a reputation of speaking as Ugandans. It is, therefore, important that we avoid voting, if we can, and that we generate consensus in order for these Members to know that they enjoy the support of this House.

Therefore, since I think today is not necessarily the last day for Uganda to perform this function, I propose that we postpone the decision on this matter, go back to the drawing board, carry out consultations and hopefully generate consensus and come here and do what we have always done. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I believe the consensus has to be built on the side of the ruling party because the rules enjoin me to ensure that there is one from the Opposition and one Independent. So, the consensus must come from your side because the rules cannot allow me to throw away the Independent or the Opposition. So, please assist us to do the needful. We put it in our rules and that is why I am saying the five.

3.34
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I once again would like to thank this House for the opportunity it gave me to serve it in the Pan African Parliament for the period 2003-2006. I hope I served this House to the expectations of those who voted for me.

Having said that, I would like to remind those who will be doing consultations that actually you might look at our rules, but start with the protocol of setting up the Pan African Parliament because that is where it begins, especially Article 4, which provides for the composition of Members of Pan African Parliament such that you don’t get a conflict between what we have done here and the protocol. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members. This matter is deferred. We shall put it back on the Order Paper when we are ready but take into account what has been said.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS OF THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY 7TH JUNE 2011

3.36
MS ROSEMARY NAJJEMBA (NRM, Gomba County, Gomba): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I hereby present to you the motion that thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and substantiated exposition of Government policy contained in the address delivered to Parliament in the State of the Nation Address by H.E The President of the Republic of Uganda on 7th June 2011. I beg to move.

3.37
Mr Aridru Ajedra (NRM, Arua Municipality, Arua): Madam Speaker, I stand here to second the motion by my honourable colleague, hon. Najjemba regarding the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President.

MS NAJJEMBA: Madam Speaker and hon. Members allow me congratulate you once again on your new leadership positions. I know it is never easy; just like any other competition, there are always winners and losers. I congratulate all of you for being winners. It is my prayer, therefore, that all of us make good use of these leadership positions to better the lives of Ugandans. 

Having said that, let me dwell on the Motion to thank the President for his substantiated exposition of Government policy contained in the State of the Nation Address, which he presented on 7 June 2011. 

At this point, I want to thank my party leaders for choosing me to present this Motion. Let us appreciate the President for sparing time to take us through the state of the nation, although it his obligation under Article 101(1) of the Constitution. We ought to thank him for fulfilling his constitutional obligation and we should not take it for granted because sometimes Parliament invites Government officials and they decline to come, but the President has always been with us.

You will all agree with me that the President was in a very jovial mood and that made all of us attentive and interested, save for a few people who chose to walk out - but we were not surprised. Having said that, allow me to highlight some of the policy issues as expressed by the President in his address. I will do this sector by sector. 
On the political note, the President congratulated Ugandans on peacefully participating in the electoral process, but also noted with concern that there were a few incidents of violence, which he regretted, and called upon the electoral commission and all stakeholders directly responsible, to study in depth the various reports on the exercise.

He further pointed out specific areas that needed attention so as to improve the electoral process. That is, the voters’ registration management, printing of voters’ cards and voter education.

He also informed the House that the country was able to single-handedly sponsor the presidential and parliamentary elections. This is an indicator that as a country, we can now see some light at the end of the tunnel. 

The President also emphasised the issue of discipline within our political parties, saying that discipline is as important for democracy as it is for the management of political parties –

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask Members who are in the lobby not to make noise?

MS NAJJEMBA: He requested all political parties to ensure that democracy and discipline are enshrined in all political parties’ constitutions and regulations. There is no doubt this was good counsel from our old man who has seen parties - the no party democracy - and he has seen parties come back again. The House will agree with me that we cannot talk about democracy and good governance for Uganda when our own political parties lack internal democracy and discipline. It is our responsibility - all of us - to nurture our very young multiparty democracy.

On the state of the economy, the President noted that whereas the global economic crisis has affected Uganda lately, the economy rebounded strongly in the first half of the financial year 2010/11, recording a growth rate of 9% in July to December 2010. Between July to September 2010, an annual growth rate of 5.1% was registered, while 15.1% annual growth rate was registered in October to December 2010. Although the country has some challenges, the overall economic performance is still substantially higher than the global and regional economic growth rates where prospects are expected at 2.5% and 4.5% respectively.

On inflation, the President informed the country that measures are underway to mitigate the current inflation trend and are packaged into short-term, medium and long-term actions including the provision of energy and road infrastructure. In addition, critical measures that have dampening impact on the rapid rise of both food and fuel prices have been put in place. He also informed us that his Government does not impose any taxes on food items produced and consumed in Uganda save for rice and sugar.

However, save for food prices and the exchange rates, the economy has continued to grow at 6%. The inflation rate is going down and I think we should take heart because the future looks bright. I, therefore, want to thank the President for the efforts to reduce inflation, but hasten to request him and Government to do more as the situation is still wanting.

The President re-affirmed the fact that agriculture is the backbone of the economy and highlighted that NRM Government’s goal has been to transform the three million Ugandan households from subsistence agriculture to commercial agriculture. It is on this basis that the NAADS programme was conceived and implemented, and all the changes that it has undergone are intended to aid transformation of the rain-fed agriculture to irrigation. Government has now finalised the four irrigation schemes of Mubuku, Olwenyi, Doho and Agoro. 

Now we are moving from hand hoe to mechanised agriculture, and from production for household consumption to production for the market, with associated value addition through agro-processing. 

However, the President’s and Government’s goodwill is undermined by implementation challenges and the onus is on all of us to ensure that the NAADS programme succeeds and achieves its major objective: That is, to transform peasants from subsistence agriculture to modern commercialised agriculture.

The President informed the House that there are additional measures that have been put in place to supplement the NAADS programme: The disbursement of Ugshs 15 billion in the financial institutions as a commercialised partnership challenge fund. And there is also development of the special intervention for Acholi sub region to demonstrate modern farming in partnership with the assembly of Acholi clan chiefs.

The national rice development strategy aimed at self-reliance in rice production by 2013, and targeted towards doubling rice production in the next five years. All these are efforts geared towards ensuring food security, but also towards improving household incomes for which we would like to thank the President.

On realising the need for agri-business, the President informed the country that the agricultural credit facility, which stood at Shs 90 billon in the financial year 2010/11, can be accessed through the participating commercial banks at an interest rate not exceeding 12% per annum and payable in a period not exceeding eight years. I, however, request the ministry responsible, through you, Madam Speaker, to avail us with a list of commercial banks participating in this venture, so that Members of Parliament can guide their people.

The progress has been made in the dairy sub sector with increased volumes of milk produced at an annual growth rate of 8.8% to 10%. The President reassured the country that Uganda’s milk processing capacity will increase from 463,000 litres to 710,000 litres per day and for this we wish to thank him for his positive development in the sector that employs a big section of the population. 

More so, the President and the NRM Government should be applauded for the efforts in developing the fisheries sector although amidst challenges. Some of the challenges in the fisheries sector are poor fishing methods, and using bad nets which end up catching immature fish. We also have incidents of fish poisoning. 

These challenges notwithstanding, Government with support from the Chinese Government, completed the construction and handover of a co-culture demonstration centre with an operational fish-feed mill and hatchery at Kajjansi in December 2010.

Furthermore, in the energy and mineral sector, the President informed the House that Bujagali Hydropower Project Dam power house and its associated transmission line is nearly complete. The commissioning of the first turbine of 50 megawatts is scheduled for October this year and thereafter, a full 250MW plant will be commissioned in April.

A feasibility study and engineering design for the 600MW Karuma Hydropower Project has been concluded, and the procurement process has started. Other mini-hydro projects completed and commissioned include: Mpanga, Buseruka, Ishasha, Maziba and Nyagak, which are due for this year, among others.

A total of 30 rural electrification schemes will be commissioned in September, while 19 are under construction, and I hope a few of my schemes will be commissioned. I, however, request the Government, through the Ministry of Energy, to support other sources of energy and roll them out to the rural communities as the cost of hydroelectric power is still unaffordable to the majority of our people. Other sources could be solar and others. 

I would like to thank the President for not only giving us the information on these hydropower schemes, but also for his relentless commitment to develop the energy sector. 

I further thank the President for his express concern over the rising fuel prices and he clarified that they are not the highest as some people have been portraying them. He, however, highlighted the positive measures his government is putting in place to normalise the fuel situation in the country some of which include: Refurbishing and restocking, under the Public-Private Partnership initiative; the Jinja storage tanks with 30 –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: I am rising on a point of procedure. A motion has been moved and seconded, and according to Rule 63, I am wondering whether you allowed the mover of the motion to read her speech because according to our rules, we are actually debating the speech of the President. I do not know whether we are also allowed to make speeches and that is why I am rising to be clarified because I do not know whether you had given the mover the permission to read her speech. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member is consulting her notes. (Laughter)

MS NAJJEMBA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. The President highlighted the positive measures that his government is putting in place to normalise the fuel situation in the country, some of which include: Refurbishing and restocking, under the public-private partnership initiative; the Jinja storage tanks with a 30 million capacity as a national strategic fuel reserve; and ensuring that all oil marketing companies maintain stocks of up to 10 working days. 

All these, among others, are indicators that our Government is doing everything possible to rescue the situation, and other factors are beyond our control like problems in Afghanistan, Somalia and Iraq. 

On education, considering the fact that it is key to the development of any country and that human resource is an instrumental resource in any development process, Government in a bid to develop this sector undertook some of the following interventions for the primary education: Procurement of P.4 and P.5 curriculum, construction of teachers’ houses in the 80 schools in Arua and Nebbi, admission of more pupils in schools in the war-affected areas, signing of customised performance target contracts by 95 percent of headteachers and their deputies, and payment of hardship allowances to teachers in hard-to-reach areas. I wish to inform this House that Gomba District is also one of those hard-to-reach areas and should always be considered. 

Whereas I appreciate this effort, allow me mention a few challenges we still have in the education sector: The overcrowded classrooms, lack of sanitation facilities in some areas, weak school management committees and PTAs, low morale of our teachers, laxity of some parents to give children the necessary requirements, including food, and all these aggravated by lack of inspection, poor pay and unfair housing conditions for the teachers.

Under the USE, the President has also informed us that a lot is being done and funds have been disbursed to ensure that the programme succeeds. We are all stakeholders and we should all do our part.

Looking at health, the President reaffirmed his commitment to the improvement of health service delivery all over the country. This, he said, will be achieved through the implementation of the five-year health sector strategic and investment plan that focuses on interventions in priority areas aimed at reducing morbidity and mortality. 

Government’s emphasis is on the delivery of the minimum healthcare package that includes: Health promotion, disease prevention and community health initiative, maternal and child health, nutrition and prevention, management and control of communicable diseases. 

Allow me to appreciate the Ministry of Health for the significant achievements registered, especially in the Malaria control through Information, Education and Communication (IEC) interventions and the distribution of mosquito nets. 

I wish to thank our colleagues who brought the motion on Malaria and also the House for considering amending it to suit our situation. I also commend the development partners and all stakeholders for the different roles in the fight against Malaria. 

In his address, the President informed the House about the positive developments in the health infrastructure. The rehabilitation and re-equipping of all existing medical facilities and staff houses - some of the health facilities that underwent partial rehabilitation include: Nebbi, Apac, Moroto and Bududa to mention but a few.

We also want to appreciate the President’s effort in dealing with medicine shortages by establishing a health service monitoring group in his office to strengthen inspection and expose drug theft. I wish to request, through you, Madam Speaker, that that team works faithfully and should resist corruption tendencies. 

I also wish to request that Government provides enough and timely medicine to our health facilities because sometimes it is not that they are stolen, but they are not adequate. On this, allow me to appeal to my colleagues, the MPs, to embark on our oversight role as a strategy to deal with these health care challenges.

On the labour and employment sector, the President informed us that the national employment policy was launched on 1 May 2011, Labour Day. We wish to thank the President and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for that initiative. We know that there are many Ugandans abroad doing a lot of work and they are bringing in a lot of money. In December 2010, those Ugandans remitted a total of US$ 5 million.

Madam Speaker, allow me to talk about the transport sector as per the address given to us by the President. There is no doubt that it is experiencing transformation. The country right now has many roads under construction while others are underway. We only appeal to the new minister to speed up these works and also improve on the quality of work.

The Uganda National Roads Authority, the district, urban and community access road agencies to which Shs 283 billion was disbursed, should continue the good work. We need value for money. There are so many other roads that have been completed and the railway line that is from Tororo to Pakwach is being worked on; Kampala-Kasese is underway, and we wish to applaud the President and his government for all those initiatives.  

The airport that is being fenced in Gulu and the ones to be started on in Kasese and Masindi, we wish to thank the Government for all those initiatives that will go a long way to improve the transport sector.

As we begin to debate the President’s State of the Nation Address - and I know very many of us are going to debate it - I request that we try to give remedies to the challenges that our country is facing and not to only point accusing fingers. One writer, Robert Sholer, in his book: “Tough times never last but tough people do,” while commenting on the economic crisis in the United States said: “Politicians used the depressed state of the economy to their advantage. It proved a great opportunity to highlight the failures, shortcomings and faults of the opposite political party. Everybody was fixing the blame; nobody was fixing the problem. The problems persisted; they grew; the recession was rampant across the country until nearly everybody was affected by it. No one was immune….”

Madam Speaker, tough times never last, but tough people do. Let us all become tough and fight the tough times without apportioning blame. Together we can make Uganda a better place for us, our children and the generations to come. I beg to move.

3.59
MR GABRIEL AJEDRA (NRM, Arua Municipality, Arua): Madam Speaker, I stand to thank H.E. the President, for delivering his speech on 7 June 2011.

I am happy to note that there are a number of policy issues that were laid before the country. I am also happy about the achievements that Government registered over the past few years.

I would like to register my appreciation particularly in regard to Government’s focus on the issue of energy. Electricity was discovered in the 15th Century, but as the President said, Uganda consumes less than 80 kilowatts on per-capita basis. Therefore, this tells us that we will not develop until we resolve the issues of power in this country. You will all agree with me that in most of our homes, most of the appliances are run by power, which makes it an essential product. But it is also true that power is essential for agricultural development as well as for the industrial sector.

I am happy to also note that Karuma Power Dam is finally coming on stream. That will go a long way to address the shortage of power in this country. I come from Arua Municipality, a town that is perpetually in darkness for six months out of the 12 months in a year. That tells you further that without power, we cannot develop. So, it is important that Government directs its attention on the issue of increasing the per capita power consumption in this country.

The other issue that I would like to address myself to is transport, which is a very important sector. There are so many types of transport: Air, water, road, and railway transport. But history has it that there are only two forms of transport that are cheap; water and railway transport. Most countries that have developed have been able to do so because they have efficient railway and water transport. Though we have a lot of water bodies, they are not being utilised for water transport. Lake Victoria is one; Lake Albert is another. We could decide to have most of our heavy goods moved on water and by railway.

As we speak, the railway transport has almost collapsed. That is one of the reasons why we have high costs of doing business in Uganda. I would, however, like to note that Government has finally decided to reinstate the water and railway transport systems. These will go a long way in trying to bring the costs of doing business in Uganda down.

Let me commend my honourable colleague, the former Minister of Works and Transport, John Nasasira, for doing an excellent job in the road sector -(Laughter)- let me substantiate on that. You will all agree with me that not long ago, it used to take a person three to four days to travel from Kampala to Arua. But today, in about five to six, hours you will be in Arua. We have one of the best roads in this country. (Applause) Sometimes we take things for granted, but we need to appreciate efforts in regard to the good work done. If you travel on the road from Jinja to Bugiri up to Busia and Malaba towns, you see an excellent road, which was constructed during his tenure.

However, I would like to say that there is still a lot of effort needed for us to upgrade our road system, particularly in Kampala, though I am happy to note that the President said in that address that in the next three years, the Kampala road network will be handled. That is very important because these roads were designed to last for about 50 years - way back before Independence. But as we speak, no amount of patching or rehabilitation will take the road network in Kampala to any good levels. Therefore, it is proper that as Parliament, we allocate a substantial amount of money towards improving the road network in Kampala. Many of you I am sure have been to many places in outside countries; look at the road networks in those countries; it is not near to what we have in Kampala. It is because our road network in Kampala has reached its design life. Literally, the network is dead; we cannot sustain it. This means we have to do something drastic to improve the road network in Kampala.

I would like to say that the traffic congestion is not only sustained by the potholes - we should also acknowledge the fact that there has been sufficient growth of traffic in Kampala to the extent that we do not have a good road network to handle this traffic. That means, as a country, we need to pump a lot of money into the infrastructure development of this city.

One day, while in one of the Internet cafes in town, I came across one of the open drains. But when I looked inside, I realised that the size of the pipe that carries the drainage is very small. It made me think that the reason we experience a lot of floods in Kampala is because our drainage network in the city has outlived its purpose. Therefore, there should be a deliberate policy and decision by Government to upgrade the drainage system in the city.

Madam Speaker, there are two issues I would like to bring onto the Floor, which I believe are a concern to the nation: One of these is corruption, which the President talked about. Corruption is like cancer; it is a matter of time and it will put the person attacked down. Yes, we can look at it as a minor issue, but it goes to the core of the fabric of our society. 

Yesterday, I had the opportunity to pay a courtesy visit to the LC V Chairman of Arua District. But while with him, one of the things he talked about was the issue of corruption and the slow implementation of Government programmes. We had a lengthy discussion in which I gave my suggestions on these issues. But I also noticed that one of the causes of slow implementation of Government programmes in this country is within our physical and financial regulations, and also in our Public Procurement and Assets Disposal Act. 

You cannot have a situation where funds are sent to the districts in September for the first quarter of the financial year and you expect them to perform. In procurement, there is a timeframe within which you cannot circumvent. Procurement takes a minimum of three to four months. So, one of the financial regulations says that you cannot go out to tender until you have received the funds. The funds are received in September, the procurement process starts in October and by December, you are still trying to procure a service and half of the year is gone. How do you expect implementation of Government programmes? There is need for us as Parliament and also the Ministry of Finance to look at some of the regulations and financial procedures that apply to local governments and also the Central Government. 

Finally, I just want to borrow an experience from Botswana where I was working. The financial regulations said that you can go out to tender, but you must not commit Government. In other words, the accounting officer must not sign and commit Government until the funds are resident in the procuring entity, which in my view is a better solution because if you allowed all the entities, including the local governments, to do the procurement activities starting from July like now, even if the funds came in September, there would be money available to be able to commit Government. But to say that you have to wait for funds to be physically in the department or in the entity before going out to tender is, in my view, one of the reasons why we have slow implementation of Government programmes. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this time to be able to make my comments on the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President. I believe it is an excellent document, which can be used as a launching pad for us, and for this particular Parliament to be able to improve delivery of Government services. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank the movers. Let me invite the Leader of the Opposition to make his response. 

4.11
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, I know that Members have come in to listen to us, but we want to propose that in the interest of understanding our document very well, we make our response tomorrow. The reason is simple; the copies are ready, but we just want to present immediately after Communication from the Chair so that you can understand what we are putting across. And it should be the only item so that you listen in good faith, and that is what we are looking forward to. Otherwise, the document is available, in English. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the Speaker has got a programme to complete and I want to give enough time to Members of Parliament. I have got to go and deal with the Budget; we must complete that process by the end of August. Please, assist me and deliver your response now. The Members are awake; I do not see anybody sleeping. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to make a response and I hope you will have the stamina. It is with great honour that I present the Opposition’s response to the State of the Nation Address to this august House this afternoon. Let me first convey my personal congratulations and best wishes to you, Madam Speaker and your deputy, for your election to this high office. By all measures, this office requires the occupants to exhibit integrity, transparency and to promote methods of work that will restore faith in this august House. So far, I have no doubt in my mind that the two of you have the requisite qualities and you can, therefore, rest assured of my support in this regard.

May I sincerely congratulate all the Members of the Ninth Parliament, upon the confidence entrusted to them by their electorate, more especially those who won their election genuinely! In a special way, I extend tribute to my predecessor, hon. Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo, for steering the Opposition in the Eighth Parliament. I wish him the best in his next assignments.

The essence of the State of the Nation Address is that it presents a significant opportunity for the President to speak to the nation and the world, transcending the political party divides, highlighting challenges facing the nation and proposing policy initiatives to tackle such challenges. It also gives the President chance to give accountability of what has been done in the previous year with the resources approved by Parliament.

The State of the Nation Address should, therefore, not just be a Government report card on its achievements. Rather, it should present an assessment of the progress, challenges and opportunities, along with a blueprint of how Government, working with the people, intends to move forward. This is the approach that would inspire and arouse people’s interest in governance and naturally get them mobilised for the political and development goals of Government.

We expected the President to move away, for a while, from the usual rhetoric, and put forward a comprehensive roadmap to revamp critical processes. We expected to see proposals for:

i)	The reform of budget processes; 
ii)	how to reduce opportunities for corruption; 
iii)	reversing the trend of electoral contests being turned into bidding wars with expensive and violent campaigns;
iv)	increasing public vigilance to deter and detect commission of graft;
v)	improving meritocracy in the public service, target selected departments and agencies of Government for cleansing;
vi)	increasing the speed and efficiency in prosecuting and punishing the corrupt, and stiffening sanctions against corruption;
vii)	how to arrest the current depreciation of the Uganda shilling; and 
viii)	clearly indicating what the major driver of our economy is; whether it is agriculture, industry or the service sector, and how resource allocation has been informed by that fact. 

Madam Speaker, as you are aware, this is the first year of this term of Government, led by the same President. You are also aware that the same President failed to deliver and account on his manifesto pledges in the last term. We enumerated these in detail in our responses last year. Yes, I can hear the cynics say, “He delivered, and that is why he was re-elected.” How he was re-elected is completely a different chapter that cannot be dealt with in this short address. The fact remains that many promises will never see the light, having served the purposes for which they were made. 

This is why we were not given a comprehensive report on these important undertakings. Even as the President emphasises that the promises in his election manifesto form a binding contract between Government and the people. Only last year, for example, the President promised to deal with the corrupt public officials who frustrate investors by asking for bribes or shares, and he promised to enhance seed multiplication through a partnership between Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and Uganda Prisons. He further promised to investigate the shoddy work on the dams in Karamoja. It is not a surprise that no mention is made on such important undertakings. 

This list of unfulfilled commitments simply adds on to the already long list which included, among others:

•	A promise to stand for the second and last term in 2001.
•	Practising zero tolerance to corruption.
•	Transforming rural households from subsistence agriculture to commercialised farming.
•	Prosperity-For-All, where each family would earn Shs 20 million per year.
•	Promoting the culture of constitutionalism and the rule of law.
•	Fully equipping at least one hospital or health centre IV with a doctor, theatre, ambulance and maternity ward in each constituency.
•	Setting up a national social health insurance scheme.
•	Putting a reliable UBC, that is Uganda Broadcasting Corporation and TV, signal in every part of Uganda.
•	Afforestation of all the bare hills in Uganda; and
•	Implementing the Greater Kampala Transport Master Plan.

Franklin Roosevelt once argued: “Repetition does not translate a lie into truth.” The several unfulfilled promises made by the NRM Government to Ugandans were not delivered. Good and responsible leadership demands that we don’t just churn out promises for purposes of votes and abandon them soon after elections. We should at all times be truthful in our commitment to Ugandans if we mean good for this country. Fortunately, Ugandans have since noticed this. Unfortunately, they have been kept disempowered from speaking out and taking appropriate action.

The Opposition is concerned about the continued criminalisation of political party activities by the NRM Government. This clearly indicates failure by this Government to nourish and nurture the young multi-party political dispensation and is greatly impeding the Opposition’s efforts to reach out and mobilise the masses. Instead of engaging the Opposition in public debate, the NRM has resorted to manipulation of the law to persecute the Opposition. They continue to use underhand methods to coerce voters to vote the NRM party. They also continue to give Ugandans the false impression that voting the NRM party is the only way development will reach their areas. It is shameful and we must condemn those underhand actions, here and now, if we are to have a peaceful country!

The media is regarded as the fourth arm of state, due to its role as guardians of public interest; as a watchdog on the activities of Government. However, the NRM Government has of recent become less tolerant to the media as is common with most governments that do not want to leave power. In fact, President Museveni has openly come out to label some media houses, both local and foreign, as enemies of Uganda’s recovery, castigating them for giving platform to the Opposition to overthrow Government.

The Ninth Parliament opens at a critical time when the media is under immense pressure from Government over what it calls biased reporting, simply because it covers Opposition activities. The NRM views the articulation of popular interests and critical analysis or reporting by the media as support for the Opposition. Reports and images in the media which contradict President Museveni’s claim that Uganda is a democracy where the will of the people is respected, have not been received well by his Government.

As the NRM leaders try to hide behind their power to entrench themselves into power, they have illegally accumulated wealth and perpetuated all kinds of human rights abuses. Of course, journalists face Police harassment, threats of torture and intimidation of media houses facing threats of closure. Government has resorted to using the media and obsolete penal laws to prosecute journalists, restrict their liberty to work and revoke broadcasting licences of media houses without due process. 

Government is employing sweeping measures and making broad assertions to crack down on critical media. Uganda Communications Commission, which is legally mandated to supervise media houses, is used as a prohibitive arm of the state to curtail free expression. While some media houses have tried to stand up to the pressure, others have curved in and censored themselves because they don’t want to get in trouble with Government. They fear to be closed down and their licences suspended. So, some of the independent journalists have been silenced.

The Opposition condemns the culture of impunity and escalation of violence during the campaign period. Specifically, we condemn the intimidation, harassment and muzzling of Opposition candidates, bribery and denying them space on radios to conduct their political campaigns. We further condemn Police harassment of the media and attempts by Government to stifle the freedom of the press. This trend, if not arrested, will derail our cherished democracy and make Ugandans get leaders who have distinguished themselves by their long proven ability to be party warlords and distributors of patronage rather than by their ability to serve the public interest.

It is unfortunate that leaders in Government only look at democracy in terms of elections. Democracy is not only about free and fair elections, which of course are still deluding us, but encompasses freedom of speech, freedom of assembly, clear rule of law, independent institutions and checks and balances on all the elected officials. 

There are a number of characteristics of democracy, among which are the holding of periodic free and fair elections and term limits. However, most of the sit-tight leaders who pretend that their countries are democracies manipulate their countries’ constitutions to extend their term limits, and then conduct sham elections that return them to power as often as they stand for the elections. We, therefore, call upon all Ugandans to stand firm, rise up and send a strong signal to NRM leaders that they have suffered enough of its abuse of state resources funded by tax payers to serve its partisan interests. 

We have no doubt in our minds that the military had earned people’s trust as they spearheaded the liberation struggle. However, the continued involvement of some senior Army officers in the electoral process is eroding this trust. In addition, the Police, which is supposed to protect Ugandans, has instead been diverted to protecting the NRM political leaders. Some of the Internal Security Officers and RDCs in the districts have become campaign agents of the NRM, thus affecting the quality of this multiparty democracy. 

We, therefore, call upon our national Army, Police and other security agencies to refrain from engaging in partisan operations, but abide by their constitutional mandate of protecting the lives of all citizens and their property. We further recommend that the pay of the rank–and-file in the forces be revisited to match the rising cost of living.

Constitutionalism and the rule of law 

In recent years, parliaments everywhere have come under intense criticism and many times, attracted cynicism and indifference. Our Parliament has not escaped this either. Indeed, the public image of our Parliament has plummeted in the recent past owing to our failure to effectively hold Government accountable, and to make sure that individuals caught red-handed in the wastage of public resources, face the wrath of the law.  

Parliamentary democracy demands many virtues. It demands not only the ability and devotion to work, but also and more importantly, cooperation, self-discipline and restraint. Parliament needs people with passion, commitment and the vision to debate, bring about ideas and reforms that will have a positive impact on the people we represent. This is the only way we can promote constitutionalism in our country.

Aristotle once argued that any form of government is good, as long as the leader who exercises power ultimately seeks the good of all, rather than his own personal interests. As political leaders, therefore, we ought to know that we are answerable to the 33 million Ugandans, and must be committed at all times to national interest first, and our self-interest last. This should be emulated by all those in leadership.

Those of us in the Opposition know well that the electorate will not accept individuals or parties who put their own interests before that of their electorate. That is why Ugandans are increasingly demanding for a Parliament that is action-oriented rather than just a talking shop. The performance of this Ninth Parliament will ultimately not be measured by the number of motions or resolutions we pass, but by the relevance of these motions and resolutions to the lives of voters – how they get translated into people’s welfare and how we hold the Executive answerable for failure to deliver that welfare.

It is, therefore, not by accident that this Parliament features many new breeds and a new generation of parliamentarians. To the extent that their elections were genuine, it shows that Ugandans are saying, “We want new people with fresh ideas and a different approach”. They want change in their lives. They want ideas, solutions, productivity, initiative and greater representation irrespective of which side you sit in the House. I, therefore, urge you, honourable members, not to let them down in whatever capacity you were called to serve. I also call upon His Excellency, the President, not to cajole you away from that enormous undertaking.

Madam Speaker, my colleagues and I have a huge responsibility of presenting a credible opposition to this Government. You are aware we are small in numerical strength, but I must assure you that we are rich in spirit, enthusiasm and hope. We will continue to push Government to follow the right path, and to stop misusing state resources to entrench its hold onto power. We shall continuously warn them on the dangers of undermining state institutions. We will also remind them that presidential term limits are good for nurturing democracy and must be reinstated. (Applause)

We shall be proud to serve in this Parliament, only if it becomes a dynamic forum to articulate people’s views; if it derives its strength from discussion of every point of view before arriving at a consensus; and if it believes in diversity as a source of strength. This diversity will only be built if we exhibit tolerance for divergent views. This is the only way we can deliver our mandate in the public interest. 

The greatest enemy we have as a nation, which we must overcome, is inside us. The enemy to beat is within us. When we put ourselves above the country and when we put profit above fairness; when we spread division instead of unity; when we think of our political opponents as enemies and when we substitute politics for patriotism at the hour of need; that is the enemy within ourselves.

We on this side of the House, hereby pledge our total support for good decisions that will be made transparently and for initiatives towards building consensus around issues aimed at addressing the needs of the citizenry for positive development. In the same vein, however, we pledge to oppose any decision that is not in the best interest of the welfare of Ugandans. (Applause)

We will take debate seriously; we will trust everyone at face value; but we will not allow anyone to undermine our judgment, and push our good faith to the limits. 

Our walk-out during the State of the Nation Address was just a natural response to such a situation. We promise you today, that we will live by those two important commitments for the good of the citizens. That is, to support good, and to oppose bad, with all our energies. (Applause)

Article 85(1) of our Constitution provides that Parliament will determine its own emoluments. This was made in good faith as it was intended to stop the Executive from stifling Parliament in the performance of its duties. However, political party patronage has already weakened this well meant checkpoint. Our electorates are already accusing this Parliament of being insensitive to the plight and welfare of other public and political servants.

In order to stop this unending mistrust, we propose and support the idea that an independent commission for remuneration of all public officers be set up. This was done in South Africa and it works well. In other countries, such as Kenya and Zimbabwe, salaries and remuneration commissions have been incorporated in their national constitutions. We are confident that if such a commission is carefully instituted, such an independent benefit-setting agency will go a long way to protect the independence and sanctity of Parliament. However, a careful study should be undertaken as to how this can be done in order not to undermine the spirit of the Constitution.

The state of our nation

The address by President Museveni was a desperate attempt to persuade Ugandans that all is well, whereas facts indicate otherwise. He could not explain why a country so blessed with natural resources, a favourable climate and such immense talent should not have done better than we did. He cited statistics that appeared impressive, when in reality, Ugandans in general are worse off today than they were in the previous year. 

The President avoided the realities about the increasing trend on the following: 

•	A debt hurdle which may lead our country into another debt trap;
•	Public spending without equitable distribution, increasing the gap and the disparity between the rich and the poor;
•	The increase in accumulated deficit on the Consolidated Fund from Shs 3,784 billion in 2008/09 to Shs 5,165 billion today, which  raises Government’s borrowing costs, and diverts resources from  social services like health, affecting the standards of living;
•	Ratio of health workers to patients, and quality of healthcare;
•	Child malnutrition;
•	Maternal mortality;
•	 School drop-outs;
•	Disparity between population growth rate of 3.2 percent per annum and the growth in agricultural output of 0.9 percent per annum, which is increasing the number of food-insecure people;
•	Torture victims and illegal arrests; and
•	Outright graft among the political class.

Monetary sector

The President lamented about the increase in lending rates and interest on treasury bills and feigned ignorance of the real problem causing this. He also says the Bank of Uganda (BoU) had to fight in the money market, to “stem excess liquidity”. 

The major cause, however, was the excessive unbudgeted expenditure on elections and the military, which the Governor of the BoU has since linked to erratic policies and financial indiscipline. This is what forced the BoU to fork out Shs 419 billion to service interest on treasury bills in order to remove the excess liquidity in the economy to dampen the inflationary pressures. 

However, on his part, the Governor of Bank of Uganda owes Ugandans an explanation on why he closed his eyes when these things were happening, yet he is empowered by the Constitution to put his foot down.

GDP statistics

The ordinary person in Uganda is neither interested in high GDP nor statistics of poverty reduction. They are concerned about their children having breakfast before going to school, or having lunch at school, or access to treatment in the current expensive private clinics, because most Government health centres neither have drugs nor qualified health workers. Similarly, expectant mothers are concerned about where to find midwives to handle them well during delivery; while the peasant farmers are concerned about a good price for their produce given the impassable community and feeder roads today.

If the above elements are absent, then any talk of statistics on poverty reduction will be meaningless. People do not eat statistics; they eat food. (Laughter) Impressive GDP statistics do not treat people. Treatment is given by qualified health workers in well equipped health centres, using appropriate drugs. Statistics on GDP are only meaningful when reflected in the welfare of citizens.

Whereas taxpayers are obliged to pay taxes, they have a right to better services from those taxes and proper accountability thereof. However, many times, the priorities of the NRM Government are simply not in sync with the needs of citizens. You will remember when in this Parliament, Government struggled without success, to justify allocation of money for construction of a modern market in a foreign country when local markets were catching fire! The money was passed but the market has never been built. We are not sure whether this is the much talked about patriotism.

The politicians who control Government resources most times allocate resources based on ‘political gains’ rather than economic rationale. They think they have every right to do as they please, irrespective of people’s aspirations. The result is simple: Wasteful public spending which does not translate into public welfare. This is why citizens dread paying taxes, for they see no reason for doing so.

Inflation

The Ninth Parliament opens at a time when the public has come to believe that our oversight function is in abeyance due to the Executive dominance. It opens when there is a huge divide between the rich and the poor, with a small part of the population swimming in abundance as the majority are wallowing in misery. It also opens at a time when inflation is a double digit, affecting public servants and wage earners who earn fixed income. 

The high inflation consolidates the widening wealth gap as low-income earners feel the pinch more than the rich. It also curtails investments due to low returns on investment and affects business planning and strategic investment decisions. The high cost of living for fixed salary and wage earners is further affected by high taxes which increase dependence on one’s gross pay, further reducing consumer expenditure.

The President finally admitted that the main driver of inflation was food prices and that it was manageable. He agrees that it is the role of Government to manage it. Whoever castigated the “walk-to-work” claiming that inflation was beyond Government’s control was proved wrong by the President that day. The protest was against Government’s inaction on rising food prices, a matter that is indeed within its control. For once, we thank the President for clearing the air and request him unconditionally to release all those being persecuted for speaking out on Government’s inaction and deal with the supply chain bottlenecks. (Applause)

Whereas the economy continues to register rising commodity prices, the President just mentions in passing that Government is conscious about the concerns of low wages paid to public servants and promises to come up with a pay reform policy. Nothing is mentioned about revising the pay cheques of the public servants to match the pace of current inflation. These are the same public servants who suffer the Pay As You Earn (PAYE) tax.

Uganda’s PAYE threshold remains the lowest in the region, at Shs 130,000. It was fixed in 1997 when the value of the Uganda shilling and cost of living were low. It no longer reflects the economic reality of prices and the value of the shilling. Over the years, and in good faith, there has been strong agitation for increase of the PAYE threshold. However, this has been resisted by Government, on the pretext that budget pressures are high, with no room for action. Instead, employees were further subjected to the Local Service Tax (LST) on the same income. 

PAYE is levied on salaried people who have nowhere to hide from the taxman.  It is easy to collect and the tax payers in this category are a vulnerable lot. The low PAYE threshold means that low income earners, majority of who are teachers and nurses, are easily brought into the tax net yet they are the lowest paid. This stifles their capacity to save, invest and consume. This means the income-redistributive capacity, as expected of any good tax, is lacking in PAYE in the current form. The poor end up financing the survival of the rich.

The failure by the NRM Government to make the necessary PAYE reforms depicts its insensitivity to low income earners’ needs and the ‘short-termist’ approach that only focuses on revenue maximisation at the expense of other wider objects of taxation, such as wealth redistribution.

There is no doubt that the Public Service of Uganda has been loyal and committed to duty even in difficult times. But it is now clear that inflation and stagnant salaries have tremendously eroded the purchasing power of these public employees. Time and again, Government tells them there is no money to increase their salaries yet it continues to spend money on non-priority areas, such as military spending on jets, Cabinet expansion and creation of more districts rather than reward these patriotic Ugandans with the long awaited and deserved salary increments. We are also aware that Government has even failed to come up with the minimum wage policy for workers. The country’s minimum wage of Shs 6,000 per month was last set in 1984 under the Obote II regime and currently, different employers pay their workers as they please. The minimum wage recommendation of Shs 53,000 proposed way back by the Minimum Wage Advisory Board has been under consideration by the President’s Office since the year 2000. It has never seen the light of the day and this minimum wage is already overtaken by the rising costs. 

Let us remember that when Government fails to keep the pace of salaries and wages with inflation, it has far reaching repercussions, as it increases the incidence of corruption. However, it seems our Government is doing this to deliberately hoodwink the citizens that it is committed to their cause and it is the public servants who are failing them. 

Economic growth is meant to contribute to general prosperity of the people by increasing their quality of life. However, while they are always told that the economy is growing at a higher rate, the majority of the citizens are excluded from the benefits of that growth, and inequality is on the increase. It is also true that Uganda’s growth path has created opportunities deliberately skewed in favour of urban areas of central and western regions, leaving behind rural areas and northern and eastern Uganda, where poverty levels are now simply unbearable. It seems that as long as 20 percent of the population are benefiting from growth, the President is comfortable. He does not care whether that growth trickles down to the common person in form of health, education, roads and clean water. That is why he says that he was surprised that many people do not see the nine percent growth, as if “they seem not to be seeing construction going on in Kampala and Entebbe areas in central Uganda”. We suspect the President was wrongly advised that economic growth and economic development is one and the same thing, and that once you have growth, the economy automatically becomes a developed and modern one. He believes that once you have buildings, even if they replace all the wetlands, such as the one being extinguished at the Spear Motors junction, in Nakawa, despite protests from the public and Parliament, it means the country is developing. 

Instead of restoring the fundamentals of economic growth, this Government is engaged in stimulus spending. The President and his party are busy expanding the Cabinet from the constitutional limit to over 80, and endlessly creating districts, thereby increasing public expenditure, while local governments are facing increasing financial pressure and are unable to meet their expanded and diversified roles because they do not have any direct revenue raising opportunities. As a result, the country is on the verge of being the object of universal disapprobation, which will force us to hang our heads in national shame, because the welfare of our rural and urban poor citizens cannot be improved.

Madam Speaker, empowering people means more than just having elections every five years; it means extending their contact with Government beyond elections, to its daily workings, and this enables them to inform Government policies by their insight. A high economic growth rate amidst exclusion is not sustainable, for it embodies discrimination, which catalyses resentment and conflict. We must come out boldly and tell our leaders that waste is bad and wrong; that theft is immoral; that gluttony is an abomination. It is a trespass on the tax payers’ purse. This is undemocratic and unacceptable, and it must end immediately.

In our view, the removal of excise duty on kerosene, which we have been advocating for, and remitting of the import duty on hoes was a gimmick only intended to hoodwink the rural and urban poor that the NRM Government cares about them. Giving a free hoe to each family, rather than remitting taxes on hoes, as we have been advocating, is the only immediate intervention to boost agricultural production and ensure food security, as we prepare for mechanisation. In any case, remittance of taxes on hoes is no guarantee that the price of a hoe will come down given the current economic dynamics. 

We believe the problem with the taxes in Uganda is not the amount paid but the ad valorem tax regime used. The use of the ad valorem tax regime means that the tax is imposed at the time of transaction. As a result, the tax that was imposed on the budget day has since changed because the dollar rate has since moved from Shs 2,380 to over Shs 2,700. This equally affects the fuel products. The net effect, therefore, is that removal of excise duty on kerosene has not changed the price of a litre of kerosene to the rural and urban poor. Further, there is no sense in removing tax on kerosene, and keeping tax on petrol and diesel, which is used in transporting the kerosene to the villages. (Applause) That is the bigger tax, which keeps the price of kerosene up and rising. That is why the whole proposal was simply a face-saving gimmick, which some of the East African presidents seem to have jointly agreed to deploy to appease their populations, cool down protests, and remove their eyes from the bigger picture. 

The Opposition believes in a strong society where we owe obligations to each other, and where the sum of our actions always adds up to the kind of society we all want to live in. We owe our people a better choice and a different vision, and will always support the direction of resources to the disadvantaged in society.
 
We, therefore, promise to be conscious stewards with the limited resources of our state. This obligation will be outlined in our forthcoming budget response, where we will show you how we intend to do things differently by cutting down spending, help create more jobs and prosperity, reform Government programmes and act responsibly in the use of state resources.  

Madam Speaker, we propose that there is need to:

•	gain control over the domestic economy, by supporting the private sector as the engine of economic growth;

•	have a general consensus on the national development plan;

•	make agriculture our main line of defense against poverty and food security, through increased funding to the sector;

•	create industries, which are viable in the long-term and do not require constant subsidies to survive, such as is the case with Phoenix Logistics, in order to create jobs;

•	have a public transportation and infrastructure plan;

•	fund rural empowerment to provide employment of the 40,000 students who graduate from our tertiary institutions every year. This would enable them be productive in their areas of origin;

•	hasten the public-private partnership legislation;

•	improve the predictability, reliability and efficiency of our business environment for those who want to invest;

•	do annual revision of the PAYE threshold and the minimum wage to march the changes in the value of the Uganda shilling. The salary increment should be over and above the current double-digit inflation and PAYE threshold to at least Shs 350,000;

•	review the entire remuneration structure through an independent commission;

•	implement the pay and pension reforms, and downsize Government, to reduce public administration expenditure;

•	urgently put in place petroleum legislation on resource and revenue management, to stream line how oil revenues will be injected into the economy without causing distortions;

•	reduce the number of the ministers to what is provided for in the Constitution;

•	reduce other political appointments and rationalize public employees;

•	address the shortcomings in our electoral system to make democracy meaningful to the citizens; 

•	rationalize the creation of districts; and

•	change the tax regime on essential commodities and petroleum products.

Agriculture

Agriculture is the core of the livelihood of most households in Uganda. It is the engine for overall economic growth and the single most important pathway out of rural poverty. With nearly three quarters of the Ugandan households’ dependant on agriculture, the sector should be made central to Uganda Government’s strategy for meeting its twin challenge of reducing poverty and fostering broader economic growth. The worsening poverty and food insecurity today is due to the poor performance in the sector.

In a country like Uganda, which is still in the early stages of development and economic transformation, agriculture growth has powerful leverage on the economy, because it still accounts for a large share of national income, employment and foreign trade. Compared to the growth in other sectors, agricultural growth has been shown to be more effective at reducing poverty, especially in countries with large agricultural sectors and a large concentration of agricultural households among the poor, than any other sectors.

Therefore, despite the importance of agriculture, the NRM Government has not handled it well. It is an irony that, while the President accepts in his address that “Agriculture is the backbone of our economy”, the sector has suffered the greatest decline in its contribution to GDP, from 51 percent in 1990 to 13.9 percent currently, during his tenure as President. While total GDP has increased over the years, real annual growth in agriculture has been on the decline, to the current 0.9 percent, with the crop sector registering a -15.8 percent growth rate. This rate is insufficient to meet the needs of the rapidly growing population now standing at 3.4 percent. As a result, most citizens are food-insecure.

The 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda pledged to ensure food and nutrition security in Uganda. This was adopted in the 2003 Uganda Food and Nutrition Policy (UFNP), which expressly recognized the human right for adequate food security for all. However, in the State of Uganda’s Population Report, 2010, it was estimated that 1.9 million people in Uganda are food-insecure while six million are at the risk of becoming insecure. Out of the children who are under age five, 22 percent are stunted, seven percent are wasted, 10 percent are underweight, and 33 percent are anaemic. This was further compounded by the recent Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) report, which reveals that nine million Ugandans are currently facing an acute food shortage.
 
The proportion of the population, who are food-insecure over the years, disproves the purported general downward poverty trends in Uganda. Indeed, experts from the Uganda National Programmes of Action (NAPA) recently observed that Uganda may be unable to feed its people in the coming years because the population growth is not being matched by an increase in cultivated land. Surely, a country which cannot feed its people cannot be a proud one. It is a country that has misery. This is unfortunate, because in the 1960s, Uganda was well known as the food basket of Africa due to its good soils, dependable rainfall, and relatively high agricultural production and supportive policies.

Madam Speaker, for over a decade, the NRM leaders continue to blame low crop yield on weather, yet we have large expanses of water reservoirs, and most of the rainwater is wasted away because of poor water harvesting mechanisms. For lack of a better description, we can call this “part-time” thinking, because the problem of agriculture in Uganda is not drought, but rather lack of planning, management and monitoring, as evidence has shown.

In his 2010 State of the Nation Address, President Museveni attributed inadequate growth in the agriculture sector to Government’s continuous reliance on weather and insufficient linkages to value addition and market opportunities, and promised to handle the problem. This year, H.E. the President, as he usually does, blamed the poor performance of agriculture, in particular, low food production, on poor rainfall and drought. Instead of informing Ugandans how far his Government has gone to address the problem, he still outlines plans that will not be implemented.

Madam Speaker, the President reported that the NRM Government has been able to fundamentally transform the three million households in subsistence agriculture to commercialised agriculture. He further said that this transformation entailed moving away from rain-fed agriculture to irrigation; from the hand-hoe to mechanised agriculture; and from production of agriculture for household consumption to production for the market through agro-processing.

This commitment has not been translated in monetary terms. Instead of subsidising and deploying tractors in sub-counties to commercialise agriculture, our leaders in Government think removing taxes on hand hoes will do wonders. They have failed to update Parliament as to what happened to the 500 walking tractors that were to be distributed to the farmers in 500 parishes in September 2008 to begin the drive towards increased agriculture production, yet money was appropriated for this function.

The President talked about a plan to build storage capacity to improve post-harvest handling. In 2007/2008, the same President promised to refurbish storage facilities at primary society level and monies were appropriated. To-date, we have not been given the progress on this. Sometime back, Government constructed silos in Kyazanga. We were not told as to who is using these silos, how much is paid and to whom. Could Government inform Parliament whether it is true that the said silos are bought or have been leased for 99 years to a company trading in produce in which the first daughter has shares?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, please assist the Leader of the Opposition with some water. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, in his 2009 State of the Nation Address, the President informed the nation that in order to achieve better market access for farmers to sell their produce at prime prices, the warehouse scheme has been started and was to be progressively rolled out. Ugandans would be interested in knowing the progress as the intention of the project was to enable rural households earn at least Shs 20 million per annum to enable them meet basic necessities.

Last year, we made a number of proposals, which would improve agriculture productivity, but the NRM Government leaders did not buy the proposals. We specifically advised Government to fund a comprehensive agriculture census that would form a basis for national planning. We advised Government to increase the sector funding of agriculture where our country has a competitive advantage, from the then 4.9 percent to 10 percent. 

In reaction to our proposal, and as if the proposal had annoyed them, the sectoral allocation has instead been slashed down to four percent. 

The current Government is like a business that increases its price in response to cost pressures. This might work for a while, but eventually, customers may refuse to buy.

The problems facing agriculture, of course, cannot be appropriately addressed without a comprehensive census because they are founded on lack of comprehensive, reliable and consistent statistical data. In our view, if you cannot measure something, you cannot manage it. The lack of sector statistics causes inadequate funding allocation and consequently, poor output. 

The last comprehensive agriculture census was carried out in 1963/1965. This was followed by the 1990/1991 National Census of Agriculture and Livestock. Since then, our planning has been based on annual sample surveys that are not regular, due to lack of funding. The institutions that are mandated to carry out this exercise, such as Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and UBOS, have never put in place statistical systems to collect important data on agriculture on an annual basis.

We need data on crop area, yield, production, an inventory of livestock and animal products and the characteristics of farming enterprises whether commercial or subsistence. We do not have such an agriculture data bank to help in planning, resulting into a steep decline in agriculture performance.

This lack of informed planning excludes the majority of the rural people engaged in subsistence farming from participating in the benefits of the country’s economic growth. These smallholder farmers do not have access to the vehicles and roads needed for transporting produce to the market. Market linkages are weak or non-existent.

The farmers lack inputs and technologies to help them increase production and reduce pests and diseases. In addition, the smallholder farmers lack access to financial services that would enable them raise their incomes by improving and expanding their production and establishing small enterprises. This low productivity coupled with the limited value-addition and lack of commercialisation is what has led to the declining GDP share of the agricultural sector in Uganda and this must be addressed.

In our budget response last financial year, we reported that we had conducted a study on the need to address the limited access to finance for agriculture production. We recommended, based on our findings of the study, creation of an Agriculture Development Bank. The draft Bill to this effect is ready for consideration by this august House.

We wish to re-affirm that our sector shadow minister will seek leave of this Parliament to table a Private Member’s Bill for the creation of an Agriculture Development Bank. We request honourable members to support the Bill for the creation of this bank that will address financial constraints faced by the majority of our voters.

The much sought-after modernisation of agriculture will remain a prophecy as long as Government does not wake up to the realisation of the need to invest massively in agriculture as a necessary pre-condition for industrial development, monetisation of the economy and food security.

Improving agriculture productivity is the only way through which the poor rural households can meet their food security needs and increase their incomes. 

Madam Speaker, Uganda has enormous potential to increase agriculture production to overcome food insecurity and malnutrition as well as take advantage of increasing food demand in the region. The only powerful tool that can overcome this is use of fertilisers and high yielding seeds. However, recent studies show that while Uganda has the highest soil nutrient depletion in the world, it also has the lowest fertiliser application, at 1.8 kg per hectare. This is mainly because of the limited knowledge about benefits and costs of fertiliser application.

The President raised public hope when he mentioned that Government would soon address the pertinent issue of actualising phosphate fertiliser production at Osukuru Hills in Tororo. However, information obtained indicates that the hills belong to the Madhvani Group of Companies. We request Government to inform Ugandans as to who will be carrying out the project and whether this would in turn reduce the price of fertilisers to the smallholder farmer.

Government has not come up with a national fertiliser policy that would consider subsidies on fertilisers as a priority. Rwanda recently carried out a fertiliser profitability analysis and use. Based on the study, fertiliser trials have been established across the country. A national fertiliser policy should be enacted to subsidise fertilisers in line with the World Trade Organization Agreement that allows developing countries subsidies of up to 10 percent of agricultural inputs.

To address the problems in the agriculture sector, we have to fix the problems along the entire value chain. These range from research and development for seeds and inputs, to irrigation, fertilisers, agricultural extension, credit, rural infrastructure, storage and marketing. We, therefore, propose the following:

Make the agriculture sector the main line of defence against poverty and food insecurity by increasing its funding to over 10 percent of the overall national budget;

Expedite the enactment of a national fertilizer policy which should consider subsidies on fertilisers and other agriculture inputs as a priority to increase agriculture productivity;

Establish an effective extension system to sensitise farmers to embrace use of fertilisers, so as to sustainably increase agricultural productivity in Uganda;

Provide water for production and disease control;

Improve access to affordable, predictable and reliable financial services;

Reduce the cost of production by putting emphasis on mechanisation and enhanced research for the introduction of high-yielding varieties of staple crops;

Provide for grain terminals/silos, refrigeration facilities, post-harvest facilities to handle bumper harvests and maintain the standard requirements of the produce;

Invest in the warehouse receipt systems in major grain producing districts and regions, to keep farm products safe and ready for market;

Support availability of adequate storage facilities at sub-counties, and mainstream functional warehouses to avoid post-harvest losses, as well as improve commodity pricing;

Expeditiously activate the existing national irrigation infrastructure, including establishing new irrigation programs;

Allocate funds to establish micro-irrigation schemes on all major rivers and lakes in the country;

Strengthen the Private-Public Partnership approach in the construction and maintenance of irrigation schemes;

Revitalise cooperatives and re-establish the stabilisation fund in Bank of Uganda and also provide a conducive policy environment that would attract private investment in agriculture.

Environment

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the state of the environment in Uganda leaves a lot to be desired, with Kampala being one of the dirtiest cities in the world. Plastic bags are in every corner of the country and Government is reluctant to enforce the ban on these plastic bags. The citizens are left to stay near choking heaps of garbage. Such pollution exposes Ugandans to diseases, and contributes to the high health budget requirement in the country.

In the last 15 years, Uganda has lost 4,000 square kilometres of wetlands, posing a risk of water shortage. The wetland coverage has reduced from 13 percent to 11 percent over the period. Preliminary results from the study launched by the Ministry of Water and Environment reveal that the major wetlands and their biodiversity are dying out, with a serious potential of water stress and flooding in the next 10-15 years. This poses a danger because our growing population will always need fresh air and clean water to live.

Uganda loses 15 percent of its GDP annually, due to the destruction of forests, land and water resources. The politicians and those who think they have money, are amongst the greatest abusers of the environment. We have destroyed the wetlands around Banda, encroached on Namanve forest, and environmental degradation continues unchecked. The 2006 NRM Manifesto, which promised to cover all the bare hills with forests, did not see the light of the day, only to resurface in the 2010 manifesto.

The Constitution states, “It is the duty of Parliament to protect and preserve the environment from abuse, pollution, degradation and also to provide for measures intended to manage the environment for sustainable development and promotion of environmental awareness”. The challenge at hand is as to whether we have used this provision to enforce environmental discipline, or we have left the work to the citizens and civil society organisations.

In order to enhance our environmental protection, we propose:

That Parliament should take a keen interest in environmental legislation and discipline in Uganda, including garbage management;

A ban on plastic bags is enforced;

National tree planting campaigns using primary school pupils, are immediately started throughout the whole country;

Starting a community cleaning exercise in Kampala, to get rid of the plastics in the city and outside municipalities and towns in Uganda;

Wetland restoration and planned urban housing and waste management, to stop the spread of filthy and disease-ridden slums; and

Early preparations for environmental impact of oil in the Albertine region.

Labour and Employment

We strongly believe that good Government policy should not only be able to spur economic growth, but also strengthen the private sector’s ability to create jobs. In our view, the private sector is a catalyst for economic growth. It is the sector that can create meaningful jobs because they put up agro-based industries that are viable in the long-term. This can only be done when we create a good environment that would attract investors to put up these industries.

Ugandans can be patient, but they have low tolerance for sustained lies. In 2008/09, the President promised to turn Uganda into a leading competitive destination for private investment in sub-Saharan Africa. According to Government, this was the only way new jobs would be created to absorb the majority of unemployed youth. However, the Global Competitiveness report published in March 2011 makes shocking revelations. Globally, our competitiveness dropped from the 108th position last year to the 118th this year.  In Africa, we are currently in the 20th position while Rwanda is 7th, Kenya is 14th, Tanzania is 16th and Burundi is 32nd. 

This means that in terms of investment opportunities in the East Africa region, we only compete with Burundi. How does the NRM Government intend to create more jobs and provide employment when our competitiveness in attracting investments is worsening as a result of corruption, lack of sound infrastructure and Government’s inefficiency?

The tourism sector which has the potential of improving our employment potential has also not been doing well due to meagre funding, poor infrastructure, and unfavourable policy environment for the development of the sector, and the inadequate protection of property rights. For example, the sector has only been allocated Shs 8.2 billion in the 2011/12 budget, which is not enough to market our tourism potential.

The 2011 Travel and Tourism Competitiveness report revealed that Uganda’s ranking in the tourism sector fell from the 111th to the 115th position. In the region, Uganda is in the 13th position, Rwanda is in the 7th, Kenya is in the 8th and Tanzania is in the 11th position. This is because Rwanda, Kenya and Tanzania have invested heavily in intensive marketing of their country’s tourism attractiveness. They have also invested in the development of innovative tourism and infrastructure. 

While statistics indicate that tourism is one of the fastest growing sectors and the second foreign exchange earner in Uganda, the report reveals that we do not invest in marketing. Kenya, for example, spends US$ 10 million in marketing and promotional activities annually. Tanzania spends US$ 8 million and Rwanda spends US$ 5 million, while Uganda spends only US$ 350,000 as you can see in the table.

How did the government expect to be top of the range in a sector where it never invested? How then does the government intend to absorb the 40,000 graduates produced annually by our tertiary institutions when we are not investing in sectors that have potential to create employment opportunities?

Since majority of our population is in agriculture, the sector has great potential of absorbing the 40,000 youth in the rural areas in agro-processing and effective extension services, rather than the NAADS-type conspiracies. We, therefore, propose the following measures to create employment opportunities:

i.	Rural empowerment to absorb the majority of the youth in their areas to increase agricultural productivity through agro-processing and extension services; 

ii.	Increment of the funding to the tourism sector;

iii.	Institute measures to fight corruption and;
iv.	Strengthen Government institutions to ease the cost     of doing business.

Corruption

Madam Speaker, the single most important thing that Ugandans seem to agree on is that the NRM Government is chronically corrupt. 

It would appear that our friends in Government have since changed our national motto to “Come, let us eat, drink and make merry, for tomorrow we shall go”. (Laughter) This is what has led to the kind of recklessness that is common at all levels of Government. (Interjections) (Laughter)

Uganda’s experience demonstrates that whereas anti-corruption laws, regulations and institutions are important, they are no substitute for action. The most important pre-condition for success in the fight against corruption is the commitment of the political leadership to fight corruption at the highest level. This is what we lack because our leaders have failed to walk the talk in the war against the corrupt.

In Uganda, corruption has become widespread resulting in endemic poverty and frustration, rivalries between the regimes leading personalities, and the rupture of the political contract between leaders and the citizenry. 

Corruption takes away medicine from our hospitals, and books and furniture from schools. It has also eaten up our roads which have caused senseless deaths due to accidents, killed our industries, destroyed agriculture productivity, rigged elections, destroyed our Police and acquitted the guilty. (Applause)

In summary, corruption has robbed, looted and plundered our public resources, killed and de-humanised our people and sown seeds of greed, selfishness and lust for power and ill-gotten wealth. It has created some leaders with questionable integrity because the corrupt, in spite of their rhetoric and grandiose posturing, do not love this country, for, if they did, they would not rob it of the scarce resources much needed for development and improvement of the citizens’ welfare.

Madam Speaker, in terms of political life, personal and group patronage has become linked to the provision of services. Elections have become less about having a credible choice of who governs, but more of an exercise in political patronage, featuring the buying and selling of votes. 

Politicians from the ruling party no longer make a distinction between Government property and NRM Party property. This is why political party functions take place in State House at the expense of the taxpayer, who foots, among other expenses, the food, electricity, water and entertainment bills. (Applause)

With the naked eye, you can see that there is no genuine war against corruption as the NRM Government has only beaten about tiny weeds, ignoring the vast plantations in plain view. It has also been selective, and many times, only taken action on those who fall out with them, rather than dealing with the vice in a non-partisan manner. 

Placing political interest above the rule of law and checks and balances is, therefore, the major stumbling block in fighting corruption.

Sometime back, the President announced that he had trained a new army of professionals ready to fight the corruption scourge and that he would use a new dangerous approach to net corrupt officials and punish them. You can see for yourselves, the suggested approach has not come to fruition. The latest is that he is now going to set up a committee to investigate political leaders and senior public officers implicated in corruption scandals. Why would someone spend time and money chasing for thieves, yet he promotes and rewards those who have already been caught? Those are diversionary tactics employed in war, when surrounded by an enemy. H.E. the President knows this science quite well.

In the 16th Century, when Sir Thomas Moore was asked to go against his conscience and deny his trust, he answered as follows: “Public trust is held like sand in our hands. If we open our fingers only a bit, to be only a bit corrupt, the sand of trust flows out quickly and is completely lost”. The war against corruption cannot be won by rhetorical speeches and the rotation of ministers and public servants who have nothing more to offer. Political will transcends good speeches and incorporates leadership by example and taking swift action where corruption is detected.

There is enough empirical evidence to suggest that governments which act in total disregard of the good of their population and dissipate their resources through various means, including corruption, cannot be considered under any reasonable standard to be practicing good governance. As representatives of the people, we should stand firm and hold responsible any political leader or public servant that misuses public resources that are meant for service delivery to our voters. It is the welfare of our voters that will make us relevant in our constituencies, and not our parties.

The victory against corruption needs courageous individuals to stand up, speak out, take risks, and alert the wider society that something wrong is taking place. This may take a toll on our lives, and political survival, but it is worth taking. This Parliament must advocate for penalties that are beyond a mere slap-on-wrist. The penalties must be tough enough to deter anyone bent on corruption or harbouring such motives. 

Madam Speaker, we have to decisively address increasing petty corruption, the perceived growing culture of impunity for grand corruption and pervasive “quiet corruption” - the failure of public servants to deliver goods or services paid for by Governments - such as unchecked absenteeism by teachers and health workers.

We, therefore, propose the following measures for adoption by this Parliament:

Any politician or public official who abuses his/her position for personal gain should be dismissed. We have no right to put public interest at risk by retaining those who treat public office as a tool for enrichment;

Unlawfully acquired personal assets must be confiscated and auctioned publicly, to recover the funds;

Heavier fines and/or sentences should be imposed for corruption;

Speed-up pre-trial investigations and judicial proceedings by adequately funding anti-corruption agencies;

Parliament and its Appointments Committee should not pass any politician and/or public official involved in any corruption scandal to occupy any political or public office unless he/she has been cleared by a competent court of law and;

Parliament should as a matter of urgency consider and enact the long-awaited Anti-Money Laundering Legislation.

The Social Sector

Madam Speaker, education and health are key components of both economic and human development. It is a common agreement worldwide that for any community to develop, its members must be educated. It is also widely accepted that for human beings to be economically productive, they must be mentally and physically healthy. Provision of quality education and health systems facilitates and promotes people’s participation in, and enjoyment of the benefits accruing from the economic activity. 

The crucial role education and health play in the overall development of a nation cannot be over emphasised. While education is widely accepted as a leading instrument for promoting economic growth, a healthy population is an engine for economic growth. Education leads to good health which is a pre-requisite to the development of any household, community or country as it translates into increased enrolment and better performance in school and high labour productivity. Despite its importance, health and education have in the last decade taken a heavy beating from the Executive in terms of budgetary allocations. Whereas the number of hospitals, health centers, schools and universities has increased, the quality has sharply declined.

Health

The importance of good health is summarised in a popular saying, “The wealth of a nation is the health of its people”. Indeed, everyone knows that the state of one’s health is at the very core of one’s existence, whether it involves an individual or nation. However, our healthcare system at present remains characterised by under investment, insufficient numbers of trained health workers, poor pay, insufficient drugs, very poor and inadequate health infrastructure and ill-equipped health facilities. 

For the last 10 years, Government of Uganda’s budgetary allocation to the health sector has stagnated over time as a percentage of Government’s total discretionary expenditure. As a result, the Uganda public health system continues to suffer from shortage of medicines, lack of health equipment and supplies, shortage and poor remuneration of health workers, and services that are not affordable to many poor persons.

Most of the facilities available in most public hospitals are in a sorry state with indicators such as the number of medical workers in health centres and availability of essential medicine wanting. The few able patients flown out of the country for medical procedures sometimes end up in the hands of Ugandan doctors who have gone abroad for greener pastures due to low pay at home. This means that the scarce foreign exchange which is a direct cost to the tax payer is spent abroad on a few patients most of whom are the well placed politicians and the civil servants paid for by Government, not villagers. 
Madam Speaker, the quality of health services in Uganda is wanting and a lot needs to be done. Indicators related to maternal mortality such as antenatal care coverage, delivery in health facilities, and medical assistance at delivery have progressed only marginally with maternal mortality in Uganda remaining among the highest in the world, due to the high fertility and poor pre and post-natal care.

The health sector continues to experience workforce challenges arising from numbers, skill shortages and motivational deficiency factors. Medical workers remain grossly underpaid with a medical officer in a public health facility in Rwanda and Kenya earning about four times more than their Ugandan counterpart. This is what has led to a high doctor-patient ratio. 

Free healthcare in Uganda only exists in principle, but not in practice. In most hospitals and health centres, there are frequent drug stock-outs, health personnel are sometimes unavailable. Basic equipment and services are inadequate and unavailable and this is known everywhere in the country. 

The initial gains in the HIV/AIDS control have since been reversed because ARV outages are very common, raising a very big threat of drug resistance. This coupled with inadequate infrastructure, staff shortage, low remuneration and general mismanagement, leaves free health service only a wish. As a result, most Ugandans are sick, yet the country boasts of many health centers.

In most rural areas, low staff morale, absenteeism, staff attrition due to poor salary and poor support and supervision of health workers, have remained critical constraints. For example, most health centres are run by nursing aides who also do not work on certain days, especially weekends. In most cases, the patients are only given prescriptions and told to go and buy drugs elsewhere. This is what has particularly contributed to high levels of maternal mortality because 61 percent of the mothers do not deliver in these facilities and end up with traditional methods of delivery in the villages, with the attendant risks.

Madam Speaker, last year, the President reported cases of district health officials having ‘ghost’ health centres which receive drugs. He directed the Inspector General of Police to investigate and prosecute all these. This scare ended up with the address, and that was it. In the same vein, this address also has nothing new to offer in terms of health care. The committee set up to investigate the health sector has only been heard of in the press, but Ugandans have not seen the fruits.

The only way to revamp the health sector is to increase the funding to meet the minimum healthcare package. We propose: 

i.	Increase in the health expenditure to the threshold of 15 percent as agreed upon by the African Leaders in the Abuja Declaration of 2001;

ii.	Funding of the health sector should be the priority and duty of Government whose constitutional responsibility is to provide health to its citizens and it should not be left to the donors;

iii.	Review of the salaries and wages of health workers to make them competitive with their counterparts in the region;

iv.	Training and recruitment of more health workers to be deployed in the various health centres in the country, and
v.	Procurement of adequate equipment for the health centres which have become white elephants.

Education

Madam Speaker, education is not only seen as a key to poverty reduction and a vehicle for promoting equity, fairness and social justice, but also helps to supply the essential human or social capital which is a necessary condition for sustained economic growth. 

However, it remains under-funded at higher levels leaving a burden to the majority poor. In addition, the curriculum has not been adequately addressed and as a result, our tertiary institutions end up producing functionally illiterate graduates who are only job seekers and not job makers. This has to be addressed to make education more meaningful.

While it is a fact that the introduction of Universal Primary Education resulted in a huge increase in enrolment, completion rates remain worrying. The trend of completion rates reported by the Ministry of Education and Sports revealed a rate below 50 percent in the academic years 2006, 2007 and 2008, and 52 percent and 54 percent in 2009 and 2010, respectively. 

Analysis of the Primary Leaving Examination performance reveals that from 2006 to 2010, the number of pupils who failed to get a PLE certificate is more than those who passed in Division 1, and on average, 24,000 pupils do not sit exams yet Government pays examination fees for them. 

We believe that this miserable performance is caused by the unrealistic funding of the UPE program and poor planning which leads to delayed release of funds. It is surprising that Government continues to budget and release Shs 450 per pupil per month, implying that each pupil gets Shs 1,350 per term. This amount is not even enough to buy half a kilogram of sugar. Even then, release of this amount to primary schools is delayed disrupting the timely implementation of school activities.

Like the health sector, education is also hit by low staff morale, absenteeism and staff attrition due to poor salary and poor inspection in schools. While we support the President’s target of improving the poor teacher to pupil ratio of 56:1 in all Government schools, we believe this will remain a dream as long as teachers’ morale remains unattended to. This was recently put to test when immediately after the President’s speech, the Primary Teachers Colleges, these PTCs, and the National Teachers Colleges, closed due to limited funding. 

Implementation of Universal Secondary Education (USE) is also facing a dilemma due to limited funding. The secondary schools currently implementing the USE programme are hard-up due to limited funding to meet the rising food prices in the country. As a result, most private schools such as those founded by religious bodies, are threatening to pull out of the programme and this may affect its implementation.

We, therefore, propose that:

i.	20 percent of our national budget be dedicated to education as opposed to the current 4.4 percent;

ii.	Government provides teachers’ houses and increases the number of classrooms; and

iii.	The salaries of teachers in both primary and secondary Schools should be reviewed to match the rising cost of living. (Applause)

iv.	There should be constant monitoring and supervision of the UPE and USE programmes by both the centre and the districts to improve the quality of the graduates;

v.	The curriculum is immediately revised to create functionally literate graduates and not these ones who are illiterate; and

vi.	The student loans scheme be immediately introduced to assist students from poor families attain higher education.

The Petroleum Sector

Last year, the President reported that Government had put in place a National Oil and Gas Policy to provide the guiding principles in the petroleum value chain, and an institutional framework for prudent management of resources and the revenues accruing from production. He further reported that two petroleum legislations, namely, the resource management and revenue management were being prepared to operationalise the policy. 

In our response, then, we criticised the way Government had connived with oil companies to keep the production sharing agreements secret, and how it came up with a national oil and gas policy without adequate consultation with all stakeholders.

While the President reported about the progress in oil exploration, he avoided to report on the progress about the legislations. In the budget speech, the Minister of Finance said Government was still finalising the appropriate legal and institutional framework for resource and revenue management for presentation to Parliament. Our concern then is that Government continues to award contracts without the relevant laws and manages the oil sector as if it is personal. (Applause) Indeed, the oil resource may turn into a curse due to poor production management, inefficient exploration, corruption and the likelihood of becoming a single sector economy. 

The President laboured to demonstrate that fuel prices in Uganda were comparable with those of Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Sudan. However, he avoided giving the national comparison of the salaries and standards of living of the people in those countries. For example, a doctor in Kenya and Rwanda earns four times more than a doctor in Uganda. A primary school teacher in Rwanda is better paid than ours in Uganda. These are, therefore, more able to pay the high fuel prices. Rwanda even went further and reduced taxes on all petroleum products. Therefore, to compare the fuel prices with those in our neighbouring countries without regard to salary levels and standards of living would be grossly misleading. (Applause)

In order to properly manage both the oil resource and revenue, we, therefore, propose that:

i.	Resource management and revenue management legislations are tabled in Parliament as a matter of urgency;

ii.	Reduction of tariffs on petroleum products should be looked at;

iii.	The production sharing agreements are made public, debated and lessons drawn from other countries; and

iv.	Use of a multi-sectoral approach involving all stakeholders such as Parliament, the civil society and the media to ensure transparency in oil management. 

In his address of June 2010, the President said most of the talk about our storage tanks in Jinja was speculative and not based on facts, and that Government had never lost interest in the storage tanks, whose capacity of 30 million litres exists to hold national strategic reserves. He further said the facility was only temporarily closed for refurbishment. This year, the same President says the tanks, which act as national strategic fuel reserves, are being refurbished and will be restocked under a Public-Private Partnership initiative. 

George Orwell once wrote that, “In an age of universal deceit, telling the truth is a revolutionary act.” Based on this contradictory information, we would like to know how temporarily these reserves will be closed, whether Government still has interest in the reserves and whether it is true the reserves were sold.  The information should be comprehensive to include all the reserves constructed by President Amin, such as those in Nakasongola. We would also like to know the whereabouts of the stock of fuel that was in the reserve tanks that has since disappeared. (Applause)

Infrastructure

Government efforts to improve and maintain the road network as a pre-requisite for development is commendable hon. Nasasira. It is commendable. However, the poor quality of works, value–for-money, delay in completion of contracts, poor absorption capacity of the funds allocated to the sector and poor management of traffic remains a problem. The other serious problem is the poor management of the contracts by the technical arm of Government.

Up to 30 percent of the urban roads in Kampala and major municipalities can be categorised in poor state, while the entire additional 10,000 km of district roads upgraded to national status in July 2009, are beyond any meaningful maintenance, requiring substantial injection of funds. It is the condition of our infrastructure that has tremendously contributed to the low level of our competitiveness in the region.

In our response last year, we pointed out that Government had failed to implement the pledges made, yet funds were appropriated. These include among others the purchase of the district road equipment, the construction of the Ntungamo aerodrome and rehabilitation of Kasese airfield, which was also in the CHOGM funds. We further pointed out the need for rehabilitating our railway and water transport system to reduce the cost of transportation which is exorbitant on the roads. The only thing Government is doing is to continue to promise and undertake studies about the rail sector. In our view, Government is just buying time and will never fulfill the pledges. These same pledges have again been made this year and we should expect more next year. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, we propose the following: 

i.	The Traffic Management Plan of Kampala be quickly availed and revisited; 

ii.	All the access roads and walk-ways be worked on;

iii.	Revamp the railway lines Kampala – Tororo - Pakwach and Kampala - Kasese;
iv.	Road maintenance equipment be procured immediately as we agreed; and

v.	Report on the review of the concession of Rift Valley Railways be done immediately; and I am happy, our Government Chief Whip knows more about this and he is available.

Regional and international matters

In his address, President Museveni concentrated on the East African Community and avoided other areas of serious concern yet our country was attacked by the Al-Shabaab terrorists last year. Our support for the parliamentary resolution to send our troops to Somalia was based on the understanding that other African nations would contribute forces. However, it is now apparent that the burden has been left to Uganda and Burundi. There are no regular and transparent reports on the state of our missions.

We have noticed that there is deliberate over emphasis on the political federation of East Africa, sometimes overshadowing economic integration objectives, which were the main intent of member states. We believe this may attract resistance from other partners and derail us from the core objective. Further, a political federation is only possible where cooperating states see the need to harmonise matters of political principle enshrined in their constitutions. For example, while other members have presidential term limits, Uganda has open-ended terms. How can we have a political federation when we have divergent political principles?

Many developments have taken place in North Africa and the Middle East, but the President evaded commenting on these. In addition, this Government does not have a policy on the repatriation of Ugandans who are caught up in war zones and other unforeseen catastrophes, like the earthquake, which triggered off a tsunami, which damaged the nuclear reactor in Japan. 

We would like to know our foreign policy on the Middle East and what Government thinks about the developments in North Africa. We also want to know the fate of Ugandan nationals in North Africa and Japan as other responsible Governments repatriated their nationals out of these danger zones leaving Ugandans to fend for themselves. These people play a great role in bringing in the country the much needed foreign exchange and, therefore, Government should reciprocate as a gesture for the contribution to our economy by these “Nkuba Kyeyos” and as a sense of national responsibility.

The Southern Sudan is getting her Independence next week, but the situation therein is potentially explosive.  However, our foreign policy concerning the situation in Southern Sudan appears to have been kept secret and personalised. There is also a lot of speculation about Salim Saleh’s presence in West Nile. We want a clear national policy regarding the situation in Southern Sudan. (Applause)

Today, Ugandans holding red passports do not enjoy the respect these passports carry because many wrongdoers who are involved in drug trafficking and international money laundering carry red passports. This is what has at least been found out with those arrested in London and Kenya. As a result, many countries no longer respect some of our dignitaries and Government has not come out to address this problem.

The state of our missions abroad leaves a lot to be desired. Gen. Ali, will you hear this: Most of the buildings constructed under President Amin’s government are in a deplorable state and many cities around the world have called on Uganda to address the problem, but this Government has done nothing at all. In addition, most of our missions abroad have become a dumping place for political failures. This has not only affected the performance of our missions, but has also demoralised career diplomats in these Missions.

We propose the following:

i.	That Parliament is urgently briefed about the situation in Somalia and the contributions of other African states to enable us review our position;

ii.	Uganda should insist on a wider AU participation, preferably from Islamic countries;

iii.	Government informs Parliament on the steps being taken to rescue Ugandans caught in the war zone and areas affected by other catastrophes;

iv.	Government should urgently refurbish our Missions abroad to rescue the tarnished image of our country;

v.	Slow down agitation for a political federation until we get economic integration right and until we harmonise the political principles in our constitutions to fast-track the political federation; and

vi.	At least 50 percent of the positions of head of missions should be occupied by career diplomats to improve on the performance.

Financing of Local Governments

For the last five years, the Opposition has been questioning the rationale of the 20 percent budgetary allocation to local governments where the majority of our citizens live. These local governments are already facing increasing financial pressure and are unable to meet their expanded and diversified roles because they do not have any direct revenue raising opportunities. To perform well, local governments should be allowed to form their own regional governments and left to manage their own resources, leaving the Central Government with core functions of defence, security, immigration and foreign affairs.

Local governments do not have a good revenue base yet Government is behaving as a donor to them. In the Financial Year 2011/12, the local governments have only been allocated 19 percent which is not enough to improve service delivery. In addition, the number of conflicts in the local governments between the chairpersons, RDCs and CAOs and the civil society are on the increase and stifling service delivery. All these have to be addressed if we are to improve the welfare of the citizens.  

We propose that:

i.	The allocation to local governments is increased to at least 40 percent of the national budget;

ii.	We increase the revenue base of the local governments by delegating some of the taxes to them so that they can collect and run their cases;

iii.	Harmonise the Local Government Act to solve the conflicts in the local governments; and

iv.	Formation of regional governments which should be empowered to manage their own resources.

Justice, Law and Order

The President says Government is committed to the rule of law, and praises himself for the establishment of specialised Police units and a few cases in court which have been disposed of. However, the rule of law is more about guaranteeing people’s freedoms as enshrined in the Constitution rather than just establishment and equipping of terror units -(Interjections)- I want to repeat here, hon. Nasasira, so that you understand. However, the rule of law is more about guaranteeing people’s freedoms as enshrined in the Constitution rather than just establishment and equipping of terror units. (Applause) 

We expected the President to update the nation on last year’s promise of improving the welfare of security personnel and their families, to commit that, courts of law would be allowed to operate independently, that the IGG and DPP would be allowed to operate uninfluenced, and that the Prisons Service would be supported rather than attacked in various ways such as land grabbing by Government and its agents. No one values and cares about prisoners anymore and this attitude must stop because all of us are potential prisoners.

Land

Matters of land in Uganda have never been resolved mainly because of lack of a comprehensive policy and also because of greed. We had hoped that upon promulgation of the Constitution, Government would immediately carry out adequate consultations that would result in formulation of the national land policy and consequent laws to operationalise the policy. That is how things are done in organised governments. Instead, our Government moved in haste and in reverse order to enact laws before a land policy.  The consequence is that the Land Act and its subsequent amendments cannot be implemented because there was no foundation in form of a policy for the Law. We, therefore, propose to Government that:

i.	Adequate consultations are made to come up with a harmonised national land policy; 

ii.	Halt the rampant land give-away until the policy is in place to guide on land use; and

iii.	Revision of the Land Act to conform to and operationalise the National Land Policy. You know what is happening.

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, throughout my term as a Leader of the Opposition, we intend to seek out, consult, listen and understand before we engage on issues -(Interjections)- I hope our colleagues in Government will not simply stifle valid criticism, scrutiny or examination, but will listen to our reasons.

We hope they will positively view our legitimate way of looking at issues because we are partners. We pledge to focus engagement around issues aimed at addressing the needs of the citizenry for positive development. (Applause)

This country is ours and we should not allow it to sink. It should be anchored on our good intentions and actions because we shall all be answerable, individually and collectively. We shall continue knocking at the door of the Leader of Government Business for an update on promises made in the President’s address and the Budget. 

The Committee of Government Assurances will follow up on all the promises made and will periodically be reporting to this House. (Applause) We have a tough chairman and the Members on both the ruling party and our side. We request Members to always give these reports the most deserved attention for the good and welfare of our citizens.

I thank you all for your kind attention, for God and my country. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for that elaborate response to the State of the Nation Address. However, I wish to bring it the attention of the House that the State of the Nation Address is a constitutional duty and the debate is supposed to assist Government to respond to the issues of the Members of Parliament and I do note that some of the sectors are not here today.  

I appeal to the Leader of Government Business to ensure that every sector is represented tomorrow when we commence so that they can capture the concerns of the Members and respond to them; and I want to also inform you that we shall commence at 2 O’clock on the dot. I will begin with hon. Namugwanya, hon. Biraro and hon. Mwesigye in that order. 

So, the House is adjourned to 2 O’clock tomorrow. 

(The House rose at 6.25 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 6 July 2011 at 2.00 p.m.) 
