Tuesday, 12 July 2011

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I hope that you had a good weekend and that you are ready for work this week. 

I want to make a small alteration to the Order Paper on item No.4. As you recall, we were invited to South Sudan for the Independence celebration and our delegation would like to first present a report before we proceed. So, I will defer this matter to tomorrow to enable our delegation to report and then we debate it together. Thank you.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

2.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Uganda Human Rights Commission 13th Annual Report of 2010. 

THE SPEAKER: The Report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission is committed to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back.

AMENDMENT TO THE COMPOSITION OF STANDING AND SESSIONAL COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you may recall, two weeks ago we received proposals from the Whips concerning the sessional and standing committees, but after we evaluated them, we found that some had oversubscribed and others under subscribed Members. We agreed with the Whips to regulate and ensure that no committee has more than 30 Members. So, we would like to complete the process today and I will ask the clerk to read the names.

Sessional Committees

Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development

1.	Nokrach William (Chairperson)                                   
2.	Baba Diri Margaret (Vice Chairperson)                          
3.	Nauwat Rosemary
4.	Mwebaza Sarah
5.	Iriama Margaret
6.	Ssentongo Nabulya Theopista
7.	Kabahenda Flavia Rwabuhoro
8.	Nakato Kyabangi Katusiime
9.	Nyirabashitsi Sarah Mateke
10.	Arinaitwe Joy Kariisa
11.	Lanyero Ochieng
12.	Kabaale Kwagala Olivia
13.	Kiiza Winifred
14.	Achire Christopher
15.	Namayanja Florence
16.	Anywarach Joshua
17.	Achile Manoah Mila
18.	Akello Rose Lilly
19.	Nyakikongoro Rosemary

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, those are 19 Members. I put the question that this House do approve the composition of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Natural Resources

1.	Kafabusa Werikhe Michael(Chairperson)           
2.	Kwizera Eddie Wagahungu (Vice Chairperson)      
3.	Wamakuyu Mudimi
4.	Nankabirwa Ann Maria
5.	Katwiremu Yorokamu Bategana
6.	Bangirana Kawooya Anifa
7.	Biraahwa Mukitale Steven
8.	Mujuni Vincent Kyamadidi
9.	Nsereko Muhammed
10.	Matovu Gregory
11.	Byarugaba Grace
12.	Bakaluba Mukasa Peter
13.	Muhwezi Jim Katugugu (Maj. Gen.)
14.	Najjemba Rosemary
15.	Wangolo Jacob
16.	Ruhunda Alex
17.	Kiwanda Godfrey
18.	Drito Martin
19.	Bigiirwa Julius Junjura
20.	Komuhangi Margaret
21.	Tinyefuza David (Gen.)
22.	Okumu Reagan
23.	Anywar Beatrice
24.	John Ken Lukyamuzi
25.	Bihande Bwambale Yokasi
26.	Akena James
27.	Ibi Florence Ekwau
28.	Cadet Benjamin
29.	Oboth M. Jacob
30.	Baryayanga Andrew

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, those are 30 Members. I put the question that this House do approve the committee as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Public Service and Local Government

1.	Kintu Florence (Chairperson)                             
2.	Magyezi Raphael (Vice Chairperson)                            
3.	Besisira Ignatius
4.	Bakeine Mable Kamugisha
5.	Omona Kenneth Olusegun
6.	Badda Fred
7.	Boona Emma
8.	Achia Terence Naco
9.	Kwiyucwinyi Grace Freedom
10.	Mutyabule Florence
11.	Kiiza Rwebembera James
12.	Muhumuza David
13.	Ayepa Michael
14.	Nambooze Betty
15.	Bako Christine Abia
16.	Mugume Roland
17.	Alum Santa
18.	Namara Grace
19.	Matte James
20.	Kiyingi Joseph

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that committee has 20 Members. I put the question that this House do approve the committee as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Social Services

1.	Lyomoki Sam (Chairperson)                                       
2.	Aleper Margaret Achilla(Vice Chairperson)                 
3.	Ssinabulya Sylvia
4.	Bitekyerezo Medard
5.	Amongin Jackline
6.	Nakayenze Connie Galiwango
7.	Kabasharira Naome
8.	Opolot Jacob Richards
9.	Gudoi Yahaya
10.	Businge Rusoke Vickie
11.	Mbabazi Betty
12.	Kamara John Nzeyimana
13.	Lematia  Ruth Molly Ondoru
14.	Nebanda Alioru Cerinah
15.	Kitatta Aboud
16.	Baryomunsi Chris (Dr)
17.	Asupasa Isiko Wilson Mpanga
18.	Khainza Justine
19.	Kabuule Evelyn Naome Mpagi
20.	Yaguma Wilberforce
21.	Lakot Susan (Capt.)
22.	Lulume Bayiga (Dr)
23.	Akello Judith Franca
24.	Waddada Femiar
25.	Alice Alaso
26.	Osegge Angeline
27.	Sewungu Joseph
28.	Amongi Betty
29.	Mary Nalubega Tunde
30.	Olanya Gilbert

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, those are 30 Members. I put the question that this House do approve the committee as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry

1.	Kasaija Stephen Kagwera (Chairperson)                   
2.	Tete Chelengat Evelyn (Vice Chairperson)                  
3.	Balyeku Moses Grace
4.	Mbahimba   James
5.	Auru Ann
6.	Nantaba Idah Erios
7.	Mugema Peter
8.	Mpairwe Beatrice
9.	Ssimbwa John
10.	Mayende Steven Dede
11.	Okot Ogong Felix
12.	Nakabaale Patrick
13.	Taaka Kevinah
14.	Kiyingi Deogratius
15.	Naggayi Nabilah Sempala
16.	Kawuma Muhammed
17.	Maganda Julius
18.	Lubega Godfrey
19.	Lubogo Kenneth

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that committee has 19 Members. I put the question that this House do approve the committee as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Information, Communication and Technology 

1.	Igeme Nathan Nabeta (Chairperson)                          
2.	Turyahikayo Mary Paula(Vice Chairperson)                 
3.	Bahati David
4.	Kyewalabye Kabajo James
5.	Semmuli Anthony
6.	Bagiire Vincent Waiswa
7.	Baliddawa Edward
8.	Nanyondo Birungi Carolyn
9.	Kwemara Ngabu William
10.	Ntabazi Harriet
11.	Omara Geofrey
12.	Tumwesigye Elioda (Dr.)
13.	Owoyesigire Jim (Maj. Gen.)
14.	Ogutu Wafula
15.	Benson Obua
16.	Atiku Bernard
17.	Nalubega Mariam
18.	Ninsiima Ronah
19.	Kaddu Mukasa Jerome

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that committee has 19 Members. I put the question that this House do approve the committee as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Physical Infrastructure

1.	Ajedra Gabriel Aridru; Eng.      
2.	Ssemugaba Samuel                  
3.	Byamukama Nuulu
4.	Biraaro Ephraim Gashanga
5.	Kaahwa Tophace
6.	Nalwanga Rebecca
7.	Balyejjusa Sulaiman Kirunda
8.	Mubiito John Bosco
9.	Aleper Simon Peter
10.	Lokii Peter Abraham
11.	Dombo Emmanuel
12.	Migadde Robert
13.	Musinguzi Yonna
14.	Lolem Micah
15.	Isabirye Iddi
16.	Ekuma George
17.	Waira Kyewalabye
18.	Nabbanja Robinah
19.	Ssemujju Ibrahim Nganda
20.	Nzoghu William
21.	Ogwal Cecilia Atim
22.	Acheng Ruth
23.	Sebuliba Mutumba
24.	Omolo Peter
25.	Amuriat Oboi
26.	Katumba Wamala
27.	Kafeero Ssekitoleko
28.	Nsanja Patrick
29.	Bahinduka Martin

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that committee has 29 Members. I put the question that this House do approve the committee as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries 

1.	Kasirivu Atwooki (Chairperson)                                 
2.	Egunyu Nantume Janepher (Vice Chairperson)            
3.	Kafuda Boaz
4.	Bukenya Gilbert
5.	Kataike Sara Ndoboli
6.	Okot John Amos
7.	Oleru Huda
8.	Lowila Oketayot
9.	Kahunde Hellen
10.	Kusasira Peace 
11.	Kasamba Mathias
12.	Bintu Jalia 
13.	Chekwel Lydia
14.	Mpiima Dorothy 
15.	Barumba Beatrice Rusania
16.	Kayagi Sara 
17.	Kiboijana Margaret
18.	Lokii John 
19.	Namoe Stella
20.	Twa-Twa Mutwalante 
21.	Babirye Veronica 
22.	Epetait Francis
23.	Kassiano Wadri
24.	Namaganda Susan
25.	Ajok Lucy
26.	Aronda Nyakairima 
27.	Chemutai Phyllis
28.	Ssempijja Vincent

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that committee has 28 members. I put the question that this House do approve the committee as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs

1.	Muwuma Milton (Chairperson)                                  
2.	Mulongo Simon  (Vice Chairperson)                               
3.	Mulindwa Patrick
4.	Kipoi Tonny Nsubuga
5.	Mbaghadi Fredrick
6.	Ssekikubo Theodore
7.	Eriaku Peter 
8.	Mukula George Michael
9.	Namugwanya Benny 
10.	Makhoha Margaret 
11.	Okeyoh Peter
12.	Kyanjo Hussein
13.	Fungaroo Kaps 
14.	Katirima Phinehas 
15.	Mbogo Hezekiah
16.	Iriama Rose
17.	Amodoi Chrispus

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the committee has 17 Members. I put the question that this House do approve the committee as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development

1.	Tumwebaze  Frank (Chairperson)                             
2.	Kasule Robert   (Vice Chairperson)               
3.	Mawanda Michael 
4.	Musasizi Henry
5.	Basajjabalaba Nasser
6.	Arinaitwe Rwakajara
7.	Todwong Richard 
8.	Okello Anthony
9.	Akol Rose Okullu
10.	Nakawunde Sarah 
11.	Sejjoba Isaac
12.	Kyooma Xavier 
13.	Lokeris Samson
14.	Lwanga Timothy Mutekanga
15.	Ochwa David 
16.	Mugabi Muzaale Martin
17.	Adong Lily
18.	Ekanya Godfrey
19.	Okupa Elijah
20.	Kikungwe Issa
21.	Akora Maxwell
22.	Ssasaga Isaiah
23.	Bagoole John
24.	Karuhanga Gerald
25.	Oromait Michael

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that committee has 25 Members. I put the question that this House do approve the committee as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Presidential Affairs

1.	Tinkasiimire Barnabas (Chairperson)                         
2.	Mwesigye Fred    (Vice Chairperson)                              
3.	Ayoo Tonny
4.	Alero Tom Aza
5.	Ogwang Peter
6.	Nakabira Getrude Lubega
7.	Nabirye Agnes
8.	Acayo Christine 
9.	Nalule Safia 
10.	Kikulukunyu Faisal
11.	Mandera Amos
12.	Kiiza Ernest
13.	Nshaija Dorothy 
14.	Amoit Judith 
15.	Ogwal Jacinto 
16.	Ochola Stephen
17.	Aol Betty Ocan
18.	Oketta Julius 
19.	Ababiku Jesca
20.	Kyeyune Haruna
21.	Okuonzi Sam
22.	Mpuuga Mathias

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that committee has 22 Members. I put the question that this House do approve the committee as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Foreign Affairs

1.	Byarugaba Alex (Chairperson)                              
2.	Katuramu Hood  (Vice Chairperson)                        
3.	Chemaswet Abdi 
4.	Sempala Mbuga 
5.	Onyango Kakoba
6.	Katongole Singh
7.	Ongalo Obote Clement 
8.	Auma Juliana 
9.	Amero Susan
10.	Seninde Rosemary
11.	Anite Evelyn
12.	Sabila Nelson
13.	Nyakecho Okwenye 
14.	Omwonya Stanley
15.	Asamo Hellen 
16.	Ssali Baker
17.	Katoto Hatwib
18.	Awongo Ahmed
19.	Kase-Mubanda Freda
20.	Mulimba John 
21.	Wamanga Wamai 
22.	Sabiiti Jack
23.	Ebil Fred
24.	Latif Ssebaggala
25.	Angina Charles 
26.	Allen Andrew 
27.	Sanjay Tanna
28.	Atim Joy Ongom

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that committee has 28 Members. I put the question that this House do approve the committee as proposed. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs

1.	Stephen Tashobya (Chairperson)                                 
2.	Bakka Stephen Mugabi (Vice Chairperson)                  
3.	Amoding Monicah
4.	Niwagaba Wilfred
5.	Achia Remigio
6.	Karungi Elizabeth
7.	Kamateeka Jovah
8.	Obua Denis Hamson
9.	Ndeezi Alex
10.	Lugolobi Amos
11.	Timbigamba Lindah
12.	Katuntu Abdu
13.	Lubega Medard Sseggona
14.	Odonga Otto
15.	Balikuddembe Joseph
16.	Ayena Chris
17.	Mpabwa Sarah
18.	Odoi Fox
19.	Mujungu Jeniffer
20.	Otada Amooti

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, those are 20 Members. I put the question that this House do approve the committee as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Standing Committees

Committee on Government Assurances

1.	Odonga Otto Samuel (Chairperson)
2.	Naggayi Nabila Sempala (Vice Chairperson)
3.	Baba Diri Margaret
4.	Kiwanda Godfrey 
5.	Sabila Nelson
6.	Kakoba Onyango 
7.	Auma Juliana 
8.	Mbahimba James
9.	Mpairwe Beatrice
10.	Ssinabulya Namabidde 
11.	Kiiza Rwebembera 
12.	Badda  Fred
13.	Namoe Stella 
14.	Tinkasiimire Barnabas 
15.	Kabaale Kwagala Olivia
16.	Makhoha Margaret 
17.	Mayende Stephen 
18.	Kabayo James 
19.	Nakawunde Sarah 
20.	Lugolobi Amos
21.	Ntabazi Harriet 
22.	Kwemara Ngabu William  
23.	Akena James 
24.	Omolo Peter
25.	Katumba Wamala 
26.	Mbugo Kezekia
27.	Oromait Michael
28.	Oboth Jacob

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there are 28 Members. I put the question that this House do approve the committee as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Equal Opportunities 

1.	Bangirana Kawooya (Chairperson)
2.	Nalule Safia (Vice Chairperson)
3.	Iriama  Margaret
4.	Kitatta Aboud
5.	Okeyoh Peter
6.	Kabahenda Flavia 
7.	Bintu Jalia
8.	Amoit Judith 
9.	Kaahwa Tophace 
10.	Kusasira Peace
11.	Oleru Huda
12.	Nabirye Agnes 
13.	Ndeezi Alex
14.	Anite Evelyn
15.	Alum Santa 
16.	Wadada Femiar
17.	Ssasaga Isaias 
18.	Ekwau Ibi Florence
19.	Issa Kikungwe
20.	Lubogo Kenneth
21.	Ninsiima Ronah 
22.	Lubega Godfrey
23.	Atim Joy Ongom

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there are 23 Members on that committee. I put the question that this House do approve the committee as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises

1.	Amuriat Oboi Patrick
2.	Osegge Angelline
3.	Biraaro Ephraim 
4.	Matovu Gregory
5.	Mawanda Michael 
6.	Arinaitwe Rwakajara 
7.	Todwong Richard 
8.	Tete Chelangat 
9.	Balyejjusa Sulaiman 
10.	Kasule Robert 
11.	Kikulukunyu Faisal 
12.	Achila Alepar Margaret  
13.	Omwonya Stanley
14.	Nakato Kyabangi 
15.	Ssimbwa John
16.	Katongole Singh 
17.	Mugema Peter 
18.	Mulimba John
19.	Tashobya Stephen  
20.	Kipoi Tonny Nsubuga
21.	Mubito John Bosco
22.	Auru  Anne
23.	Owoyesigire Jim 
24.	Ayena Krispus 
25.	Kiyingi Deogratius
26.	Kyanjo Hussein
27.	Kyeyune Haruna
28.	Tanna Sanjay 
29.	Baryayanga Andrew 
30.	Mpuuga Mathias

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like to remove hon. Mathias Mpuuga. He serves on the Appointments Committee. So, there are 29 Members. I put the question that the committee as proposed be approved minus hon. Mpuuga. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Budget Committee
		
1	Lwanga Timothy (Chairperson)   
2	Achia Remigio (Vice Chairperson)     
3	Mwesigye Fred
4	Kamateeka Jovah
5	Nyakecho Annet
6	Mulindwa Patrick
7	Amoding Monicah
8	Wamakuyu Mudimi
9	Nankabirwa Ann Maria
10	Okot John Amos
11	Kataike Sarah Ndoboli
12	Basajjabalaba Nasser
13	Akol Rose Okuulo
14	Ssali Baker 
15	Ongalo Obote Kenneth  
16	Bigirwa Julius  
17	Komuhangi Margaret 
18	Nebanda Cerinah
19	Acayo Christine Cwinya-Ai 
20	Okot Ogong Felix 
21	Ruhunda Alex
22	Katirima Manoni Phinehas 
23	Ogwal Atim Cecilia
24	Dr Bayigga Lulume Micheal 
25	Okupa Elijah
26	Akello Judith Franca
27	Ekanya Geoffrey
28	Matte Joseph   
29	Mujungu Jennifer K.	
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that committee has 29 Members. I put the question that this House approves the committee as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)
	 	
Committee on Science Technology 
	
1	Obua Dennis Hamson (Chairperson)   
2	Mandera Amos (Vice Chairperson
3	Nokrach Wilson William	
4	Waira Kyewalabye Majegere  	
5	Ssemmuli Anthony	
6	Bategana Katwiremu Yorokamu
7	Baliddawa Edward Kafufu  	
8	Omara Geoffrey	
9	Wangolo Jacob 	
10	Namugwanya Benny Bugembe  	
11	Barumba Rusaniya Beatrice	
12	Mutyabule Florence Tibafana 	
13	Nauwat Rosemary 	
14	Kintu Florence	
15	Mukula George Michael	
16	Kahunde Hellen 	
17	Omona Kenneth Olusegun	
18	Tinyefuza David (Lt. Gen)	 
19	Ajok Lucy	
20	Namaganda Susan	
21	Mugume Roland	
22	Ochola Stephen	
23	Epetait Francis	
24	Kafeero Ssekitoleko Robert  	
25	Dr Okuonzi Sam Agatre	
26	Achile Manoah Mila 	
27	Bagoole John B 	
28	Anywarach Joshua Carter  	

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that committee has 28 Members. I put the question that this House approves the committee as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)
	 
Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline
 	
1	Amero Susan (Chairperson)          
2	Maj.Gen Muhwezi Katugugu Jim (Vice Chairperson)
3	Lyomoki Sam Jacob 
4	Niwagaba Wilfred
5	Lokii John Baptist
6	Mulongo Simon
7	Karungi Elizabeth
8	Lanyero Sarah Ochieng
9	Tumwebaze Kagiigi Frank
10	Sejjoba Isaac
11	Angina Charles (Brig.)  
12	Ogwal Jacinto Deusdedit
13	Balikudembe Mutebi Joseph
14	Lubega Medard Sseggona
15	Lukyamuzi John Ken
16	Acire Christopher
17	Odoi Oywelowo Fox 
18	Ssempijja Vincent Bamulangaki 
19	Kaddu Mukasa Jerome
20	Iriama Rose		

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that committee has 20 Members. I put the question that this House approves the committee as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)
  
Public Accounts Committee

1.	Wadri Kassiano Ezati (Chairperson) 	
2.	Akora Ebong Patrick  (Vice Chairperson)
3.	Yaguma Wilberforce	
4.	Bakunda Alex Byarugaba 	
5.	Kyooma Xavier Akampurira	
6.	Kiboijana Margaret N. 	
7.	Musasizi Henry Ariganyira	
8.	Drito Martin Andi 	
9.	Musinguzi Yona	
10.	Kwizera Eddie	
11.	Nalwanga Rebecca	
12.	Besisira Ignatius 	
13.	Asupasa Isiko	
14.	Boona Emma	
15.	Kaabule Evelyn 
16.	Achia Terence Naco	
17.	Mujuni Vincent Kyamadidi	
18.	Arinaitwe Kariisa Joy 	
19.	Ssekikubo Theodore 	
20.	Opolot Jacob Richards	
21.	Mugabi Muzaale Martin Kisule	
22.	Seninde Nansubuga Rosemary	
23.	Mpabwa Sarah Patience (Maj)	 
24.	Bihande Bwambale Yokasi	
25.	Ssewungu Joseph Gonzaga  	
26.	Bako Christine Abia	
27.	Alaso Alice Asianut	
28.	Wamanga Wamai Jack 	
29.	Cadet Benjamin	
30.	Karuhanga Kafureeka Gerald	

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that committee has 30 Members. I put the question that this House approves the committee as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on National Economy

1. 	Mukitale Biraahwa Stephen (Chairperson)
2. 	Mbagadhi Frederick (Vice Chairperson)
3. 	Okello Anthony	
4. 	Byamukama Nulu	
5. 	Lolem Micah Akasile 	
6. 	Dombo Emmanuel Lumala  	
7. 	Kamara John Nizeyimana	
8. 	Nsereko Muhammad 	
9. 	Isabirye Iddi	
10. 	Mbabazi Betty Ahimbisibwe	
11.	Kafabusa Werikhe Michael 	
12.	Byarugaba Grace Isingoma  	
13. 	Sempala Mbuga Edward William 	
14. 	Bahati David	
15. 	Bakaluba Mukasa Peter	
16. 	Bagiire Vincent Waiswa   	
17. 	Bakka Stephen Mugabi	
18. 	Migadde Robert Ndugwa  	
19. 	Lokeris Samson	
20. 	Kiiza Monday Ernest Apuuli	
21. 	Balyeku Moses Grace	
22. 	Timbigamba Lyndah 	
23. 	Aronda Nyakairima (Gen)
24.	Semujju Ibrahim Nganda
25. 	Wafula Oguttu	
26. 	Ssebagala Latif	
27. 	Obua Ogwal Benson	
28. 	Nalubega Tunde Mary	
29. 	Nalubega Mariam	
30. 	Maganda Julius	

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that committee has 30 Members. I put the question that this House approves the committee as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Local Government Accounts

1.	Sabiiti Jack (Chairperson)	
2.	Namayanja Florence (Vice Chairperson)	
3.	Turyahikayo Kebirungi Mary Paula	
4.	Chemaswet Abdi Fadhil Kisos	
5.	Babirye Veronica Kadogo  	
6.	Awongo Ahmed 	
7.	Ekuma George Stephen	
8.	Bakeine Mabel Lillian Komugisha	
9.	Eriaku Peter Emmanuel	
10.	Magyezi Raphael	
11.	Katoto Hatwib	
12.	Nshaija Dorothy Kabaraitsya	
13.	Lokii Peter Abrahams
14.	Ayepa Michael 	
15.	Ayoo Tonny	
16.	Egunyu Nantume Janepher 	Ogwang Peter	
17.	Kwiyucwiny Grace Freedom  	
18.	Adong Lilly	
19.	Ssemugaba Samuel	
20.	Nakabira Gertrude Lubega  	
21.	Kafuda Boaz		
22.	Bakireke Nambooze Betty	
23.	Nzoghu M. William 	
24.	Ebil Fred	
25.	Katuntu Abdu
26.	Namara Grace. K. 	
27.	Allen Andrew
28.	Olanya Gilbert
29.	Amodoi Silas Imalingat 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that committee has 30 Members. I put the question that this House approves the committee as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)
	
Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters
	
1	Najjemba Rose Muyinda (Chairperson) 
2	Dr Twa-Twa Mutwalante J. (Vice Chairperson)  
3	Nantaba Idah Erios	
4	Dr Bukenya Gilbert Balibaseka	
5	Dr Tumwesigye Elioda	
6	Bitekyerezo Medard  	
7	Nyirabashitsi Sarah Mateke  	
8	Khainza Justine	
9	Alero Tom Aza	
10	Nabbanja Robinah	
11	Kabasharira Naome	
12	Lematia Ruth Ondoru	
13	Dr Baryomunsi Chris	
14	Mwebaza Sarah Wenene	
15	Nakayenze Connie Galiwango	
16	Amongin Jacqueline 	
17	Kayagi Sarah Netalisire  	
18	Chekwel Lydia	
19	Igeme Nathan Nabeta		
20	Asamo Hellen Grace   	
21	Muhumuza David	
22	Kase-Mubanda Freda Nanziri	
27	Lakot Susan (Capt.)		 
23	Achieng Ruth	
24	Taaka Kevinah 	
25	Atim Anywar Beatrice	
26	Kaps Hassan Fungaroo	
28	Akello Rose Lily	
29	Kiyingi Bbosa Kenneth Joseph 	
30	Bahinduka Mugarra Martin 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that committee has 30 Members. I put the question that this House approves the committee as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)
	
Committee on Appointments
	 
1	Kasamba Matthias (Chairperson)	
2	Mpiima Dorothy (Vice Chairperson)	
3	Nakabale Patrick	
4	Ssentongo Nabulya Theopista	
5	Muwuma Milton	
6	Ochwa David	
7	Kasaija Stephen Kagwera	
8	Aleper Simon Peter	
9	Katuramu Hood	
10	Dr Ajedra Gabriel	
11	Lowila Oketayot	
12	Businge Rusoke Victoria	
13	Kasirivu Atwooki	
14	Turyahikayo Paula	
15	Nyakikongoro Rosemary	
16	Gen. Tumwine Elly		 
17	Amongi Betty	
18	Nandala-Mafabi Nathan	
19	Sebuliba Mutumba Richard	
20	Owor Otada Amooti	
21 	Mpuuga Matthias

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that committee has 21 Members. I put the question that this House approves the committee as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
MS NEBANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have not heard my name on the Standing Committees though I presented my interest to be on the Committee on National Economy. Even the first time they presented the names, it was missing until our Chief Whip included it. But I have not heard it again on any Standing committee. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I informed you that there were committees, especially the standing committees that were over subscribed. One had 35 Members, another 39 and another 36; and yet our resolution had agreed on 30 Members. Can you let me know where else you want to serve because the one you want has reached 30 Members? 

Defence is a sessional Committee, Hon. Nebanda, and if there is anybody else who has not been allocated, let the clerk know. They will show you the committees, which are available and you can make a choice, but many of them now have 30 Members. We will, however, find you somewhere.

Business Committee

1.	The Speaker
2.	Deputy Speaker
3.	Leader of Government Business
4.	Leader of the Opposition
5.	Government Chief Whip
6.	Opposition Chief Whip
7.	All party whips
8.	All committee chairpersons as ex-officio members
9.	Independent Members include:
10.	Nsanja Patrick
11.	Ababiku Jessica

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the Business Committee be approved as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Madam Speaker, is it in order for someone to serve on two standing committees? I have heard Nsanja Patrick on the Committee on Science and Technology and now on the Business Committee.

THE SPEAKER: We shall check. He is supposed to have one standing committee and one sessional committee. Hon. Members, if there are still Members who have not been placed on standing committees, inform the clerk so that adjustments can be made.

I also wanted to reassure Members that all the committees are equal and equally important. We are looking at that arrangement only for this first session. The Rules Committee will be assigned the responsibility of looking at splitting some committees and creating new ones. So just serve where you have been allocated for this session. It will be a good learning experience.

In the public gallery we have students from Pepperdine School of Law in California, USA. They are up here. We welcome them. They have come to watch the proceedings.

3.03
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, which has to do with National Forestry Authority (NFA). In December last year, National Forestry Authority thought to recruit an Executive Director among the jobs advertised in The Monitor Newspaper of Monday, 20th December. This advert run for 25 days up to 15th January 2011 and attracted 11 candidates. The soliciting company, which had been hired by NFA was Java Consulting Company.

The information I have got is that the 11 candidates sat for interviews, both oral and written, on 28 February 2011 and they equally sat for the third interview on aptitude and psycho-social assessment on 3 March 2011.

NFA board members requested, in the middle of March, the three candidates who had gone through the whole process and they are Dr Arthur Mugisha, Dr Robert Nabunyumya and Dr Hudson Andruo, to present to them memos of a picture of what they wanted NFA to be like in three years.

Madam Speaker, last week on Wednesday 6th July, another advert was run in The Daily Monitor advertising for the job of Executive Director. The only change on the advert was the company that was to handle the recruitment exercise. This time it was the human resource manager.

On Tuesday, 14th June in The New Vision, there appeared an article that the minister was cancelling the appointment of an NFA boss and she is quoted to have said that she was under pressure from State House to appoint the former LCV Chairperson of Kabarole District, Michael Mugisa, who holds a Bachelor of Science in Forestry only from Makerere University. However, hon. Mutagamba went ahead to say that this person did not sit for interviews and, therefore, could not be appointed.

Why I have raised this matter as one of national importance is that I am praying to this House that the honourable minister comes and makes a statement to explain to us what the fate is, of the three doctors whose names had been sent to her to be appointed as Executive Director. 

The other thing that I am interested in knowing is, is this confirming what The New Vision published that she is under pressure and, therefore, she is conceding and bowing to pressure from State House to hand pick a former LCV chairperson who did not sit for interviews? 

The interviews were conducted when he was participating in elections and now they are finding a soft avenue of bringing him in by placing a new advert, this time round not by the same company, Java, but by the Human Resource Manager so that he or she can manipulate the whole process and give us another Akankwasa who will go and carry the Shs 900 million or more than that -(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: I want my senior colleague to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs or Defence or that of Security to come and explain the circumstances under which security organs have also become a necessary component in verifying interviews for those who fail or pass them.  We are finding this exceedingly strange as Parliament.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you hon. Colleague for that information. I am adding to the litany of my prayers. In the both adverts, it was not indicated anywhere that candidates will be scrutinised by security. The New Vision of 14th June said that the Minister could not appoint any of the three doctors because he had forwarded their names to security for vetting.

The honourable minister should come to this House and tell us whether this advert required security to vet the candidates. Why is it that the first advert ran for three weeks, but this last advert which was placed on 6th of this month is only running for eight days? What is the logic in shortening the period? Madam Speaker, I rest my case.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are carrying many papers and I think you should lay them on Table. You are reading from papers which I cannot see.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I lay on Table the first advertisement by National Forestry Authority through Java Consulting Company. This advert was soliciting an Executive Director. It is dated Monday, 20 December 2010. 

I lay on Table the second advertisement which ran in The Daily Monitor on 6 July 2011 and this time the applications are going to the Human Resource Manager, National Forestry Authority and not Java Consulting Company.

I also want to lay on Table a publication on how the honourable minister was handling the process of appointing the three doctors and confirming that she was under State House pressure to appoint one Mugisa Michael, a former LCV Chairperson of Kabarole. It is dated, 14 June 2011. My prayers are well laid out in the Hansard. (Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: I request that the Leader of Government Business comes here and clearly tells us the government policy on recruitment. It is becoming a culture that people who lose elections are later appointed to important public offices. The person who stood against hon. Wamanga is among us, and is a commissioner; Hon. Kadunabbi is now an Insurance commissioner. I want to be guided so that we can advise our people to work for failure such that they can be appointed to important public offices.

THE SPEAKER: That is not related to what the honourable member was saying.

LT GEN. MOSES ALI: I find it unacceptable for the honourable member to pick papers on the streets and begin to say that he has a serious case. He should come out with a proper -(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: The honourable colleague laid on Table information which this House is happy to have received. The colleague wants Government to come and explain these circumstances. Is it in order for the Leader of Government Business to come and stand on this Floor of Parliament and call these documents rubbish picked from the street? Is he in order and is that Parliamentary language? 

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member had a lot of information in his head, but he was only using what he has laid to buttress his query. Please let us know when the matter will be answered.

LT GEN. MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I find it difficult to really entertain these issues raised by our colleague, but the Chair is yours and you are the final decision-maker.  I would recommend that these papers -(Laughter)- which have been presented here – newspapers bought from the street. Whatever the case is, I advise that this matter be referred to the Committee on Agriculture and Natural Resources. Otherwise, this issue would have qualified for oral answer; meaning that you should have followed proper procedure then the minister would find time to come and answer. 

Since he came without following the procedure, I will not pre-empt what you are going to say, but I would recommend that this issue be pushed to the committee. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Hansard is available to all the Members of this House. I think the Member was speaking slowly and what he said has been recorded. Let the Minister get the Hansard of today and then come and make a statement to this House. (Applause) The next item.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY 7TH JUNE 2011. 

(Debate continued.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, 45 Members had contributed to this motion. The other matters that we discussed on Thursday and Friday were outside this motion and so I will resume with Member No.46. I would like to invite hon. Alex Ndeezi to be followed by Hon. Baba Diri. Five minutes.

3.22
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD REPRESENTATIVE, CENTRAL): I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. There are only five minutes and, therefore, I will be specific. The first point is on elections in this country. His Excellency the President mentioned –

THE SPEAKER: You are disturbing the honourable member. Perhaps you can move down. Hon. Ndeezi, please come down.

MR NDEEZI: The President mentioned that last year we spent Shs 500 billion on elections. We are also aware that very soon, we shall be completing the election cycle by conducting village and parish elections, and we know that the Electoral Commission requires another Shs 200 billion  and that adds up to Shs 700 billion. I also know very well from my colleagues –[HON. KYANJO: “Procedure.”] No please.

THE SPEAKER: You are disturbing the Member.

MR KYANJO: I am rising on a matter of procedure, to assist a critical assistant of hon. Ndeezi, with express permission to be in this House because he helps a lot with communication each time hon. Ndeezi has to deliver a speech. The gentleman was away, and I felt that it would be procedurally right to accept the honourable member to get his aide closer so that he can communicate with comfort.

MR NDEEZI: Madam Speaker, do not worry. I have access to my assistant (Hon. Alaso rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: Now you are disturbing, hon. Ndeezi.

MR NDEEZI: Do not worry, Madam Speaker, because I have access to my assistant.

THE SPEAKER: Are you okay, hon. Ndeezi?

MR NDEEZI: Do not worry. I have access to my assistant.

THE SPEAKER: He is fine. 

MR NDEEZI: I am very comfortable and I have been comfortable here for the last 15 years -(Applause)- comfortable from 1996 to date uninterrupted; and so my friend, you should not worry because I am comfortable.

I was saying that the President said we spent Shs 500 billion on elections last year and very soon we shall be concluding the election cycle by holding village and parish elections for which the Electoral Commission requires Shs 200 billion, that adds up to Shs 700 billion. (Phone rings)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please switch off those telephones otherwise I will ‘arrest’ the telephones.

MR NDEEZI: I am also aware that we MPs spent more than Shs 2 trillion, which is quite a huge sum of money. I know it is unavoidable, but it is quite a huge sum of money; this money is enough to construct a dispensary in more than 1,000 sub-counties in this country, and also sufficient to sponsor more than 2,000 students at the university. What am I trying to say? I am trying to say that we can reduce the cost of conducting elections in this country while at the same time maintaining our democracy. 

I propose that we adapt the Rwandan style of elections. In Rwanda, the term of political leaders is seven years and not five. By conducting elections after every seven years, we save billions of shillings. 

So, Madam Speaker, my appeal is that the Government introduces a constitutional amendment to ensure that the term of office of political leaders is seven and not five years. 

Another important point -(Interjections)- -(Laughter)-

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MR NDEEZI: I hope you support that important amendment when it comes up. 

THE SPEAKER: Order Members! This has excited you, but please, allow hon. Ndeezi to speak.

MR NDEEZI: NAADS has recruited sub-county NAADS coordinators for a year, which is a problem. I had told these people to use the existing extension workers at the sub-county. But I hear these NAADS people have encroached on the NAADS money to hire new coordinators; that one, I will not accept.”  This was the pronouncement by His Excellency, the President.

We know that right now, these useless NAADS coordinators are still in place and are being paid by the Government. We also know that these NAADS coordinators consume more than 60 percent of the NAADS budget.

His Excellency, the President, has adequately accepted the problem, but we have not seen the solution. I, therefore, appeal to the Committee on Agriculture to ensure that the NAADS budget does not include funding for these coordinators.

I also appeal to the Minister of Agriculture to ensure that these NAADS coordinators are immediately phased out in line with the President proposition. 

My last point is on the work of Parliament. The President commended the Eighth Parliament for a job well done, but also reminded us that a lot of business was left pending by the Eighth Parliament. He urged the Business Committee of Parliament to look at this pending business with the view of sorting out the most urgent ones for prompt handling. 

I strongly believe that what we did in the Eighth Parliament should not be considered as dead efforts. I strongly agree with the President that the important business that was left pending should be handled by this august House. In this respect, I beg to make two important appeals. There is the Marriage and Divorce Bill that we handled in quite fine detail in the Eighth Parliament, and it was also there in the Seventh and Sixth Parliaments; I request our chairperson and members of the Business Committee to ensure that this Bill is reintroduced to Parliament at the earliest possible time. 

Secondly, I beg to remind you that in the Eighth Parliament – (Member timed out_)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, this is precisely what I wanted to ask you before hon. Ndeezi spoke. In recognising the challenges our colleagues with special needs have, the five minutes’ time allocation for the rest of us should not apply to hon. Ndeezi and hon. Baba Diri because it takes a lot of concentration on our part to pick out what hon. Ndeezi is saying and it takes hon. Baba Diri a lot of time to work it out. That is why I ask that these five minutes should not apply to them; maybe they need seven or so minutes, in the interest of affirmative understanding. I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I usually find them quite efficient in their delivery, but I think it is the clerk’s fault for not ringing the bell because they are supposed to ring the bell at four minutes, to notify the Members. Okay, hon. Ndeezi, you were disrupted; let me give you one more minute to complete. 

MR NDEEZI: There was only one point left and my colleagues disorganised me. (Laughter) I wanted to remind you that the Eighth Parliament passed a motion granting me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill called “The Persons with Disabilities (Amendment) Bill, 2011”. Parliament requested the Eighth Parliament to cause publication of the Bill and I am happy to let you know that the Bill has been published. 

Secondly, the motion urged the Minister of Finance to provide me with a Certificate of Financial Implication to enable me introduce this Bill to the House for the first reading. I regret to let you know that up to now, the Minister of Finance has not provided me with a Certificate of Financial Implication. Madam Speaker, I request the Leader of Government Business to prevail upon the Minister of Finance to respect the will of this Parliament and give out the Certificate of Financial Implication to enable us proceed with the first reading and discussion of this important Bill. I support the motion. Thank you so much. 

3.35
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the President for his comprehensive State of the Nation Address. The President mentioned each and every sector, which is for the good of our nation and I thank him for that. 

I would like to address myself on the side of agriculture. I appreciate the efforts of our government to ensure that we move from peasantry to modernity; that is, that we have to modernise our agriculture. Indeed it has taken a very long time; up to now, we have not fully modernised our agriculture and many people are still peasants. What are the reasons? One is land fragmentation. You will find that there is not enough land for large scale agriculture because of the way in which our homesteads are situated. When a father dies, they divide the piece of land among his three children and these three children too have six children each. So, the land becomes smaller and smaller and that is something that is hampering our modernisation. 

Secondly, there is the issue of the tools we use for farming. I appreciate the tax reduction on the hoe, but what we need now, in addition to the hoes, are tractors so that we can till large portions of land for production. With the hand hoe, we are just wasting our time and we shall never modernise our agriculture. Therefore, I am requesting that every district should be provided with at least three tractors, which can be used for clearing the land. 

I appreciate the NAADS programme, but the people handling it are letting us down; for example, for the so-called three commercial farmers per sub-county, you will find that the available land is only one acre and they are maybe given plants for only a quarter of an acre. How can we really commercialise and get money out of our work if we proceed at this speed? We need to be given enough planting materials and enough viable seeds. I have seen in my sub-county that the beans which were provided were rotten and never germinated. We need to improve our method of providing tools and materials for agriculture. 

Madam Speaker, the people of Koboko would like to do agro-business and they have gone one step further by putting up a one-stop centre in Koboko District where they sell maize flour, rice flour and oatmeal. However, our challenge is electricity, which has never reached Koboko and which will take long to reach. We were told, in the State of the Nation Address, that the Nyagak power project will be ready in December and we have heard the same for the last five years. So, let us be very serious and have that Nyagak power project for the people of West Nile who are in darkness, and also for agro processing. 

I do not know whether power will even be enough; can 3.5 megawatts really serve the whole West Nile? It will not be enough even for lighting. It will not cover all the seven West Nile districts. We are asking Government to connect us to the main grid from Jinja so that we can benefit, rather than depending on that small quantity. Very soon, we are going to have power from the other source. I know that at Murchison Falls, hydro power will be generated, but when will that be? It will take very long. We need to be connected to the main grid so that we benefit. If there is load shedding, we shall also suffer the same; if there is power, we shall also benefit.

I would like to come to health. I am very happy that the President, on page 30, talked about the health centre IIIs which are going to be upgraded to hospitals. I remember very well, about four or three years ago, Koboko was one of the health centres supposed to be upgraded to a district hospital. Now it is not among the six given here, yet the President made a pledge before all the people of Koboko that Koboko Health Centre would be elevated to a hospital.

You must remember that Koboko is at the border. It also serves people from Sudan, Congo and Uganda. It serves more people than Arua Hospital. I am requesting Government to ensure that the pledge of a government hospital for Koboko is put in place. Katakwi was mentioned with Koboko. Fortunately, Katakwi is mentioned here, but Koboko is not here. I appreciate the health centre IIs being built, but we need more staff - more nurses, more doctors - in these health centres otherwise, they will not serve us.

I have learnt with profound shock from the local council of Arua District that Arua nurses training is going to be changed to comprehensive nurses training. They want to remove the diploma for midwifery and nursing in Arua Hospital yet Arua Hospital is the only training hospital in West Nile that provides nurses and midwives. Where shall we get nurses? Shall we have enough nurses? I have also learnt, from reliable sources and from our observation, that these comprehensive nurses are not well trained. They attempt several courses here and there, but they are not qualified in a specific area. (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I know those who contributed the other time, so please, let us go round first.

3.43
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first of all commend the President for the State of the Nation Address and the Leader of the Opposition for the subsequent reply. 

The issue in my constituency is crocodiles. The President did not mention it neither did the Leader of the Opposition. It means that either the government is not yet informed or is not concerned about the people who have been eaten by these crocodiles. People have lost their lives. Some who are still living have lost limbs; others have lost – what I cannot say in parliamentary language – the sitting facilities, ears and so on. (Interjections) 

I would like to ask for the support of this House so that we move a motion and ask the government to compensate the families of these victims. The minister should be able to give us a statement because these crocodiles have been eating people since 2000. The minister should come up with a statement telling us what steps the ministry has taken.

Number two is about water. In my constituency, I have one big sub-county called Bukabooli, which is near the lake. It is actually at the banks of the lake. The problem here is that you cannot draw water from the borehole. If you get water from the borehole, it is salty or develops some solid matter and the water cannot be used. There is a problem. I do not know whether the minister of water is around. We can either tap rain water or harvest water from the lake.

Number three is about what my colleague, hon. Baba Diri, has talked about - health. I have just been touring my constituency and I toured all the health centres. I want to disagree with the Leader of the Opposition that there are no drugs. To a certain extent, there are drugs. The main problem is the staffing. It is not that the people are not there; they are there, but they are not working. They just go there to draw salaries. You find that there is one person at the health centre yet about three people are deployed there. The Minister of Health should put more emphasis on ensuring that these people report for duty. 

The other alternative would be; since these people are drawing salaries and they are not working, let the ministry withdraw them from the payroll. That money can then be given to the other people who are working. I need to know the role of the health inspectors. I moved there but you find that all the centres are in a very pathetic condition. We need to know the role of the inspectors and these people who are drawing salaries and are not working. What is the problem? The minister should come up.

I have a health centre IV which has got an ambulance and a theatre and it is supposed to have a doctor. The doctor has never reported for two years now. The theatre is redundant, the ambulance is never used for its purpose and it is now one of the pool cars at the district. (Member timed out_)   

3.49
MS SARAH KATAIKE NDOBOLI (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): I thank the House and particularly His Excellency the President of Uganda for the State of the Nation Address. Equally, I acknowledge our colleagues on the Opposition side for their side of the story. 

My interest is mainly in the agricultural sector. We were all given opportunity to contribute. I acknowledge all the sides, as I have said before, but I feel we have a missing link. Even in this national address, we are acknowledging that 68 percent of the population do not have economic empowerment. I, therefore, propose, particularly for my people in Budaka who I am sure constitute the 68 percent, that we have clear strategies to address poverty. Much as the NAADS programme is on the ground, we are all aware that it captures the empowered communities and the right people are not being addressed. So, I feel that when we are considering the Budget, we should squarely address the real issues by providing funds for the agricultural sector. We are emphasising an industrial revolution, but I know that it is the agricultural sector which will drive the industrial sector. 

My second concern is about our policies for the environment. Many of us have travelled outside Uganda and what we notice is the polluted and dirty environment. We are all concerned that policies are put in place but we never implement them. I pray that this august House, this time round, addresses the issues of buveera. Let us emulate Rwanda. Rwanda is a young country compared to us, but their policies are progressive. So, I pray that we put things into action and leave this business of having theoretical stories. 

Another issue, Madam Speaker – I will come back another day. (Laughter)

3.52
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, before I say anything on the State of the Nation Address, I wish to report to this House some two unfortunate incidents which occurred in my constituency last week. There was a big hailstorm which destroyed crops, farms and houses in Bitoma Sub-county. Secondly, there was a fire which burnt the boys’ dormitory at St Mary’s Vocational School in Kyamuhunga Sub-county. It destroyed property of about 70 students. Fortunately, in both incidents we did not lose any lives. 

A lesson for me, and this is the appeal I make to Government, is that we should decentralise a little more the services of fire brigade. In this case of the fire at St Mary’s Vocational School, the fire brigade truck from Mbarara arrived long after the ashes had cooled down. 

Madam Speaker, regarding the State of the Nation Address, the people of Igara West received His Excellency’s speech with a lot of enthusiasm, appreciation and real conviction that the choice they had made in February to re-elect His Excellency the President was the right choice. (Applause) This is because the State of the Nation Address reaffirmed their conviction that he is still the man with stamina, conviction and vision necessary to continue leading this country even beyond 2016. (Applause) That is why I have the pride to really support the motion moved by hon. Najjemba. 

I think that the State of the Nation Address deserves our full support, and I will give two examples that are pertinent to my constituency. First of all, Igara West is basically agricultural. As an agricultural society, we are supportive of the President’s vision of value addition through agro-processing. We are happy and appreciate Government’s support last year. We were able to access the agricultural facility and we were able to put up a second factory for the farmers, a subsidiary of Igara Tea Factory, based in Buhweju. This factory is able to employ and support more than 4,000 households. Last year, the factory was able to bring in almost US$ 10 million in terms of foreign exchange. 

It gives me satisfaction to see that Government’s vision is in the right direction. If value addition or agro-processing can be done for the rural poor people in Igara, suppose we did it across the country. That 4000 people are able to bring in US$ 10 million, if 10 percent of our working population were able to bring in this amount, I think we would be talking of about US$ 7 billion per annum.

Secondly, in terms of support, I would like to request, while emphasising support to agriculture, that we consider giving subsidies to farmers in terms of agricultural inputs - especially for us in the tea industry - like fertilizers, pesticides and high yielding clones. 

I also look at the vision of His Excellency the President on rural electrification and to me this is the basis for rural transformation. We have looked at the programmes that we have in Igara West and I have already made a proposal to the honourable Minister of Energy to consider one of the rivers, River Mchwera, which is sizeable enough. Preliminary estimates give us about three megawatts. 

Finally, regarding the State of the Nation Address, I paid attention to the decorum that we gave to the last speech of the President. I have looked at rule 9(4): “The President, while occupying the Chair of State may make a Presidential statement, which shall be heard - and I would like to stress – in silence and not followed by any comment or question…” (Member timed out_) 

3.57
MR AMOS MANDERA (NRM, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to commend His Excellency for the State of the Nation Address that was very wonderful and comprehensive. I have a few comments. 

It is true that agriculture is the backbone of Uganda’s economy and 80 percent of Uganda’s population are peasants. In his speech, the President emphasised improvement of household income, but when you look at our peasants, many of them sell their produce at podding or flowering stage. In April, for example, a kilo of maize was sold at Shs 200 and yet today it is at Shs 1,100. A kilo of coffee was sold at Shs 500 and yet today it is Shs 2,000. A kilo of beans was sold at Shs 600 but today, in July, it is over Shs 1,000. I, therefore, want to suggest to this House that we revive the Warehouse Act which emphasised the receipt system, and make efforts to mobilise our farmers to undertake collective marketing because many of our farmers lose out. Once they sell their produce at the flowering stage, their household income cannot improve at all. 

Secondly, his speech emphasised agro-processing and many of our colleagues here were citing the problem of the banana bacterial wilt. The government has taken initiative to process agricultural products, bananas inclusive, and a case in point is Nyaruzinga in Bushenyi. Madam Speaker, I want to bring it to your attention that the people of Kooki have been exporting bananas to London -(Interjections)– Yes! However, I also want to tell this august House that most bananas in Kooki are being affected by this bacterial wilt. 

Another point is that the government adopted a system that every sub-county must have a government-aided secondary school and yet in some sub-counties in Kooki, we have a secondary school where students study under trees. I call upon the Ministry of Education to pay keen attention to that so that those secondary schools can be like other secondary schools in the country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.03
MS GERTRUDE NAKABIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Lwengo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the State of the Nation Address made by His Excellency the President of Uganda. I also appreciate the presentation from the Leader of the Opposition in which he tried to look at some of the critical issues that need to be addressed. Thank you very much.

I would like to comment on the education sector. It was catered for in the State of the Nation Address but I was of the view that we include some salient issues. They talked about the teacher to pupil ratio of 1:56. I would say that target is genuine, but we also have to consider where it is not applicable. There are some places where that target cannot be reached because of the geographical status of some of those districts. 

In my district, Lwengo, and parts of Ssembabule District like Lwemiyaga, if you take that ratio, it leaves some schools without teachers. When the ministry was establishing the schools in those remote areas, it considered the distance the pupils used to walk and they established schools under the SFG programme. So, when you take that ratio and you find a school with 150 pupils, it means they are going to post three teachers to that school whereas it might be having seven classes. 

So, I would request the ministry to not only stop at the teacher to pupil ratio of 1:56 but also consider the class to teacher ratio. If the school has seven classes, let it get seven teachers plus one and that is eight teachers per school. Otherwise, some districts might be left out. 

I appreciate the point on training and the mode of governance in different schools. However, I would like to add that even the school management committees in primary schools should be considered for training because those committees represent the government and so they should learn to interpret what the government puts up. If we leave them behind without training, they are going to let us down. 

Another issue I want us to critically look at is the pupils’ lunch. We have been saying that the government is doing its work and so let the parents do their work and pack food. Currently, due to the drought and whatever, even though we are telling the pupils to pack food, the food to be packed is not there. Parents do not have food and so our pupils are starving. So, I would like the government to take into consideration the pupils’ lunch. 

I also request the government to revise the Functional Adult Literacy (FAL) programme. Honourable members will agree with me that what happened at the swearing in exercise of our local leaders was alarming. So, I think we better put that FAL programme back on board so that we can help especially the local leaders to get basic knowledge. It should be compulsory for the local leaders. That is my opinion. 

We have been complaining about the inspectorate department saying that it is not working. I was expecting to find something on inspection and the facilitation of the ESA department so that it is motivated, but it was not catered for. (Member timed out_)

4.08
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. I rise to support the motion to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address and to appreciate the NRM Government for the efforts in developing our nation. 

In furtherance of the good policies to bring quality services closer to the people, and in order to reduce maternal and child mortality, health services should be firmly routed at health centre IIs all over the country. The health centres should be equipped. They should have a maternity unit, a doctor, enough nurses and a midwife. In one of the sub-counties in Mitooma, Kanyabwanga, there is a health centre II which was built about five years ago and it has been closed all this time. Why? Because there is no accommodation for a doctor and that is because after it was built, Government changed policy.

I think simple facilities like gloves, pads and cotton wool should be in plenty in these health centres because their absence keeps women away. So, we should ensure that they are provided. 

On roads, Mitooma has hard-to-reach areas like Kiyanga, Kanyabwanga and Mayanga. Those who know the language can get the story from the very names. Due to poor roads, the women risk delivering at home rather than dying of ruptured uteruses on bicycles and boda bodas on such bumpy roads.  Despite this, the people in these areas, especially Kiyanga, are hardworking. They grow a lot of rice, groundnuts and vegetables. However, their gains are undermined by the poor roads and so they need to be assisted to add value to their produce by processing. There is also a trunk road that runs between Kitagata and Kabira, but it has become completely impassable and has been abandoned. 

Food security, as most Members have said, has been threatened by the banana wilt and there are rumours that the genetically modified species from Kawanda and the pesticides that we use to kill the weeds could again be the source of this wilt. Research should be undertaken as a matter of urgency and farmers should be advised. When you see one of your banana plants affected what steps should you take so as to stem the spread to the whole plantation? 

The NAADS programme is doing a good job, but in my area, it concentrates on giving goats and things like beans and maize.  I would think that NAADS should be used to sensitise people to grow vegetables. Research indicates that in the whole of Ankole, there is plenty of food, but our children are stunted because of lack of vegetables. So, NAADS should play this role. 

Further to that, our hard-to-reach areas lack clean water. Of course they do not have electricity and they lack means of telecommunication so that when one has a problem, they have no way of calling for help. I, therefore, appeal to UTL to take interest, especially in the area of Kiyanga. 

Education levels in the hard-to-reach areas are very low and supervision would be the answer. I have been a civil servant before and I think that –(Member timed out_)

4.14
MS NAKATO KYABANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to comment on the issue of rural electrification. First of all, I would like to thank the government for the programme, but I would like to inform Members that there are a number of districts which have a problem of electricity. In Gomba District, for example, the total coverage of electricity is less than 10 percent. Out of 85 trading centres, we only have power in 10 of them. This has affected economic development in the district.  

So, I would like to move that when it comes to budget allocations, let the programme of rural electrification be given more funds so that it can cater for such districts not to lag behind in development. I would like to move, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

4.15
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion, but I have some few remarks to make. 

His Excellency talked about the Public Service and delivery of service, but it looks like as a government, we do not really do much. When you look at the pay disparities in the Public Service, it undermines delivery of service. So, I do not know how we can achieve what the President is talking about unless we harmonise these pay disparities. 

There are some pays that are not realistic. When you see that His Excellency the President – the fountain of honour - under the Presidential and Emoluments Act is paid Shs 3.5 million and yet people like the Chief Justice get close to 10 million; is that pay realistic? Why can’t we have harmonised pay, as he mentions on page 50? Unless we pay our civil servants well and facilitate them, we should not expect much. 

We have also created satellite institutions or organisations. You find that there is a ministry, but the people being supervised by the ministry, like the permanent secretary or the Secretary to the Treasury, are paid about Shs 2 million and then the person who is being supervised, like the Auditor-General, is being paid about Shs 40 million. Unless that contradiction is solved, corruption will not stop. 

Madam Speaker, the President talked about corruption on page 49. If we are to fight corruption, we must put mechanisms in place and one of them is the IGG. Why don’t we have a substantively appointed IGG? What does the government say? We neither have the IGG nor the deputy but the law says we should have the IGG and two deputies. If you are committed to fighting corruption, then this should be the first priority.  

When you look at the pay of doctors, who spend seven years at university, and the RDCs who we do not know how many years they have spent at school, the doctor gets Shs 600,000 while the RDC who may really not have gone to school gets about Shs 1.7 million. These contradictions have to be harmonised.

When you look at the agricultural sector, which is very important, we as Members of Parliament should go out and encourage food production. The President, on page 13, talks about irrigation using bottles, but he needs to be informed that for the country to have an irrigation system, we must have an irrigation policy. We do not have an irrigation policy in Uganda; how are we going to implement it? We do not even have the required manpower. Recently when I checked, I found that out of the five irrigation engineers we had, one has retired and another one is in Tunisia, which leaves us with only three. So, how are we going to do the irrigation?  

Another issue is about corruption. We tend to blame civil servants that they are very corrupt but it seems the political class is not any different from those people because corruption is universal. So, we should not apportion blame only on the lower local government and not on some politicians somewhere. So, when we are handling them, we should not discriminate.

If we talk about the rule of law, we should encourage the Ministry of Justice to ensure that there is adherence to the Judicial Code of Conduct. When you take your matter to court, it is decided upon, but it may take you three to four years to get a judgement. So, the Minister of Justice should see to it that at least there is adherence to the Judicial Code of Conduct.

Madam Speaker, in the health sector, we have Mulago as a referral hospital, but Mulago is no longer a referral hospital nor is it a teaching hospital. The doctors are not facilitated and in the end, you find that all the doctors are going to South Africa, the UK, Kigali -(Member timed out_)

4.20
MR JEREMIAH TWATWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, allow me to join the nation first and foremost to thank His Excellency the President for the good address, which he gave to the nation. The address was full of good things - what had taken place, the challenges and what was required as a way forward. In that respect, I would like to discuss the subject matter, mainly emphasising what should be done particularly in my area, that is, Iki-Iki constituency, which I represent.

First and foremost, when His Excellency was undertaking his campaign, he made a number of pledges and I would like the various ministers to address this issue and respond to the challenges, which the President highlighted. One of the areas was to convert Budaka Hospital to a general hospital to cater for the district and the highway because there are many accidents which take place on that highway. 

If that health centre IV is converted to a hospital, it will cater for the population in Budaka, Kibuku, Namutumba, a bit of Butaleja and the accidents on the road. In a similar way, Iki-Iki County needs a health centre IV because it is now fully-fledged as a county and requires that health centre IV.

In the education sector, schools have been constructed and classrooms have been equipped with desks, but now we have a problem of delivery of quality education. The grades that the children get in that part of the country are not the best. I would like His Excellency the President and you, colleagues, to join me and say that the government, together with parents, should find a way of motivating the teachers in that part of the country and also feed the children. One of the problems is that the children go hungry. They have no food and so they do not turn up for classes, and even those who turn up are not attentive when they are in class. So, we need to revisit the issue of feeding the children.

The other issue, which I would like to highlight, is that of energy. His Excellency the President promised to extend electricity to Ryama Sub-country and Kameluka Sub-county; good enough, in the latter, a seed secondary school has been built, but they would require electricity. This also includes the community. So, I would like to appeal to the Minster of Energy to help that part of the country to get this energy so that the people are served.

The other issue, which was not well highlighted in the address of His Excellency the President, was that of the environment. That part of the country has been environmentally degraded; people have cut down the trees. We now need to address this problem energetically so that we can plant trees. In that way, we shall be contributing to the improvement of the environment and bring back rain, which is not very regular in that part of the country and has brought famine. Now, when people plant their crops, they do not get good yields.

Next is the issue of unemployment. The youth are not employed and this is a big problem, which may cost us our political jobs if we do not address it. I would like to advise that the industries which were in Mbale, like ATM, and the cotton industries which were in Bukedea should be revived and at least be part of addressing the issue of unemployment in that part of the country. (Member timed out_)

4.26
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the President for making an attempt to tell Ugandans what the state of Uganda is. Though it is called the State of the Nation Address, it has a lot of omissions and a lot of amusements. So, we can maybe call it the state of amusement of the nation.

The good omissions include those in Moyo District; there is a mini hydro power dam right now operational in Metu Sub-county built by GTZ, the people of Moyo and the people of Metu Sub-county. On page 20, under energy, it has not been included. Small as it is, it is a good example for this country and, therefore, it merited being mentioned here.

The President, in his numerous good speeches, where he seems to be always intending to amuse the people, has ever told the people of West Nile that if you are given power -(Interruption)

MR KYEWALABYE: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member on the Floor to refer to a serious document, the State of the Nation Address, as a document of state of amusement? Even though he may not agree with the government, I think he should respect the document because it is the President of this nation where he lives, who has delivered that document and, therefore, it deserves respect. If you have disagreements with it, you can use another word. Is it in order, Madam Speaker, for him to use that word?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo, I think you are bordering on breaching a certain part of the Constitution, which states that the person who wrote that document is a fountain of honour.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you for your guidance. I refer to that good example of the hydro power dam built by an organisation, GTZ, in collaboration with the people of Metu. It never delayed a lot like the Nyagak power dam here. A 3.5 megawatt power dam construction taking a minimum of five years; what about this good one of Karuma of 600 mega watts? Effectively, you would say you will lose 0.5 out of the 3.5 megawatts and then you take five years to generate 3 megawatts. How many years of delay then would you take to construct a 600 megawatt power station? You need over 200 years.

That is why, with due respect, I know the President is the fountain of honour, but when he speaks to us, we feel happy and amused when he says power is going to be there next July. We feel happy and clap in West Nile. We get amused by these things. This year he did not even mention a specific month like in the past when he used to mention July. Every time he promises that this power dam of Nyagak is going to be finished this month, people clap; they feel happy and get amused. That is why I respectfully say that when he speaks, I get amused. 

I invite you, Madam Speaker, to visit Metu because you are known to be a friend of Moyo. I also invite the President to visit Metu and see a grass thatched house connected to hydropower without being burnt. His Excellency amused us in West Nile by saying that, “You people, why don’t you build with Mabati because your grass thatched houses will be burnt if we connect them to hydro power.” There are houses in Metu which are connected to this power but they have not caught fire. We invite the President to come and see so that he can use another source of labour, like the Army, to build Nyagak without any delay. 

I know that when it comes to managing things, the President is good at using the Army. I suspect that he has failed to ensure that Nyagak is built without delay because he was not using the Army. When he thinks about building the railway network, he thinks about using the Army because he knows that his expertise lies there. I suggest that the President should use the Army to build Nyagak such that we do not hear good things which cannot come to pass. 

Lastly, we the people of West Nile, borrowing from the example of the Metu people, should be granted permission by this House and we build the dam ourselves. We should mobilise money and build the dam because we have been waiting on the state without success. If we do this, we will be blamed for undermining the powers of the President or the state. For how long are we going to be kept waiting? The rest of Uganda is moving on. There are new opportunities opening up in Southern Sudan and we should benefit. If infrastructure is not in place, then how can we benefit? 

An example of deliberate delay is a bridge called Kiakia on River Inyao between Rhino Camp and Obongi. The shortest way to go to Obongi is from Pakwach through hon. Omach’s constituency. It is a short distance between Rhino Camp and Obongi, but because there is no bridge on River Inyao, we cannot cross. This bridge has been budgeted for and there is money for it on paper, but it stopped at the stage of design. (Member timed out_)

4.34
MS MARY TUUNDE (NRM, Workers’ Representative): His Excellency’s speech was very good; it was gender sensitive and friendly because it touched on all the necessary sectors which would affect the livelihood of people in the country. He talked about the economy, but it was late because there is an economic crisis in Uganda and the whole globe. If we have a crisis and there is a lapse in communication, then you can cause a problem. Every conflict has the potential of becoming violent if you do not address it in time. Next time, let us have people to talk about the economy and inflation so that citizens get to know what is happening around them. 

Agriculture is an important sector because Government cannot create jobs for everybody in this country. People are farmers and they are doing a good job in this country. If we try to modernise agriculture minus irrigation, in this era of environmental degradation, climate change and ozone layer effect, we cannot do much. Nothing comes out every time we talk about irrigation. It was even talked about last year. Now we should walk the talk; we should not only talk about it and leave it there. We should make sure that all the policies we talk about are put in place. 

You cannot succeed by talking about good health centres minus the personnel. The personnel should be well motivated and doctors put in place in all those centres. We should not only look at other resources in the education sector, but at the human resources too. They should be motivated such that they go and work in those hard-to-reach areas. 

I would like to thank Government for putting in place an employment policy, which was a problem before. In that employment policy, there is a minimum wage component and we are seeing results coming in. In future, the Ministry of Labour should make sure that the employment policy is put in place. 

As we look at creating jobs, we should know who is benefiting. We should not forget the Decent Work Agenda of ILO. We are seeing investors coming here to exploit our workers. Some investors come here with their own workers, for example, the Chinese and Indians. They even bring in porters as if we do not have porters in Uganda. We should create jobs for our indigenous people and not for Kenyans or people from other places. 

We should also think of retention of those ones that we already have in place. The teachers are not well motivated and this is true for all the other civil servants. There is inflation but there is nobody talking about them. When the Minister of Finance was reading the budget, she said that they consulted KACITA, bankers and other groups, but what about the workers? We have our negotiating machinery, but why is it not in place? Why aren’t we considered when they are making the budget? The Police should be motivated and this cannot be done using salary alone. We can use other motivating factors. (Member timed out_)

4.39
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): When you listen to the NRM side, they start by thanking the President, but at the end they complain about their areas. My suggestion is that time should be given to Members of Parliament to visit the whole of Uganda and we see what exactly is on the ground. That will help us know how things are. This business of starting by praising and then you turn to complaining is very dangerous. 

I am one of the Members of Parliament who matched out during that Address and it was not intentional, but because Government does not deliver. 

When you look at page 25, the President talks about procurement of P.4 and P.5 curricula. What curricula was procured? We do not know. We have been having a former curriculum and we have a thematic curriculum; and even if he talks about procurement, in Uganda, P.4 and P.5 teachers were given only two copies per school per subject to run. 

Pupils do not have textbooks under the new thematic curriculum, and that is why, up to now, we still have a problem of emphasising teaching in local languages. But schools are still teaching in English and at the same time, examinations are coming in English. Either way, people go to Nasser Road and print exams in English whereas Government is giving exams in Luganda for our children. Where is education headed?

He talks about customised performance target contracts. Ninety-five percent of primary teachers had this exercise, but what are the results? 

He talks about the payment of hardship allowances to teachers in hard-to-reach areas. All teachers in Uganda are in hard-to-reach areas. (Laughter) A teacher from Villa Maria going to Kabukunge uses calories to go to that school. A teacher from Kampala uses a taxi and pays a lot of money, and it is all hardship.

It is only because the Police and UPDF officers took a certain oath, otherwise they would have been the first to go to the streets. Civil servants must also be considered. 

Unless the Ministry of Education writes a circular to Government schools, there is no way headteachers can ask parents to bring lunch or pay money for lunch when there is no ministerial policy on it, because that would be charging fees.

I was also amused. The President said payment of capitation grants for both private and universal schools was low and after his speech, headteachers went on strile and told us that they would stop children from studying. What did they pay that time when schools were closing?

Before we start universal A ‘level education, I am of the view that we constitute a committee to research on how we shall do it; perhaps UPE is facing problems because there was no research team. Hon. Kawanga Semogerere, the DP President Emeritus, said two children; President Museveni said four; and then UPE started without a research desk.

In UPE schools, we do not have PTA associations because parents are no longer paying fees, but the President said we shall conduct workshops for parents and teachers’ associations. Where are they from? PTA deals with money and it is not there.

As I wind up, I will look at health on page 30. The President said there are plans to decongest Mulago National Referral Hospital through construction of three satellite hospitals at Naguru, in Nakawa Division; another in Kawempe Division; and Kiruddu in Makindye. Is he catering for Kampala alone or should it be for the whole of Uganda? 

When you want to decongest Mulago, first construct a referral hospital in Kalungu as a new district. You created new districts to give us better services and, therefore, all new districts should have referral hospitals and then we shall see development. I beg to sit, Madam Speaker. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: I thank you.

4.44
MS JENNIFER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): I thank you, Madam Speaker, and also take the opportunity to thank His Excellency the President, for his State of the Nation Address, which was a very good one with good plans. I strongly believe that if we join hands, we can implement these plans together for a better Uganda. (Applause)

Most of the issues raised in the State of the Nation Address affect Ntoroko, both directly and indirectly. I will give a brief background of the economic activities in Ntoroko District.

The first activity is fishing along the shores of Lake Albert; the second is cattle rearing in the low-lying area of Butuku; and the third activity is crop growing along the foot of Mt. Rwenzori.

On page 16, he pointed out the bad fishing methods which lead to inadequate fish. I strongly agree with him that the bad fishing methods have led to low income for the government.

In Ntoroko, the people who live along the shores of Lake Albert entirely depend on fishing for their livelihood and as a result, there is nothing that they do apart from fishing to earn a living.

I agree with the President that the poor fishing methods are not good and in the long-run, immature fish is caught. My humble appeal to the line ministry and Government is to sensitise the people on the good methods of fishing. Secondly, the Government and other authorities like URA should stop the sale of small nets because fishermen buy the nets from the market and use them to catch the fish, after which their fish is burnt or destroyed.  

This causes conflict and normally they come to us, the leaders, complaining that they gave us their vote, but the Government is burning their fish and yet if the Government came out, especially the line ministry, and sensitised these people on the good methods of fishing, the people would do the same.  I humbly appeal to the line ministry to sensitize the people and the people will follow it up. The same people who fish along Lake Albert share a border with Toyo Game Reserve and, therefore, do not have enough land; there is a lake on one side and a game reserve on the other, and the people have increased in numbers.

I want to report to this House that when people die there, their bodies are thrown into the water because they do not have any land to bury their dead! The President, on page 38, talked about Government commitment to sustain land use. I appeal to the wildlife authority and Government to provide some small piece of land for these people so that they can bury their dead, instead of dumping the bodies into the lake.

The low-lying area of Butuku, with cattle keepers, always floods when it rains. Much as rain is an act of God, the floods can be controlled because there are measures like the President talks about on page 13. He talks about water reservoirs commonly known as valley dams. The people’s cows during the drought die in thousands, but if the government can put up valley dams to collect this water, which floods during the rainy season, then that water can be kept and used during the drought for the animals.

The people who cultivate along Mt Rwenzori harvest big, but their harvest is sold cheaply because there is plenty. The President talked about modern storage facilities, which I wish could be put into place -(Member timed out_)

4.49
MR PHILLIP WAFULA-OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I recognise the State of the Nation Address by the President -[Mr Odonga Otto: “Guidance.”]-

THE SPEAKER: On what? You are taking hon. Wafula’s time.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence and guidance. The Member from Ntoroko raised a very serious issue of throwing dead bodies into the water, and I think it is something so urgent that we may not even have to wait for the State of Nation Address to end before the minister can substantiate, because tomorrow or even today, more bodies will be thrown into the water and this is very traumatising to hear about. I thought I could seek your indulgence so that at an appropriate time, as you may guide, that issue attracts specific comment from the line ministry, because I feel it is a little gross. Thank you so much. 

MR NASASIRA: Madam Speaker, which line ministry is hon. Odonga Otto talking about? We want to know where he is directing his question. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think hon. Odonga Otto is concerned about what hon. Mujungu said, that the people of the islands in Ntoroko are caught between the water on one hand and the national park on the other hand and have no land of their own, and that even when their people die, they throw them into the water because they have nowhere to bury them. That is what hon. Mujungu said. 

MR NASASIRA: Anyway, we are going to find out. We are going to engage the honourable member and the relevant ministry will come here and explain. [Hon. Members: “Which one?”] There is no ministry for throwing bodies in the lake -(Laughter)- we are going to inquire whether it is the Ministry of Local Government, whether it is a security matter or whether it is the Ministry of Health. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, being the shadow minister in charge of water and environment, I am moved by the concerns of hon. Odonga Otto. One danger of dumping a body in water is the catastrophe of diseases and other developments of that kind. So, the Government Chief Whip should have known that it is the Ministry of Water and Environment to answer that query and possibly the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to rule that it is a very serious matter and we shall need an answer for the people of Ntoroko, when closing this debate on the State of the Nation Address. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope I am just starting because I had not made – 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you will get your five minutes. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I have listened to the President make – (Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your guidance that at the end of the debate on the State of the Nation Address, the relevant minister shall respond, but under the circumstances, should we eat fish? This has far reaching implications – the fact that dead bodies are being thrown in the river and fish is being supplied on the market and in big hotels, even in the parliamentary canteen! Can the Minister of Health come out and clearly tell us because these are very important things. (Laughter)

MR BAHINDUKA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to give additional information. What he has said is absolutely true. The land was grabbed by the game reserve that existed, but initially, the land belonged to the people. On average, in Ntoroko, 20 people die a month and as I speak, two people were killed on the lake two days ago because they were trying to steal nets, and one of the bodies has been lying around for two days because they have nowhere to bury it and it is terrible. I call upon this House to find a solution for the people there because it is a shame and it is even ashaming for us to stand here in Parliament and talk about it. I call upon the ministry and the Uganda Wildlife Authority to come and rescue us with immediate effect. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you are taking hon. Wafula Oguttu’s time. What do we do? Okay, let us hear from the neighbours of Ntoroko, briefly. 

MS NTABAZI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I happen to be a neighbour of Ntoroko District and a Member of Parliament from Bundibugyo District; Ntoroko District was in fact born from our district. So, most of the problems, which occur in Ntoroko District, affect all of us because it is the only lake which we feed on, most especially when it comes to fish. As district leaders at that time, we tried our level best to inform the ministries because this involves many ministries: Forestry, tourism, health, lands, environment and many others. So, we tried our best to involve the RDCs and the security leaders, but the problem remained one; when we involved the Ministry of Fisheries, they said that if we put this issue on air, the market for fish from that area would be lost and we would lose exports. So, the matter was turned into something different, but the problem is that people are dying. Ntoroko County is heavily populated and it has more than 56 categories of people and different cultures. HIV/AIDS is spreading fast in this sub-county and people are dying every day. We should really come in and assist. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this House notes with concern the situation of land management and use in Ntoroko District, and we ask the government to respond when closing the debate on the State of the Nation Address. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I hope Members will not interrupt my time. 

THE SPEAKER: Do not sit down unless I tell you to. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, it is sad that we should be thanking the President when he actually forgot such an important matter that my colleague from Ntoroko raised. Maybe he does not know that there are citizens in this country that cannot be buried but are fed on by crocodiles and fish, which we eventually eat and export. 

I want to talk about education. The statistics show that in our country, for every 100 kids who start in primary one, only 27 complete primary seven. In Kenya, about 80 complete primary seven and in Tanzania, about 70 complete P.7. Kids run away from our UPE schools because of various reasons: The girls have no pads, like somebody said, but most important is the question of feeding our children. Hon. Nakabira from Lwengo talked about it; children run away from school because they do not have food; they are starving and cannot concentrate. In Bugiri, teachers tried to improvise so that they could cooperate with parents and feed the children. However, the President went over there and reprimanded the headteachers and threatened to sack them if they ever asked parents for food to feed their own children. This is very unfair because I am sure that the President’s children ate from the schools where they studied, just like all our children. Our children do not go to UPE schools; they go to private schools and feed well. They even carry tons of food to school in their bags. But we have a law that stops parents from communally feeding their children at school. So, the children flee those schools.

We are begging the President to revise this. If there are parents who want to feed their children and are able, the President should review his position and not be so hard and threaten to sack headteachers. Feeding the children will also help the economy. We shall have a big domestic market for food.

Secondly, is the issue of water. Bugiri is a water-distressed district, yet we border a lake. Hon. Majegere was talking about it. He is my neighbour in the west. We have a lake which is no longer useful to us. We used to eat fish from there, but now there is no fish in Lake Victoria for us to eat. If the fish is there, it is extremely expensive. If the fish is caught, it is taken away and exported. It is sad that we like exporting our fish to get dollars, but deny our own people protein, including our children, so that they can study well.

We have hills surrounding the lake in Bugiri. We would like to ask Government to consider bringing us water from the lake and put it on the hills so that it comes to our homes or at least trading centres. Hon. Majegere talked about crocodiles eating people because these women and children go to either bathe or fetch water from the lake, sometimes 10 kilometres away. It is hard for some of us to thank the President when there are issues like this which are not raised. 

You cannot dig boreholes in Bugiri because the water level is very low. Half of the boreholes, which are there, are spoilt and the government does not repair them -(Member timed out_) 

5.03
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have to thank the President for having presented the State of the Nation Address. However, I have this to be observed.

Upon receipt of the document, I perused through, but to my dismay, I did not see anything about water for consumption. This is a very big omission for this country. In Adjumani, we have water problems. Women and girls spend their days and nights at boreholes and wells. It eats on our productive time. Next day, when the girls get to school, they cannot concentrate because they sleep in class. The status of our water for consumption needs to be taken into consideration and has to be addressed in many parts of this country.

On the issue of power, I want to agree with my colleague from West Nile. The statement on power is like a vision of organisations which you cannot achieve and develop within the shortest period. Adjumani got its status in 1997; up to now, we are suffering a lot. It has a lot of implications on the aspect of security. At night, you cannot move. People have to close their shops early enough. We are talking about value addition. What do we mean by value addition minus power? Our fruits in West Nile are wasted because we do not have power. I think the issue of power has to be addressed. There are common goods, which should be termed as primary needs for our country - power and roads. 

When we talk about roads, from 1997 up to now, we do not have any sign of tarmacking. This has been like a song throughout. A child who has never gone to school does not know how a tarmacked road looks like. We cry for rain to come, but when it does, we get stuck while travelling from Adjumani to Kampala. Last week, trucks were stuck. The state of our roads in Adjumani District is so bad.

On the issue of agriculture, I agree that we need to move to commercialisation from subsistence farming. But without attainment of food security - how do I think of commercialisation when I am hungry? What will I offer for sale? Famine is looming in Adjumani. We have been seeing it in the papers; we have been hearing about it. People are suffering; they are starving. My proposal is that let us focus on food security first. If we cannot have enough food - maybe we are thinking of middle-class people but not the rural poor if we are supposed to move into commercialisation. 

In his address, he talked about markets. Our farmers are cheated and exploited. Let us look at the rural ones. The major challenge after production is pricing. They even sell their goods right from the farms. Lorries come from Sudan, go straight to the farm and your cassava is bought from there at the cheapest price. I know market is determined by demand and supply, but how can we come in as Government, to ensure that we sensitise our people about how to sell their goods? They do not even store. Even if NAADS is there, we are reaping less than 10 percent from the sweat of these people. For me, that is critical.

I propose that as famine is looming in many parts of this country, the ministries of Agriculture and Disaster Preparedness should become proactive by always doing surveys so that we know at which level we are. It is not good to react when the problem is already there -(Member timed out_) 

5.08
MS FEMIAR WADADA (FDC, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to say something about education. In the three districts of Bugisu, that is Mbale, Sironko and Bulambuli, we had two teacher training colleges, but they were all closed. I see everyone here crying about schools being over-populated, and one teacher handling three classes. May the government reinstate these colleges so that we can have teachers to cater for the growing population?

We have the issue of lightning. The equipment that was supposed to control the lightning was taken away from the hills and mountains. I think they were searching for mercury by then. Now it is time for us to put these things back so that we can save ourselves from being struck by lightning. 

About Prosperity-For-All, the President, on his posters put it clearly, in black and on a yellow paper, that we would all be very rich. In our area, he went around during his campaigns and allowed us to go back to our forest on Mount Elgon. We were allowed to cultivate. We wasted our time, our seeds, our energy and put it in the forest. Right now, his boys cannot allow us to harvest our yields from the shamba. Both women and men are being raped and even killed. This business of saying, “Prosperity-For-All”; villagers get their prosperity from agriculture. How are we going to be rich if we cannot be allowed to harvest what we put in the soil? 

There was a lot said about everything improving in 2011 – someone was talking about seven years; seven years will not work for us because if you cannot deliver in five years and you have been around for over 27 years, tell me how seven years can help you deliver. 

Budadiri Hospital is just like somebody’s veranda, where people just go to register the sick. They even sit on the floor; there is no bench; there is no laboratory and yet they say that we are growing and we are developing. What kind of development is this if your health isn’t good? 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.11
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join my colleagues in adding my voice to the State of the Nation Address debate. 

The people of West Nile appreciate Muni University, which the President talked about on page 25. I have received it with both hands, and I am sure this is one of the historical developments, which the people of West Nile will remember the President for in the 25 years. (Applause) I am saying this with pride because there are issues which have been unattended to. 

The people of West Nile ask for real things, which will develop not only the region but this country and I am sure Muni University is one of them. For your information, by next year, this university is supposed to start the techno-science faculty, which I have not heard of in any university in this country and I am sure you will all focus towards West Nile.

However, there are issues which I would like to present to the august House, which the Minister of Education should take seriously. That is, to fast-track the enactment of this university so that it is recognised and given a vote, and is allocated resources in order for it to help in “manufacturing” human resources for this country and the globe.

We also put it to the ministry and the august House that more funds need to be advanced to this university. The taskforce is a hardworking one; Shs 1.4 billion was allocated and this money has already been committed. We are requesting that more money is put in place because this university is going to be on demand, and in order to cater for this demand in advance, these resources need to go to this university very fast. I urge the ministry to be closer to the taskforce.

The President also talked about tertiary training institutions in this country. In this regard, I want to address the plight of our core PTCs and particularly, Arua Core PTC, which is doing badly in terms of infrastructure. It was one of the institutions which was affected recently. When it was closed down, all our children had to go back home and then return, which was an expense to the parents who are already burdened. This appeal should be taken seriously. My good friend, hon. Mallinga, once visited that institution and he saw how in bad shape that institution is. This is one area we need to look into.  

On the issue of scraping diploma programmes from Arua School of Comprehensive Nursing and Midwifery - this institution is not only for West Nile, but the whole country! We would like these programmes to be decentralised to upcountry institutions. When they bring these programmes to Mulago, it means increasing the cost of acquiring this kind of knowledge. In Arua, this was the institution which had been feeding our health centre IIs, IIIs and IVs in terms of staffing, and at the same time helping us in community outreach. 

The other issue of concern in West Nile, is the recognition of Inzikuru. I am sure from the Seventh Parliament to date, many State of the Nation Addresses have been given. However, the issue of Inzikuru stadium, which I am sure is in the Hansard, has never been brought forward. So, I want to remind this august House that Inzikuru stadium is still on the wanted list for the people of West Nile because our daughter got recognition and put our nation on the international map. I think this is something my brother, Lt Gen. Moses Ali, the Third Deputy Prime Minister, would like to take to the Cabinet -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before I invite hon. Amodoi, I have information from His Excellency the Vice-President, inviting all of you to celebrate the 50 years anniversary of the University of Dar-es-salaam. To commemorate that event, President Yoweri Museveni will be hosting a fundraising function at State House Entebbe on Saturday, 16 July 2011, starting at 12.00 noon and ending at 4.00 p.m.

The Vice-President requests those who would like to associate with the University of Dar-es-Salaam, to dig into their pockets and attend the function. For Members of Parliament, I understand you will pay Shs 200,000 for a seat while those who can afford a platinum card will pay Shs 10 million to seat five people at a table. The gold card will pay Shs 8 million to seat eight people. The silver card will pay Shs 5 million to seat 10 people. The Vice-President needs your support.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, you have just drawn our attention to a fundraising in Entebbe. May you help us understand the purpose of this fundraising? Is it for Dar-es-Salaam University? Is it because the Vice-President and His Excellency the President, are alumni of Dar-es-Salaam University?  But if it was not for that, I would have wondered why we cannot even raise funds for Makerere University and other universities here in Uganda, which are in dire need. Is it because they are OBs of Dar-es-Salaam University? I just needed that clarification.

THE SPEAKER: I am just a megaphone. Yes, the Vice-President is an alumnus of the University of Dar-es-Salaam. They are looking to construct a non-resident student utility at that university. So, I am just passing on information. 

5.19
MR CYRUS AMODOI (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): I would also like to thank the President of the Republic of Uganda for his elaborate speech. I have some issues of concern on page 44, that is, peace and security. 

Katakwi District is one of the districts in this country that is still infested with insecurity and instability, including my constituency, Toroma. Immediately after elections, from around March up to date, the Karimojong rustle more than 300 herds of cattle in the district of Katakwi on a daily basis. In my county, they have rustled more than 150 and they are almost driving people back to the camps.

In this country, it is in Katakwi District where we still have camps. It is still in Katakwi where people cannot afford the basics of life because of this catastrophe. I would like to appeal to the honourable members, through the Speaker, that when we are looking at the stability and peace of this country, this issue must be taken very seriously. My people were trying to recover, but the animals they were trying to rear have once again been raided. Now, who is going to pay them? Who is going to pay the families of the people that have died in this exercise? And a number of people have died. And this one gives me a very big challenge: Leading people that are stressed; leading people who are going to camps. I almost have no constituency.

The second issue concerns - 

THE SPEAKER: Do you want to take information?

MR AMODOI: Yes.

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, what hon. Amodoi is saying is a fact. Last weekend, I personally did not attend the introduction of the minister because I was at the border at Olilim. When we talk about cattle raiders, I am happy that we have the Leader of Government Business here. It is a fact! We request the Minister of Defence to come on the Floor of this Parliament and tell Ugandans why we still have internally displaced people in Katakwi.

Two, we have lost lives of the innocent civilians in Katakwi. We want to request Government to compensate the families of the bereaved. We all know it is the constitutional mandate of Government to protect the citizens of the country - 

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Ogwang, you are smuggling in a contribution.

MR OGWANG: So, I want to give information to my colleague that he was talking about Toroma, but in Awoja, in Usuk County, the same problem is happening. Even this morning, animals were raided. I thank you. 

MR AMODOI: The other issue is on the energy and mineral sector on page 19. Whenever the President has come to my district, Katakwi, he has promised power, but Katakwi has been in existence for almost 10 years, and the districts that Katakwi was born with have almost everything. I visited Pader - I know the whole of Uganda. I am a retired Army officer of the UPDF. Pader has got power, all the financial institutions and the roads are very clear. But I get worried when in Katakwi; we are still in darkness. So, it is imperative that the Minister in charge of Energy and Minerals should come and explain to this august House why Katakwi is still in darkness -(Laughter)- because in the programmes of the President and in his manifesto, he has always talked of rural electrification for the whole of Uganda, and indeed, most parts of Uganda have got electricity, but I wonder how and why a whole district still has no power. 

The other issue is on education on page 25. Teso, as a sub-region, has always been promised a university. In fact, if I am not mistaken, it might be Teso region that may not be having a public university in the whole of this country. I would request the government and the minister in charge to come and explain to Ugandans what is happening. We also need a public institution -(Applause)- like other parts of Uganda - Central Buganda has a university; the North has got a public university; my brothers from West Nile have received a public university; the western part of Uganda has received a public university; but the eastern region does not have a public university and yet it was promised. I thank you.

5.27
MR VICENT MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion that was moved by hon. Rosemary Najjemba thanking the President for an elaborate State of the Nation Address. It was indeed elaborate but not without missing links. 

When the President was on his campaign trail in Rwampara, he told them that Rwampara is one of the greatest counties in this country and needs to be a very big independent district and he said it would be. I am before you, Madam Speaker, to say that the people of Rwampara are eagerly waiting for that presidential pledge, aware that during the campaigns, the pledges we make form a social contract between us, the leaders, and those we lead. I will not have delivered if I do not deliver that. 

Rwampara is one of the rugged areas - those of you who have gone through it know. Mountainous as it is, most of the hills are bare, but Uganda has less in terms of the environmental protection policy. That aside, we have a wetland encroachment issue in Rwampara in Bugamba and other areas. Whereas our environmental officer is very quick at evicting those poor peasants who have encroached because they have no land, I am always very surprised that the big shots, Members of Parliament and ministers, who are encroaching on big land here in Busega and elsewhere are busy constructing and the people who are cultivating vegetables in Bugamba, Kibingo and in Kamomo are evicted. It is very dangerous! We must apply the law and it must be non-selective.

I want to move to the issue of the local leaders. I have been a local councillor for five years - the chairman works, so to say. You cannot talk about service delivery and monitoring when you cannot facilitate these people. These councillors get an allowance of between Shs 3,000 and 10,000 depending on the nature of the sub-county or district because their consolidated pay is from the 20 percent. It is very dangerous for them to monitor Government services when we cannot facilitate them. I, therefore, move that we should also facilitate local councillors if we want –(Interruption)

MR MBAHIMBA: Madam Speaker, I come from Kasese Municipal Council, which is a higher local council than many others. So, I have found out that the members of the executive of the higher local councils are not even paid and yet they are there to monitor and supervise the activities of Government. I wish to inform this House and also put in a request that members of the local council executive should be paid. Some of the urban areas are even bigger than some districts where members of the district executive committee are paid. 

MR ATIKU: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. I returned from Arua yesterday and the information on the grounds is that, the Ministry of Local Government has now scrapped graduated tax compensation and sub-counties are being told to look for other sources of revenue. This has been an abrupt communication and I am sure sub-county councils are no longer going to have council meetings, and they won’t be able to facilitate their staff. That means our lower local councils are going to cease to operate. That is the information I wanted to give to this House. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I border hon. Kyamadidi and marry from his area; we are neighbours and so we are one. When it comes to allowances of councillors at lower levels, these are fellows who sit down and are paid about Shs 60,000, which is even taxed – actually the councillors in Mbarara Municipality have assured me that they will not sit when their money is being taken. For that matter, you cannot monitor service delivery in a country when you are hungry. 

You see, when you pretend to employee me, I will also pretend to work for you. Couldn’t this be one of the reasons as to why service delivery at local councils is very poor? For that matter, if we find that this is what is causing people to fail to deliver, let us scrap taxation of councillors’ allowances – these are small, but very important people! I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.33
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Female Youth): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank my colleague, hon. Kyamadidi, for raising this matter. We cannot be talking about issues of councillors without mentioning anything to do with issues of the youth. (Laughter) So, what I would like to raise, one, is the issue of Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA). I have just had a meeting this morning and these people are almost going to sit down. 

I also saw a petition to the President saying they are not recognised in the KCCA Act and the youth councils are actually not in the Act. So, I am wondering how the Eighth Parliament passed this law without taking into account some of the other special organs as established by the laws of Uganda. 

The other thing concerns the bigger country and it is to do with the youth councils in many ways. We have talked about the importance of young people in this country. It is not that we really want to abuse the seniors, but the concerns that we are talking about are very critical, and we want to encourage this dialogue so that we can unpack this thing further. So, the challenge we are having in line with your issue is that of payment to councils as well as youth councils. They say they are paid Shs 490,000 per quarter and in this work, they are supposed to monitor youth programmes in the district. These issues need more time so that we can explore and debate on them further. I thank you. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I don’t intend to make a submission, but I intend to ask Government, in light of the ongoing budget process, and tied up with these matters that are being raised - councillors saying they will not work - and then, in the absence of the compensation, what happens in council meetings that are supposed to pass the budget? That matter must be addressed. Otherwise, we shall have a stalemate in the budget process and we will not move, and yet you know that this process is time bound. I think that is something that your chair might really want to pursue, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, the matter is well taken. Fortunately, the chairpersons of all the sessional committees sit on the Budget Committee. Now, we are instructing you to bring up this matter specifically. It must be brought up in the Budget Committee. (Applause) Thank you. 

5.37
MR JOHN OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): I would also like to applaud the President for the State of the Nation Address. On the other hand, I would also like to convey my congratulations and humble respect to the Leader of the Opposition for having scrutinised the other side of the observation. Indeed, when you compare the two addresses in your note books, and you take them down to the peri-urban and urban areas, then you will find exactly where your district lies.  

Agago has just been uplifted to a district status in July 2010, and it has 16 sub-counties plus three town councils. It has such a large geographical coverage that needs a lot of services. I would like to touch some few areas like education.  Indeed, the President has clearly mentioned that the UPE achievements to the nation are paramount. Much as the enrolment has increased from 44,000 to 94,000, the teacher-pupil ratio is wanting because we have one teacher to 71 pupils. And when you look at the school dropout percentage, it is so high, 80 to 90 percent. Why is all this happening? 

The first reason is the looming poverty in the district. The people are so poor that they cannot sustain their children at school, leave that alone, they walk long distances. The schools’ proximity from the homesteads is quite far. Children have to walk an average of 10 kilometres, which has accelerated the dropout rate.

Early and forced marriages, especially of girls have also caused school dropouts to increase greatly. 

When you look at the thematic programme, children from P.1 to P.3 are being taught in the local languages and then, starting from P.4 to P.7, they start to prepare them for PLE. This is the problem. I say this because some few months ago when some children were transferred from Agago to the central here, you would know that there is a big difference between these pupils and those within Kampala; the central region where education standards are basically that you do not start from these thematic programmes.

I also want to comment on what my brother put to the House on the Karimojong. Agago is one of the districts, which are suffering from the Karimojong warriors. I wrote a letter to the Minister of State in charge of Northern Uganda addressing this problem. In my letter, I put some suggestions on what can be done. One of them was to increase the number of soldiers patrolling the area. The second point was to have a joint and cross-border security sensitisation meeting in areas where people have this problem.

I would also like to raise an issue concerning the ex-combatants. During the campaigns, when the President came to our district, he mentioned that they would be compensated, but when I read this State of the Nation Address, nothing was mentioned about it. The President did not only mention that they would be given that compensation, but even went further to say that each person would be paid Shs 10 million. I want to state that the ministry concerned should look into this matter because it is important to my people.

Finally, concerning retirement benefits, there are many people who have been retired from the Civil Service. The distance to Kampala in search of their pension payment is a big problem. I propose that if possible, this service should be put at a certain level so that we access the services to process their retirement packages. (Member timed out_)

5.43
MS OLIVIA KWAGALA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will first make two quotations before I proceed. There is a quote in Animal Farm which says, “Four legs good, two legs better”. I will use that citation to plead through the State of the Nation Address that when we are talking about areas of concern, Iganga District does not surface anywhere. So, if we go to Animal Farm where they were saying “two legs good”, zero legs are not any better.

To proceed, page 24 of the address concerns the oil mining sector. This time for oil, they have specifically said those generating oil will take 80 percent, and that is Central Government. Seventeen percent will be for local government and three percent will be for land owners. It is very funny that I come from Busoga region, which generates power. That issue of the redistributive effect has never been addressed. Since Busoga has had a problem of farmers who have not yet commercialised their farming, I think we should also take advantage and be included in that area if the redistribution effect is being looked at from that angle.

On page 12, there is NAADS. I would like to inform you, Madam Speaker that much as the NAADS programme covers 112 districts, some of the seeds, which were given to Iganga District were taken to Iganga court as exhibits of an accident, meaning that for this season, nothing has been done. So, I do not know what you will say when you are accessing the NAADS people for Iganga District.

The President also said that the inflation is food inflation. I feel that something should be expensive to a person who has the money. We need to address the aspect of unemployed people not having what they call purchasing power parity. It is expensive to those who have. What about to those who are unemployed? We would like the minister in charge to see that they reflect how they have handled the issue of unemployment from year to year.

I will go next to the issue of hospitals. Iganga has a main hospital on the road and when they are distributing drugs, they do so on an equitable basis, but all hospitals which are on the main road cater for people who have got accidents and those who fall sick in transit, yet they get the same quantity of drugs. In that situation, therefore, we request that the minister, while redistributing drugs, should consider hospitals along the highway.

Lastly, every time they give the Ministry of Public Service more money to clear debts and pension arrears - but I would like to inform you that unless Public Service gives us detailed information of the people it has paid, it is more of a problem than a solution. Thank you very much.

5.47
MS FREDA KASE-MUBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very happy that I have caught your eye at last. I would like to thank the President for his State of the Nation Address. I would like to pick out one particular item in the address, which I liked more than the others and that is the proposal to give every household four or five milking cows to help with income generation.

I am aware that in the past, attempts have been made to give cows to households to help them with income generation. In Masaka District, people were given cows but it was a single cow. After a few months, this single cow developed problems; it was not conceiving even after repeated insemination. In the end, the cow was sold off. So, I think that investment failed and that is why I am particularly happy that the President, even if it seems very expensive, worked out this project of four or five cows per household.

This is very welcome in Masaka because our people have been having land problems. With these milking cows, it is going to be zero-grazing so that we do not give the excuse that we cannot take care of these four or five cows. This project is going to work and it will help us to have milk for home consumption such that we are able to get rid of problems like kwashiorkor and malnutrition. These are problems the honourable member from Namutumba mentioned the other day. I welcome this project, very much. 

The President recommended irrigation, which should play a very important role in agriculture. He praised the idea of using water bottles. I think that if we are going to develop agriculture as a means of helping all our poor in Masaka then we cannot use water bottles only. I think water bottles can only help us to water our vegetable gardens in the backyard.

On page 11 of the State of the Nation Address, the President said that, “the NRM Government’s goal has been to fundamentally transform the three million Ugandan households in subsistence agriculture to commercialised agriculture”.  If we are going to launch commercialised agriculture, which to me, I understand to be expanded acreage of the crops that we are planting, then water bottles will not help us that much. We should think of using sophisticated irrigation systems. (Member timed out_)

5.53
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): I rise to talk about a persistent problem we have been having in this country. This is the problem of trade deficit. This problem has been there for many years. I plotted the figures concerning our import bill and the value of exports. What I observed from the trend is that the deficit has been growing. This is the very reason our exchange rate has always been depreciating. The Bank of Uganda has always used the short-term measures of monetary instruments to address this problem.

The exchange rate has been worsening by three steps, the Bank of Uganda intervenes and it moves back one step and it continues like that. Since 1997, the exchange rate has depreciated from Shs 800 per dollar to Shs 2700 per dollar. The short-term answers the Bank of Uganda is providing are not going to address this problem. The long-term solution lies in production for export.

The import curve is moving up while the export curve is just stable. Unless we address the problem of production, then this country is not going to stabilise. Most of us have been talking about agriculture. Every economy has primary drivers of growth and in Uganda they are, agriculture, industry, mining and related sectors; and yet these are the least funded sectors in Uganda. 

The stock farms that used to operate in many parts of the country are no longer operational. We are no longer breeding animals at these stock farms. We used to talk about extension services delivered by the Ministry of Agriculture, but they are almost non-existent today. When it comes to industry, you can see that we are taking ages to have Namanve Industrial Park available to investors. 

Two years ago, after some agitation from members of our community, we created an SME unit at Uganda Investment Authority (UIA). A few days ago, the honourable minister was talking about creating an SME directorate in the Ministry of Trade and Industry, forgetting that Cabinet passed a resolution to create one at UIA. We keep hitting and running away from these important policy positions. 

We are performing poorly in terms of our production for export. I propose that we need to restructure the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) to prioritise primary drivers of growth such as agriculture, industry and mining. These will generate money for this country; and unless we do that, people will continue to demand for resources which are not available. Our resources will remain constrained. The maximum we have been able to export from the fisheries sector in one year has been 220,000 metric tonnes. This is what we have been able to harvest from the existing water bodies. A study that was done about two years ago established that the water bodies we have in this country have a potential to generate 2.1 million metric tonnes per year. In terms of money, that would amount to about 3.2 trillion. The potential from major water bodies is 721,000 metric tonnes and we can get 147,000 from minor lakes. 

We can also get 328,000 from crater lakes. All these need to be exploited, but the resources to stock these water bodies have not been available. Consequently, the fish sector exports have been running down to the extent that many of our industries are beginning to close down or to operate at very low levels of capacity utilisation.

My humble appeal is that while the public is lamenting about this problem, Members of Parliament should not; because we should provide an answer. We are responsible for appropriating the budget for the various sectors, but what are we doing about it? Should we also sit here to lament about how agriculture is not receiving money?  (Member timed out_)

6.00
MS MARGARET MAKHOHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namayingo): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for finally catching my eye –(Interjections)- it is my eye that has caught hers. (Laughter) I thank you very much for the opportunity you have given me. 

Namayingo District is newly created and the reason it was created is because we had inadequate services. Therefore, we were given the opportunity to share the services. I also want to take the opportunity to thank the President for giving us an address on the state of the nation. He mentioned a number of good things that we have to appreciate. It also concerns the aspects or the sectors that are important. Namayingo being a new district, still lacks some of the services.

Regarding the health sector, Namayingo has no hospital, but only one health centre IV, four health centre IIIs and 19 health centre IIs. Therefore, the district still needs the attention of the Government to extend the services to us.

When it comes to medical personnel, we only have one medical officer, seven clinical officers, 12 nurses and four midwives. [Hon. Members: “You are lucky”] Members are saying we are lucky, but this is not a sub-county; it is an entire district which has the main land and the islands. So, you find that we are still backward and we need the intervention of the government so that we can also feel we are part of Uganda. We thank Government for giving us a district status.

On the education sector, last year, we had about 40 first grades in PLE in the entire district and yet other schools in some districts are getting in hundreds. So, we are still backward in education and we call upon Government to intervene because we now need to have educated people. Every office you go to, you need to have papers yet we have only 40 first grades in the entire district when other districts are getting hundreds. We need the intervention of Government.

We still have few schools; there are four secondary Government-aided schools, 86 primary schools and no tertiary institution. Those who drop out of school have nowhere to go in Namayingo. We call upon Government to come to our rescue, otherwise, other people will continue progressing and getting bigger jobs when the people of Namayingo are backward. (Laughter) 
On rural electrification, Namayingo is in darkness. It is like the dark continent of Uganda. (Laughter) When we hear other people talking about having little electricity and thermal power, in Namayingo, it is still a dream and yet it is a district; one of the districts of Uganda. 

I call upon Government to come to our rescue. How can the entire district have no power and we are talking of improving and adding value? We are mainly farmers and fishermen, but when you have no power – maybe, we would be coming up with factories to pack and export maize flour, but how shall we pack when we do not even have a generator to run? We are badly off. We call upon the ministers responsible to come to our rescue so that we also feel we are in Uganda. 

Concerning roads, we are badly off because however much our people are farmers, we get poor prices after harvesting because the roads are muddy and so you cannot take your goods anywhere to a good market. So, we end up selling at cheaper prices and at the end of the day we have -(Member timed out_)  

6.06
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): I would like to join the other colleagues in thanking the President for fulfilling his constitutional obligation to address the nation. 

Buhaguzi County is basically a rural area and the livelihood there is mainly from farming. I appreciate the fact that the President appreciated the fact that Uganda’s economy is based on agriculture and the comprehensive issues raised on the agricultural sector touched my area, Buhaguzi County.

I want to appreciate the fact that he realises the fact where we now have to shift from subsistence type of farming to commercial. My people are mainly in subsistence farming where we grow mainly for food and less for sale because of the nature of the machinery and technology we use.

The time is now that we shift from rain-fed agriculture to irrigation and other issues will come in the policy. Fortunately, we are here to do that. 

In the last month, I went and chaired a constituency review meeting on NAADS, during which I realised a number of issues. NAADS is a good programme, but it is mainly on paper, especially in my constituency. There are many big posters welcoming you to the NAADS programme, but when you go there to monitor, you realise that not much has been done. The programme has good intentions, but there are clear bottlenecks which we found out.

First of all, we realised that there is need to select 100 framers in every parish. If you consider the population we now have and then consider the population from which you have to select 100 farmers, you realise that cannot cause any impact. In my parish, there is a population of over 1,000 farmers, but you are talking of selecting 100 to represent the food farmer category for food security. There is still a challenge in that. 

The six farmers selected per parish to represent the market-oriented model farmers cannot effectively make an easy turnover to bring change to the community in the whole parish.

I also realised that there was a problem; how do you select those 100 farmers and who are those to do the selection? These are the NAADS and local leaders and, therefore, there is biased selection involved in this because of local politics and the indifferences we face at that political level.  

We also established during NAADS meetings that the selected farmers may not necessarily fit in that category of farmers. Since we do not have enough time, I would just say that in this phase II of the NAADS programme, there is a component where every village is required to have a village forum in which the chairperson plays a big role in monitoring the programmes and development of NAADS. However, it is of great concern that up to now, there is no leadership at the village level and we are worried that elections may not take place because there is no statement in regard to this. 

Madam Speaker, Buhaguzi County is in the greater Bunyoro region where sooner or later, we shall have oil. I know that very many people’s appetites are high and issues of milking the cow without feeding it will come. I know we shall debate these issues, but my point is about the environment. I request the Ministry of Energy to work together with the Ministry of Water and Environment to ensure that an environmental impact assessment is done because as we celebrate the positive effects of oil, the region may suffer from its other effects and how shall we compensate -(Member timed out_)

6.11
MRS SYLIVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address and to congratulate him and the NRM for the remarkable achievement and also for the good plans he has put across for the country for the next five years. Hon. Members, it is undisputed that Uganda’s economy has grown in the past two decades and indeed, Uganda’s economy is among the fastest growing economies in the world; and for that, the President and the NRM deserve a pat on the back. 

On page 6 of the State of the Nation Address, the President observed that there are a number of people in Uganda who doubt this growth. I think that is where the major challenge to Government is because the problem we have is that a big number of people in Uganda do not associate with this growth. It is true that the economy is growing and when you look around, you can see the buildings and the roads –(Interjections)- yes, there is infrastructure development, but then there are major fundamental issues that we must address such that every Ugandan can associate with this development and we must accept that. 

One of the big issues is that we still have seven million people in Uganda living in absolute poverty. Our population is 33 million and seven million of these cannot afford a decent meal in 24 hours. The other big problem is that in terms of absolute numbers, the poor produce more children than the rich and the less educated people produce more children than the educated. So, these numbers are likely to increase and thereby erode all the benefits that would accrue from the development which the economy is experiencing. So, it is a big challenge that we have to address in the next five years. 

The people that I represent see the buildings and move on good roads - these days our road is being worked on and that is development - but there are fundamental issues. For example, a woman will ask, “Will my child have breakfast when going to school? If I went to hospital tomorrow with my child, would I get drugs? If a pregnant woman goes to a maternity centre, will she find welcoming midwives and drugs such that she can deliver her baby safely?” Those are the fundamental issues that we must address. We want this development we see here in Kampala translating into positive changes across the country. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about agriculture. Many Members have commented on agriculture and the President indeed spoke about it as the backbone of the economy. I have no doubt about the President’s commitment to use NAADS to transform the country because he has walked across the country to sensitise for NAADS and promote it. But unless NAADS is remodelled from its present form, it will not transform Uganda. I wish the Minister of Agriculture were here, I would have advised him. But since the Leader of Government Business is around, I advise Government to take on the palm oil project model in Kalangala District. That project has transformed the peasants in Kalangala because it works with the people right from the beginning. They provide them with seeds, fertilisers, credit to pay the labourers and they organise them into SACCOs; they also organise them and buy their produce from them. At the end of the day, the farmer is helped throughout the whole continuum of production and today, the people of Kalangala are benefiting from this programme –(Member timed out_)

6.17
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker for this opportunity. I would like to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address, which was comprehensive and detailed. However, there are a few observations that I want to point out to the ministers on which they must take action. 

This would have been the right time for the President to mention something about the district border conflicts in the newly created districts with the old ones, because people are killing each other. The end of the Eighth Parliament would have been a wrong time to address such issues because that was a time when it was almost difficult to make a decision. However, now that we have just come out of those elections, this is the right time for the Executive to take a decision to try and solve these conflicts. For example, in Yumbe, there are border issues between Moyo and Yumbe and people are almost killing each other. We have a problem with Arua, Koboko and almost all the neighbouring districts. This has gone to regional levels because we also have a problem with Southern Sudan. When will we solve these problems? We are trying to dodge them by not talking about them, but instead, we are making them bigger and a time will come when we shall fail to solve them. This is the right time and this should have appeared in the State of the Nation Address. Therefore, I request the line ministry to take action to solve these problems. 

I thank the President for his commitment to peace within and outside the country. Within our region, especially in Southern Sudan, now that they are completely independent - I very well know that our President had a lot of commitment in seeing that we liberate our black people in Southern Sudan. 

However, that is not meant to say that we give them everything and make our people suffer. In the Eighth Parliament, some of the Members resisted when money was given to construct a market in Southern Sudan. I was on the Committee on Foreign Affairs. The committee refused, but the whole House approved it. Now you see the risks we are facing. 

Last month, in West Nile, we lost 28 people. They all perished when they were going to Southern Sudan. What if the advice of this House was taken and we had border markets? I do not think my people would have died. I thought when that happened, the line ministries would consider something and bring a statement to this House. It was an accident. They were stuck in a stream and at night; the lorry was fixed by the people. They did not know the direction of the water. We have the regional cooperation minister, the disaster preparedness minister; they are quiet about it. What is happening? 

At the end of Members’ contributions to this State of the Nation Address, when these ministers are responding, I should hear something about that. I am even recommending that they at least give some contribution or compensate those people.

I would like to say something about externalisation of labour. When Japan got a disaster, I was walking near this market and on the walls, I saw a paper where people were advertising, asking people to apply to go and work in Japan. It was very risky when the nationals of that country were leaving their country because of the risk, while our people were planning to go and work there.

6.23
MS VICTORIA BUSINGE RUSOKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like appreciate the State of the Nation Address. However, we need to own the achievements as well as face the challenges together and arrive at a possible solution. 

My concern is on landuse. I thank Government for its commitment to sustainable landuse and land tenure security. There is a case in Kabarole District where six sub-counties used to live on land owned by Tooro Kingdom and individual landowners. Time came when these people were threatened that they would be chased away. Fortunately, a good policy came in place and Government paid the claimants - the landlords. Much as they own the land, at the moment, there is no clear policy allowing them to process titles. So, they cannot secure loans to develop or enlarge their agricultural production. 

Some of the land-owners camouflage and come again to claim money when these people want to put up permanent buildings. I thank hon. Kagwera for the great intervention we have been undertaking to fight and stop this. It is then that we learnt that these people were paid their money, but the occupants are not very well-informed that they are now bonafide owners. The policy is silent about them getting land titles to develop themselves.

I request that the minister in charge informs these people. Their names were registered and their acreage is known, so that they can also use the opportunity of using their titles to secure loans and develop themselves, especially with regard to agriculture.

My next point is on hard-to-reach schools and the related hardship allowance. At the moment, only 29 districts are benefitting and the policy had promised to roll out to other similarly affected districts. I will again give an example of Kabarole where we border Bundibugyo, which is a beneficiary district. Bundibugyo was curved out of Kabarole. Mount Rwenzori is the same and stretches up to Kasese where our schools, 26 of them with a population of 1,898 teachers, are established. Whereas this hardship allowance was meant to be a motivator, it has become a de-motivator. It is not regular and teachers working in similar circumstances are not considered. It has even made them more lazy because they are not benefitting yet they are living in the same environment. It is my plea to the Ministry of Education to at least come up with fair and considerate criteria.

I will rush through the effect and problem of the rabies vaccine. This vaccine is hard to get and when rabies come, the owners of the dogs must pay. Even when the victims go for treatment, they are told to buy the vaccine. It is very expensive. One person can take about 12 injections and people are coming all the way from far-to-reach areas to the referral hospital where the vaccine is on sale. The ministry concerned should research and do something because that disease is deadly. Once you are bitten by a rabid dog, if you are not treated effectively, the end result is death.

In addition, the ARVs are nowhere to be seen and people are not given any alternative. I do not know how other districts are fairing –(Member timed out.)

6.29
MR GODFREY LUBEGA (Independent, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am also comfortable with the President’s address; however, there are a few things to note. The majority of the people I represent are farmers.

I welcome the idea brought by one of the Members of introducing tractors, this time not at the district level but at the sub-county level. These days we have experienced seasons becoming very short. For a lady or gentleman to break the land after all this drought, it would take time; you will have to wait for rainfall before you begin to prepare the land. By the time he or she is done preparing the land, the season would be over. We appeal to the President to help us introduce the tractor system. I know farmers can meet the expenses of fuel and the allowance of tractor operators.

Secondly, I would like to note a case of the girl-child. In any society - in Uganda we have problems - children, especially girls, are no longer comfortable. They are killed like edible rats everywhere in society. At home, when mothers divorce, they do the donkey work and do not go to school, and in some cases they become wives at an early age.

When you go to school – we were very comfortable during our days when we had senior women; these days we have junior women. Imagine someone from senior four at 15; goes to train for two years and comes back to teach. Can such a person be a senior woman?

We have girls under UPE, who sometimes because of problems, go to school late. Girls do not also have sanitation equipment given that their homes are very poor. So, they get frustrated and leave school at any time. 

Defilement cases, especially in rural areas where there are no people to assist, are settled out of court. They negotiate with the parent; in the meeting they will ask, “What are you going to gain out of this? Let me give you this money.” The parent will then force the girl to change her statement and say that she is 18. 

There is a parable in the Bible about a farmer who cast seeds; some seeds landed on a thorny environment; the girl is now in a thorny environment. We need to have programmes that reach such girls in the grassroots. Otherwise, if they grow up with all these frustrations we cannot get much from them. Thank you.

6.34
MS RUTH ACHENG (UPC, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. Let me also add my voice to thank His Excellency on his well-bulleted points in the State of the Nation Address. (Applause) I have the following observations to make.

I want to begin with page 13, on the NAADS programme. I would like to thank him for his special intervention, through the cultural institutions of Acholi, for implementing NAADS activities. I also want to thank him for considering the youth of Teso and for giving them opportunities.

My request is that since the women of greater North went through a lot of difficulties during the war, and taking into account that women are at their best when it comes to agricultural cultivation,I would propose that we give women opportunity to access and use the NAADS money so that in the course of implementation, when we get to evaluation, we evaluate how the cultural institutions, the youth and the women have performed.

Still on NAADS, I agree with him on the issue of recruitment. It is not in order to recruit NAADS coordinators and yet we have agricultural extension workers that can do the same work as the NAADS coordinators. (Applause)  I would, therefore, propose that instead of recruiting the coordinators, we could use those resources to embark on career development of agricultural departments and other departments in local government. 

I would like to cite one policy when it gets to career development. There are policies in local government which stifle a career development path. For instance, in order to qualify as a head of department, you must have served at a principal position for three years, but when you get back to local government, there are very few departments that have a provision for principal positions. We have it in personnel, but it has always been a big problem. When you want to get the Chief Administrative Officer, you have to give it to a principal personnel officer who has been dealing with human resource. When it comes to administration of the district, it is a big challenge. Districts have been sending their requests in this regard and Central Government refers them to Parliament for consideration because it is a policy matter. 

I also have an observation on health. On page 29, it says, “We have registered improvement in the areas of reproductive health.” In the area of reproductive health, I want to talk about the referral system. In my constituency, and the country at large, most of the referral systems - although ambulances were given - are not functional. That is why approximately 16 women still die every day when they are giving birth. So, we should ask ourselves why women are still dying in big numbers and yet we say there are improvements. 

We still have close to 45 percent of women giving birth at home and yet we have health centres; why is that so? Could it be that health centres are not facilitated? Could it be that we are not sensitising our women to go to these health centres? 

The President’s speech emphasises construction of more health centres. I would propose that we first facilitate the existing health centres rather than going to construct many more health centres. 

I would like to know more about rural electrification, which he talked about on page 20. Is the government footing the entire cost of rural electrification or the community will be contributing. I need to know more, maybe from the minister in charge. Thank you very much.

6.39
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also take this opportunity to thank the President for his State of the Nation Address. However, I have a few issues to comment on.

The President promised to closely monitor the issues of the interest rate. As I speak, I have noted with concern that Bank of Uganda has already increased the exchange rates and they have already communicated to commercial banks to increase the interest rate, which is a bit contrary to what the President promised.

I would also like to join my honourable colleagues to express my concern about the health sector -(Interruption)

LT GEN. MOSES ALI: For the correction of the record, my colleague might have meant interest rate and not exchange rate. The Governor cannot increase the exchange rate. So, let him correct that. He meant the interest rate and not the exchange rate.

MR KIYINGI: Madam Speaker, I was very clear about the interest rate. It is not the exchange rate. It is the interest rate -(Interjections)- and it is already communicated to commercial banks.

I was also commenting on the health sector whereby the President categorically stated that he was going to increase the number of health centres in each sub-county. As I speak, there are many sub-counties without even a single health centre, and where you find these health centres most of them are non-functional. 

I also want to mention that we should put more emphasis on facilitating some referral hospitals. For example, you will agree with me that hospitals like Kawolo and Iganga have handled so many accident victims. So, when you are allocating resources and facilities they should go to those areas. 

Since this was the State of the Nation Address, I may not concentrate on my own constituency. However, I have to mention a few things. The President is always talking in a rosy manner when he is addressing the nation and he has always concentrated on roads. But as I speak, we have heard a number of promises on the road from Villa Maria going to Ssembabule through Bukomansimbi. This road has been in a sorry state for a long time. The other road is the one from Masaka to Bukakata which is one of the areas which attracts a lot of income for this Government -(Interruption) 

MR SEWUNGU: Thank you my brother from my neighbouring district for giving way. There is another issue about this Villa Maria road. When the Sisters of Bwanda - the Holy Sisters - were celebrating 100 years of existence, the President promised to tarmac the road from Villa Maria to the convent. All the materials were brought but nothing is taking place. They are stealing the tar and we are waiting but we do not know what is happening.

So, when he talks about that road, it is the same from Villa Maria to Kalungu up to Kyamulibwa. That is what I was contributing, Madam Speaker.

MR KIYINGI: Thank you very much. I was talking about the Bukakata road. This road connects the whole district of Kalangala where we have a tourist destination in Ssese Islands. (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, 34 Members have contributed and I am not sure whether transport is very good this evening.  So, I do not want to keep Members until it is very late. The debate will continue tomorrow. 

However, Prime Minister, the major themes today were on agriculture, but I have not seen the ministers of agriculture here. They were on finance, but I have not seen the Minister of Finance. They were on Education, but the ministers are not here. There was stressful information from Usuk and Katakwi, but the Minister of Defence and his assistant are not here. Security? They are not here. No Health is here. 

Prime Minister, it is the most important debate in the life of Parliament and the ministers are required to be here. We are aware that every ministry has more than one minister and so we want to see them here tomorrow.

House adjourned to 2 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.46 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 13 July 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)
