
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Official Report of The Proceedings of Parliament

FIFTH SESSION – 21ST SITTING - FIRST MEETING

________________________

Tuesday, 12 July 2005
 
Parliament met at 10.37 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you back from the weekend. I have realised that since we are still going on with the Constitution Amendment Bill, there may be a need to periodically explain to the public what we are doing.

I have been concerned with the interpretations that have been made about creating Kampala as a special capital city under the Central Government. A very serious debate has been going on that we gave the President powers to appoint the mayor and political leaders of that capital city. This is grossly wrong. We never did that because we were aware that objectives and democratic principles must be followed. So we do not see how the President can just appoint a mayor and political leaders. There is a need for someone on the Front Bench to explain to the people what we are doing periodically, since it is not the work of Parliament.

The other matter was when by an Act of Parliament we passed in the committee an amendment that gave powers to Parliament to exempt certain elections from the secret ballot. It was about local councils I or II, which was explained here but then the following day it was said that we said that elections of district leaders would be by lining up. There is a need to explain to the people what we have done so that confusion is not created by misinterpretation of what we have done. I thought honourable members had also observed that when it is not –(Applause)- the Order Paper should be adjusted to allow hon. Lukyamuzi to make a statement on the environment. There was a day celebrated over the weekend so we shall allow him to make that statement. Thank you very much. 

10.42
MR ALEX ONZIMA (Maracha County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the concerns you have raised about the proceedings in this Parliament. I also believe it should be your burden to take the trouble to explain what we are going through at the moment. I would have thought that this would be the responsibility of the Public Relations Officer to explain some of these items. Much as the head of the institution throws some light on this, we need to get some response from the institution, which should be in detail so that the audience outside there can be able to comprehend and appreciate the work we are doing under your leadership.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the interpretation of the law, which we made is that of Parliament. I thought the Executive should be coming out to explain this, rather than Parliament. We pass the law and leave it to other people to interpret and implement. We could do it but I thought it is the work of the Executive to come out on this. After all they have the equipment and the facilities to educate the public about what we have done, but I take your point.

MR AGGREY AWORI: Thank you. Mine is a more maiden affair. What is the “weather forecast”? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I will discuss it with the minister in charge of meteorology. 

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, periodically the meteorology department comes up with a forecast –(Laughter)

10.44
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Lt Gen. Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In addition to agreeing with what you have said, I would like to point out that it is also our responsibility as Members of Parliament to explain the decisions we take here, to our electorates. Definitely you cannot just take a decision here and go back and expect the Executive to go and tell your electorates what to do. Much as the Executive is able to explain, as Members of Parliament your responsibility extends outside this House. Once you go home you have to tell the people so that they know what is happening here. That is the responsibility of both the Executive and the Legislature.

THE SPEAKER: Very good. 

10.45
MR TOM BAGALANA (Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise in concern over the previously passed referendum law. The Electoral Commission is doing much but when I was in my constituency I noted that people are still confused as to what is going on. So I want to inform you that the referendum awareness exercise is not going on smoothly because the people in the countryside are not being informed about the referendum question. It is only the elite who can listen and are able to watch TV that are getting well informed about the question of the referendum. 

So, I request you to advise the Electoral Commission to use the radio to inform people about the referendum question in all languages, otherwise people are not aware of what they are going to vote about on Thursday, 28 July 2005. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay.

10.46
MR AVITUS TIBARIMBASA (Ndwora County East, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In addition to what hon. Onzima has mentioned about Parliament’s public relations officer, since the former public relations officer was promoted and he left Parliament, we are noticing a big difference in terms of communication to the outside world. In fact I wanted to raise it on the Floor of the House, what is happening? Has the former public relations officer been replaced? Is somebody who cannot consult the ministers and get information and then inform the public occupying the office? Because when the other officer was still there, every morning you would listen to different radio stations and he would be explaining to the public about what happens in the House. 

You realise that even Members of Parliament did not exactly follow what took place on Tuesday last week but one. You came here and explained and thank God for WBS because on Sunday those same proceedings of Parliament came on air and you were explaining and people understood. So if Members of Parliament who are deliberating on these Bills do not follow, how do you expect the public to understand? I think we need to intensify; we need to improve the office of the Parliamentary public relations officer.  

Another point –(Interruption)

CAPT. STEVEN BASALIZA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for hon. Tibarimbasa to impute that Members of Parliament do not understand the deliberations of this House?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think what he was – you must see his statement as related to what actually he was talking about. What he was talking about was, when some Members of Parliament castigated their friends who had voted yes during a second reading; a yes, which was just to allow the Bill to go on the Table to be scrutinized and they said that they had voted on kisanja! Actually it was just allowing the Bill to go to the Committee Stage to be examined. Then they said, “Why did you vote for kisanja when you are this, when it was not the case?”  

I explained that unless the Bill goes to the Committee Stage, even what you want or what you do not want could not be removed. So for somebody to vote yes he only means that we should go and examine the Bill and remove what we do not want. I think that is what he was talking about when he said some Members of Parliament misunderstood the proceedings.

MR TIBARIMBASA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that clear explanation and I remember one member in the names of hon. Sam Awori conceded and apologised for having voted wrongly on the Floor of this House.  

Another business I want to clear with you is in today’s New Vision where we read that the Prime Minister had requested the Vice-Chancellor of Makerere University to form a committee to investigate himself. I do not know whether it is proper? There are people who have worked in the university and they know the procedures, is it proper for the Prime Minister to have –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, my honourable colleague this morning seems to have all his facts not in the right order. Is he in order to continue misleading this august House by calling me Sam Awori when I am not? I am Aggrey Awori. Is he in order to tell the august House that I voted wrongly because I did not understand, when the actual fact is that I did not apologise? Is he in order to continue maligning my image not only in the Hansard but also over publicly owned media like Radio Uganda and WBS? Please, protect me.

THE SPEAKER: The problem of Sam Awori, I think hon. Tibarimbasa is a Rotarian and at one time we had a Governor by the names of Sam Aggrey Awori and he thought you are -(Laughter)- but he is corrected. He was thinking like a Rotarian when he called you Sam Awori. 

And honourable members, you leave the issue of the vice-chancellor. You can take it up with the Minister of Education or the Chancellor himself so that we do not have to waste time on it here.

10.49
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We on the Government side note with appreciation your advice on what has been apparently an omission on the part of the Executive arm of Government regarding misrepresentation of the business of this House. Although some members have suggested that Parliament has a role to play, we totally agree with you that very often a lot of this misrepresentation is to malign the Executive arm of Government and, therefore, it is our duty that we should do everything possible to make sure that these misrepresentations are remedied. We are going to take it up with appropriate authorities.  

Allow me to also add this that I would like to appeal to members of this House, as honourable leaders, when they are meeting the press not to give false information to the press. A lot of what you see in the press originates from some members of the House and members of the House should be responsible enough. Even if you do not agree with the thing you put it as it is and you put your case. 

Although they are not here, I would also like to appeal to the press that whenever we finish business they have a tendency of going to particular people to get information. There are those in positions of responsibility and leadership who would give the right information but for some reason the press are more interested in certain people and you know invariably the kind of information they always give to the press. Therefore, I would also like to appeal to the press that they seek out responsible leaders and ask them what –(laughter)- I mean those responsible for the business in the House. Seek them out.

If it has to do with Justice, ask the Minister of Justice; if it is has to do with Education, ask the Minister of Education. If it has to do with Foreign Affairs, the Minister is here; if it has to do with Defence, the Minister of Defence is here; talk to these people. Hon. Amama Mbabazi is saying that I should appeal to them not to ask hon. Awori. (Laughter) But as a Member of this House he is entitled to participate in our business. That is the appeal; we take your advice seriously.

10.52
REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA (Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My concern is about the falling prices of vanilla in Mukono District. We have raised this matter for some time but what worries me is that last weekend a one Ssalongo aged 60 years committed suicide in protest of the falling vanilla prices. We are worried about what is likely to happen and the Government has not come in to assist and rescue our people. We have constantly reminded the Minister of Trade and the committee but up to now nothing has been done. We want our people to be protected to have a vanilla policy and even to know what is going to be done because the prices continue to fall from Shs 150,000 per kilo to only Shs 1,000 per kilo. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The point is taken.

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to inform the House, while I appreciate hon. Rev. Bakaluba Mukasa’s concern, that this matter is before the committee and the person who is handling the committee is also from Mukono and he grows vanilla. I, the Minister who is standing here, grow vanilla but you should not fight market forces. 

I also want to inform this House that there are people who have developed synthetic vanilla so while they cannot allow us to do synthetic vanilla and you have organic vanilla, the market forces can decide to buy organic or synthetic vanilla. Let me also say that raw materials will always fetch a price according to the market forces, but the committee will report to this House.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

11.00
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much Mr Speaker. This is a personal statement in my capacity as the Vice-President, GLOBE International. 

On behalf of GLOBE International, Uganda Chapter, I would like to salute the G8 Group of Nations, which have been meeting in the UK to inter alia discuss the effects of global warming, and the African poverty dilemma.  

GLOBE, which stands for Global Legislators Organisation for a Balanced Environment, started in Europe in 1989 in a small way but it is now a Commonwealth association in over 100 countries of the United Nations, including Uganda. GLOBE endeavours to create Parliamentarians with an impeccable commitment to the protection of the environment through a global forum of advocacy related to a balanced environment. 

On behalf of GLOBE International, therefore, I congratulate the group of eight countries for having put the subject of climatic change and Africa’s debt burden on top of the agenda. The group of five should bring the same endeavors on board their agenda; I am talking about the equivalent of India, Mexico and others. The five are small giants but great polluters of the ozone layer. 

I am, however, saddened by the bombardment of the city of London by unscrupulous people as the summit was going on in Scotland. Those wrongdoers should not claim to be Africa’s friends. I strongly condemn the attack of innocent people at a time when sustainable solutions were being sought to address serious global problems. 

Mr Speaker, the need to implement the concerns of the Kyoto Protocol is today a global obligation. It is now eight years since the protocol was adopted and a number of countries, including the United States of America, remain to ratify the protocol. Others have ratified it but have not yet respected the target percentage deduction of their gas emissions into the ozone layer. In a nutshell, many countries are still non compliant to the known targets of the protocol and this is a very big challenge. 

I feel proud that Uganda is among the countries, which have ratified the Kyoto Protocol, and we must be proud about that. I call upon all African countries, which have not ratified the protocol to do so without further delay. The United States of America, being a member country of the world of civilised nations, has no excuse for not complying with the Kyoto Protocol demands. It should set an example, which is in line with what civilisation stands for; there is no excuse for not ratifying the protocol. 

The developed countries today account for about 56 percent of the total carbon emissions in the ozone layer. Africa south of the Sahara should watch out. The climatic conditions in most of the countries underlying that zone have drastically changed: water levels and river basins have dropped exceedingly and forests are disappearing at an alarming rate while populations are expanding immeasurably. Debt relief alone may not pull Africa out of the present poverty. We must undertake alternatives to make a change. 

In Africa we are poor not because we must be poor. We are poor because we have not rationally utilized the diversify natural resources. Our continent is predominantly agricultural in character. The more we regularise agricultural practices, including the practice of agro-forestry, the more we attract rain occurrences and the more rains remain to come. But we have ignored these practices. 

Productive agriculture entirely depends on a balanced environment. The world’s most influential giants have been good enough to free us from conditionalities for as long as we can promote the existence of good governance, democracy and human rights. Therefore, no country in Africa should say that those values cannot be promoted; they must be promoted.

Mr Speaker, our efforts to reduce global warming should be a serious undertaking. Let us make energy affordable and promote the technology of energy saving cook stoves in all the rural areas. Let us generously protect all the existing forest covers from now onwards. It should be a moral offence for anyone to cut down a tree without replacing it with three more young trees. Let us set an example as honourable members in our respective constituents, and I am talking to you members as I am also talking to myself.

Above all, as I wind up, in answer to the caldron call of the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act of 2003, Uganda should declare a national tree-planting day to be observed every year. The standards underlying our industrial carbon fumes or carbon emissions are chaotic. Many a moving car today is a source of carbon fumes. Through tree planting we can reverse the trend. Something, therefore, must be done before we collapse and the time for taking action is not tomorrow, the time is now. Thank you very much. 

MR PETER LOKERIS: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification from hon. Lukyamuzi as to whether he has already demolished his house, which he constructed in a wetland?  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I thought the minister had a point to make. Apparently in Kampala - you all know that Kampala is predominately wet. It does not environmentally mean that every wet area must necessarily be a wetland –(Laughter)– especially if it is not gazetted so. Thank you.  

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT NO. 3) BILL 2005 

Clause 34

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Chairman, in clause 34 we were proposing to insert a new Article 96(a). Since the publication of the Bill and the general debate, I have received representation on the content and drafting of clause 34, and I am undertaking consultations on the matter. I would request that this clause be stood over. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: The clause is stood over.

Clause 35

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, clause 35 proposes to remove the implications of what has been inserted in the Constitution by Act 13 of 2000. The committee came to the conclusion that since Act 13 of 2000 was nullified by the Constitutional Court, a nullification that was confirmed by the Supreme Court, that Act does not exist in our statute books so whatever it purported to insert anywhere does not exist. There is no need for this Parliament to proceed to remove what is non-existent. We propose the deletion of clause 35.

DR MAKUBUYA: If time allowed we could have a longer argument on the submission of the committee but my instructions are to accept the recommendation of the committee and I accept that the clause be deleted. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 35 be deleted. 

(Question put)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position is: no abstentions, none against, and those for are 117. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 36

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, while adopting the proposals in clause 36, the committee objected to the provision that relates to the declaration of a presidential candidate elected unopposed and the committee had recommended that this is a matter that should be handled by the Acts of Parliament going by the example of parliamentary elections and so on and so forth.

After a review of Article 103, clauses (4) and (6) – I read clause (4): “A candidate shall not be declared elected as President unless the number of votes cast in favour of that candidate at the presidential elections is more than 50 percent of valid votes cast at the election.”

Clause (6): “The candidate who obtains the highest number of votes in an election under clause 5 of this Article shall be declared elected President.” 

The above formulations do not foresee a situation where there is a possibility that only one candidate is nominated at the close of nomination; and in the Constitution there would be no way of recognising this kind of election should there, by close of nomination, be no candidate elected. We have reconsidered this position but would also like to propose a further amendment to the clause, as it is in the Bill proposed as the new clause 6(a). We propose that it should now be redrafted to read: “Notwithstanding the provisions of clauses (1) and (4) of this Article where in a presidential election only one candidate it nominated after close of nomination, the Electoral Commission shall declare the candidate elected unopposed.”  We beg to propose. (Applause)

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, I accept the amendment. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, honourable members, have you internalised the proposed amendment? Incidentally what happens if on nomination day there is no validly nominated presidential candidate?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, there are things, which can be ruled out of possibility. If a term of office for a president has come to an end and there is no candidate to vie for the presidency at all, then there is something very strange about that country. (Laughter) I think that is likelihood, which can be regarded as unlikely. It is unlikely that you would have a country, which has no candidate for the presidency when the term of a President has ended. 

There would have been a Vice-President who would have had an interest. There would have been a citizen really who would be interested in being a President; and in the case of Uganda, unless something radically changes, there will be candidates for the presidency. So I do not think we should put a provision in the Constitution to say that if no candidate appears, something else should happen.

THE CHAIRMAN: But the situation you have been addressing is a situation of only one person since you can zero in on one, you might as well zero on zero. It is a possibility and you must provide for it.

MAJ. (RTD) KINOBE: Mr Chairman, you are right that we must also look at the worst scenario. Of course according to hon. Kabwegyere it may not, but supposing it happens? First of all the elections of the President are not held at the time when the term expires, and it was deliberate to have indicated that you start preparing to have elections three months to the expiry of the term of the President. The process of elections starts with a candidate. Once there is no nomination then there is no candidate.

The Electoral Commission again goes through the process and that should not be here. It should be in the electoral law, which starts off the process of creating candidates for purposes of elections. If that scenario is likely to develop, the remedy must be in the Electoral Commission law because it is where the process of getting a candidate starts from.

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you suggesting that it is not a constitutional matter?

MAJ. (RTD) KINOBE: I am suggesting that it should not be under this; it should be at the stage of coming up with candidates.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to get clarification from you or the chairperson on the issue of “notwithstanding”. This drafting of “notwithstanding” -(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Have we exhausted the other first question? You have a valid point but have we exhausted the other possibility that there is no validly nominated candidate?

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Then I will hold on.

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Chairman, are you proposing to the chairperson that we should write that where at the close of nomination there is nobody who has turned up, the Electoral Commission shall re-submit and call for fresh nominations?

MR RUZINDANA: Mr Chairman, it is possible the single nominated candidate can actually die and if he has died, we must provide for it. I think we need to put that for example the Chief Justice will act or somebody like that. But it is possible. The possibility is there. The incumbent President can be nominated; he may be the only candidate and then something happens -(Interjections)- no the Vice-President is not nominated. It is the particular candidate who is nominated.

DR MAKUBUYA: I think you are raising an important point. May I ask for time - 24 hours – and I issue a statement on this matter tomorrow morning, Sir?

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, can we now proceed with the clause as it is and as amended by the chairperson?

MRS BYAMUKAMA: May I ask now? My issue was on the drafting with the word “notwithstanding”. Maybe the Attorney-General will look at that. 

Also when you look at clause 36 it says: “Apart from elections as required by clause (2) of Article 61 of this Constitution”. When you look at Article 61 of the Constitution, there is no such thing as clause (2). So what is this cross-reference about? I just want clarification on those two issues: the drafting of “notwithstanding”, and that particular cross-reference.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, we have already adopted clause 18 of the Bill and if my colleague would scrutinise clause 18, she will realise that in clause 18 we have introduced Article 61(2). What that means it that the current Article 61 becomes 61(1) and what we have introduced in clause 18 becomes Article 61(2). 

MR WANDERA: Mr Chairman, for purposes of clarification, I seem to have heard the chairperson of the committee make reference to 103(1) and (4), which I think was a slip of the tongue because when he was explaining earlier on he made reference to 103(4) and (6) but when he read the amendment, he mentioned 103(1) and (4). So I want him to repeat the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Chairperson, can you please read the formulation again?  

MR OULANYAH: Hon. Martin Wandera is right. It should be clauses (4) and (6).

THE CHAIRMAN: Can you read it again, please? It is better if we can read the entire clause as amended.

MR OULANYAH: “Notwithstanding the provisions of clause (4) and clause (6) of this Article, where in a presidential election only one candidate is nominated, after closure of nominations the Electoral Commission shall declare the candidate elected unopposed.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, it is clear now. I put the question to it. 

MAJ. KINOBE: Mr Chairman, when I heard the chairperson of the committee proposing his amendment at first, he added clause (1). Clause (1) reads as follows: “The election of the President shall be by universal adult suffrage through secret ballot.” But then in his second reading he has –(Interruptions)

THE CHAIRMAN: He dropped the other one because it was not necessary for purposes of –(Interruptions)­- he did correct that.

MAJ. KINOBE: That is what I am seeking clarification about. He did not clarify. He only said that he has abandoned one.

THE CHAIRMAN: He did. So now I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put.)

 (The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position is as follows: no abstentions, none against, ant those for are 147. The ayes have it. So the amendment has been carried.

(Question agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now I put the question that clause 36 as amended stand part of the Bill.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, the minister asked you to give him 24 hours to give an answer to that same Article.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well should it be necessary that his answer requires recommitting we shall recommit, but let us proceed with it as it is now.

(Question put.)

AYES:
1.	AADROA ONZIMA ALEX 		 
2.	ABURA PIRIR SAMUEL 		
3.	AEL ARK LODOU 			
4.	AHABWE PEREZ 			
5.	AKAKI AYUMU JOVINO 		
6.	ALI MOSES 				
7.	ALISEMERA BABIHA JANE 	
8.	ALONGA OTHMAN HARUNA 	
9.	AMAMA MBABAZI 			
10.	ANDRUALE AWUZU 			
11.	ANGIRO GUTOMOI CHARLES 	
12.	APUUN PATRICK 			
13.	ARAPKISSA YEKKO JOHN 		 
14.	ARUMADRI JOHN DRAZU 		
15.	ASUPASA ISIKO WILSON MPONGO
16.	ATENG OTIM MARGARET 		
17.	ATUBO OMARA 				
18.	AWONGO AHMED 			
19.	AWORI SIRYOYI AGGREY 		
20.	BABA DIRI MARGARET 		
21.	BADDA FRED 				
22.	BAGALANA TOM SAMSON 		
23.	BAGUMA ISOKE MATIYA 		
24.	BAKALUBA MUKASA PETER 	
25.	BALEMEZI NALUBEGA LYDIA
26.	BAKALUBA MUKASA PETER 
27.	BALEMEZI NALUBEGA LYDIA 
28.	BAMWANGA STEVEN 
29.	BANYENZAKI HENRY 
30.	BASALIZA ARAALI HENRY 
31.	BASALIZA MWESIGYE STEVEN 
32.	BAZANA KABWEGYERE TARSIS 
33.	BBUMBA SYDA NAMIREMBE 
34.	BESISIRA IGNATIUS 
35.	BIIRA BWAMBALE LOYCE 
36.	BIKWASIZEHI DEUSDEDIT 
37.	BIRIMUMAASO MULINDWA 
38.	BITAMAZIRE NAMIREMBE GERALDINE 
39.	BITANGARO SAMUEL 
40.	BULAMU JONNY RICHARD 
41.	BWERERE KASOLE LWANGA EDWARD 
42.	BYABAGAMBI JOHN 
43.	BYAMUKAMA DORA 
44.	BYANYIMA NATHAN 
45.	BYARUHANGA CHARLES 
46.	BYENKYA NYAKAISIKI
47.	CHEBROT CHEMOIKO STEVEN 
48.	EPETAIT FRANCIS 
49.	ERESU ELYANU JOHN 
50.	ERIYO JESSICA 
51.	ESELE JOHN PETER 
52.	ETONU BENEDICT 
53.	GABOI KIBAALE WAMBI DAVID 
54.	GOLE NICHOLAS DAVIS 
55.	HYUHA SAMALI DOROTHY 
56.	ISANGA NAKADAMA LUKIA
57.	KABAKUMBA LABWONI MASIKO 
58.	KABAREEBE AMON-REEVES MUZOORA 
59.	KADDUNABBI LUBEGA IBRAHIM
60.	KAFABUSA WERIKHE MICHAEL 
61.	KAGABA HARRIET 
62.	KAGIMU KIWANUKA
63.	KAGONYERA MONDO 
64.	KAJEKE WILFRED
65.	KAKOKO SEBAGEREKA VICTORIA 
66.	KAKOOZA JAMES 
67.	KALULE SSENGO EMMANUEL 
68.	KAMANA WESONGA EDWARD 
69.	KAMANDA BATALINGAYA COS
70.	KAMUNTU EPHRAIM
71.	KASAMBA MATHIAS 
72.	KASIRIVU ATWOOKI BALTAZAR 
73.	KATIRIMA PHENHAS
74.	KATONGOLE BADRU 
75.	KATURAMU HOOD KIRIBEDDA
76.	KAWANGA JOHN BAPTIST
77.	KAWOYA BANGIRANA ANIFA 
78.	KAYANJA ELLY 
79.	KAYIZZI ASANASIO 
80.	KAYONGO TOM 
81.	KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO LAWRENCE 
82.	KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA ISRAEL 
83.	KIDEGA DANIEL FRED 
84.	KIGYAGI ARIMPA JOHN 
85.	KIKUNGWE ISSA 
86.	KINOBE JIMMY WILLIAM REUBEN 
87.	KITHENDE KALIBOGHA APOLINARIS 
88.	KITYO HENRY MUTEBI 
89.	KIWAGAMA WILLIAM WILBERFORCE 
90.	KIWALABYE MUSOKE DANIEL 
91.	KIWANDA GODFREY
92.	KIZIGE MOSES 
93.	KOLUO CHARLES
94.	KUBEKETERYA JAMES 
95.	KULE MURANGA
96.	KUTESA SAM 
97.	KYAHURWENDA ABWOOLI TOMSON 
98.	KYATUHEIRE JACQUELINE
99.	LOCHIAM MILIGAN ROSE 
100.	LOKERIS APARITE PAUL 
101.	LOKERIS PETER AIMAT 
102.	LOLEM MICAH 
103.	LUBOWA MOSES PAUL 
104.	LUKYAMUZI JOHN KEN 
105.	LULE MAWIYA UMAR 
106.	LWANGA HERBERT WILSON 
107.	LWANGA MUTEKANGA TIMOTHY 
108.	LYOMOKI SAM 
109.	MABIKKE MICHAEL 
110.	MADADA KYEBAKOZE SULAIMAN 
111.	MAGOOLA ZIRABAMUZALE 
112.	MAKUBUYA KHIDDU EDWARD 
113.	MALINGA JOHNSON 
114.	MALLINGA STEPHEN OSCAR 
115.	MASIKO KOMUHANGI WINFRED 
116.	MATOVU BYATIKE 
117.	MATOVU DAVID 
118.	MAYENDE SIMON 
119.	MBABAZI KABUSHENGA HAMLET 
120.	MBALIBULHA TABAN CHRISTOPHER 
121.	MEHANGYE IDAH 
122.	MIGEREKO DAUDI 
123.	MINDRA JOYO EUGENIA 
124.	MUGERWA NAMAGGWA SAUDA 
125.	MUHWEZI KATUGUGU JIM 
126.	MUJUZI PIUS 
127.	MUKAMA FRANCIS JOSEPH 
128.	MUKASA ANTHONY HARRIS 
129.	MUKASA MURULI WILSON 
130.	MUKIIBI BENIGNA 
131.	MUKULA GEORGE MICHAEL 
132.	MUKULA RICHARD 
133.	MUKWAYA BALUNZI JANAT 
134.	MULENGANI BERNARD 
135.	MUNYIRA WABWIRE ROSE 
136.	MUSUMBA ISAAC ISANGA 
137.	MUTULUUZA PETER  
138.	MWANDHA JAMES ELIEZER 
139.	MWESIGYE ADOLF 
140.	MWESIGYE RUHINDI HOPE 
141.	NABETA NASANI 
142.	NACHA LORIKA ROSE 
143.	NAMAYANJA ROSE 
144.	NAMUSOKE KIYINGI KYAMA SARAH 
145.	NAMUYANGU KACHA JENIPHER 
146.	NANKABIRWA SSENTAMU RUTH 
147.	NANSUBUGA SARAH NYOMBI 
148.	NANTUME ERON JANET 
149.	NASASIRA JOHN 
150.	NAYIGA FLORENCE SEKABIRA 
151.	NDAWULA ALI SEKYANZI 
152.	NDAWULA KAWEESI EDWARD 
153.	NDEEZI ALEX 
154.	NDUHUURA RICHARD 
155.	NSABA BUTURO JAMES 
156.	NSHIMYE SEBUTULO AUGUSTINE 
157.	NSUBUGA NSAMBU 
158.	NSUBUGA WILLIAM 
159.	NTACYOTUGIRA PHILLIP MARY 
160.	NUWAGABA HERBERT MUNTUYERA 
161.	NVUMETTA LUTAYA KAVUMA RUTH 
162.	NYEKO OCULA MICHAEL 
163.	NYENDWOHA MUTITI JONATHAN 
164.	OBBO HENRY JOSEPH 
165.	OCHIENG PETER PATRICK 
166.	ODIT JOHN 
167.	OGENGA LATIGO MORRIS 
168.	OGOLA AKISOFERI MICHAEL 
169.	OGWEL LOOTE SAMMY 
170.	OJOK B’LEO 
171.	OKOT ALEX 
172.	OKOT OGONG FELIX 
173.	OKULLO EPAK YEFUSA 
174.	OKUMU RONALD REAGAN 
175.	OKUPA ELIJAH 
176.	OKURUT KAROORO BUSINGYE MARY 
177.	OLUM ZACHARY 
178.	OMACH MANDIR JACHAN FRED 
179.	OPANGE LOUIS 
180.	ORECH DAVID MARTIN 
181.	ORYEM HENRY OKELLO 
182.	OTAFIIRE KAHINDA 
183.	RAINER KAFIRE JULIET 
184.	RUHINDI FRED 
185.	RUKUNDO SERAPIO 
186.	RUTAMWEBWA MUGYENYI MARY 
187.	RUZINDANA AUGUSTINE 
188.	RWAKIMARI BEATRICE 
189.	RWAMIRAMA KANYONTOLE BRIGHT 
190.	SABIITI JACK 
191.	SAIDI OKUTI NASUR 
192.	SEBALU MIKE KENNEDY 
193.	SEBULIBA MUTUMBA RICHARD 
194.	SEKITOLEKO JULIET KABONESA 
195.	SINABULYA NAMABIDDE SYLVIA 
196.	SITENDA-SEBALU WILLIAM 
197.	SSEKIKUBO THEODORE 
198.	SSEMPANGI KEFA FREDERICK 
199.	SSENTONGO NABULYA TEOPISTA 
200.	THEMBO NYOMBI GEORGE WILLIAM 
201.	TIBARIMBASA AVITUS 
202.	TIPERU NUSURA 
203.	TUBBO NAKWANG CHRISTINE 
204.	TUMA RUTH 
205.	TUMWESIGYE ELIODA 
206.	TWAREBIREHO TUNGWAKO 
207.	WABUDEYA MUKAYE BEATRICE 
208.	WADRI KASSIANO EZATI 
209.	WAGONDA MUGULI JOHN WILSON 
210.	WAMBUZI GAGAWALA NELSON 
211.	WANANZOFU SIMON PETER 
212.	WANDERA MARTIN 
213.	WANDIRA SPECIOSA KAZIBWE 
214.	WANJUSI WASIEBA SYLVESTER 
215.	WONEKA OLIVER  
216.	WOPUWA GEORGE WILLIAM 
217.	YERI OFWONO APOLLO 
218.	YIGA ANTHONY 
219.	ZZIWA MARGARET NANTONGO 

NOES:
1. ODONGA OTTO

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Otto I need not challenge your vote but you have registered “no”. On what are you voting “no”? 

Honourable members, as the clerk tallies the votes, I want to inform you that one of the leading girls’ secondary school in Uganda and actually the oldest, Gayaza High School in Kyadondo, Kasangati, will on Saturday celebrate 100 years of its existence. As you will appreciate, we have benefited tremendously from this school. In the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery we have visitors who have served that school diligently and among them is Ms Joan Cox -(Applause)- who was headmistress of that school from 1950 to 1972; and we have Ms Warren who was headmistress from 1972 to 1990. 

We also have some of the teachers like Mrs Barbara Cooper who was teaching there from 1966 to 1972, Ms Ann Carter who was there from 1961 to 2000, Ms Janice was there from 1965 to 1995 and they have been accompanied by Miss Eunice Katehumba, who is a teacher there. In the House we have many old girls and I do not know whether I should go through the list but I think the Prime Minister’s late wife was also at Gayaza High School. Since our teachers and headmistresses are here, there is no harm for the old girls who are here to stand up for recognition.

On behalf of the entire Parliament, I want to welcome you to Uganda. I know you have just flown in from the United Kingdom. Thank you for the job well done. I wish you an enjoyable stay in Uganda with the old girls and the people of Uganda who love you. I thank you very much.

The results of the voting on clause 36 are as follows: there were no abstentions, one member is against, and those for are 219. Thank you very much.

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 37

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Chairman, I rise to move a motion on behalf of hon. Katuntu. I move that clause 37 of this Bill be deleted.

THE CHAIRMAN: In the first place, did you present your motion to the committee?

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Chairman, I am sure that hon. Katuntu presented this motion to the chairperson of this committee and I seconded it. There are other members who support this motion as well.

THE CHAIRMAN: Chairperson, is that the position?

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, when I was sitting here I received a hand scribbled note written on, “Motion - amendment to clause 37”, and the names of hon. Katuntu and hon. Anang-Odur appear on it but it is not signed by anybody. That is the document I have.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, before I make a ruling on this particular motion I want to remind you again of the provisions of rule 108(4), which state that when a Bill is published during first reading, you must study it and decide whether you intend to effect any amendment in that particular Bill. If you wish to do so you must go to the committee to which the Bill is committed and submit it for consideration. The committee may accept or it may not, but if it is accepted the committee then adopts it as part of its amendments. If they reject it, you are free to bring it on the Floor so that we consider it at the Committee Stage. Those are our rules and I have mentioned this particular rule many times.

However, now we have a member who is saying that he has a very important provision of the Constitution, which he is amending. He might have overlooked it and thought about it later so it is important that you consider it for fairness since this is the Constitution. But note that this should be the last one. Unless you follow rule 108, I may not accept your proposed amendments. Let us hear the amendment and see how to proceed.  

MR ANANG-ODUR: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman  -(Interruption) 

MR OCULA: Mr Chairman, I am not opposed to what is happening but just to set the record straight, if you look at our Rules of Procedure, rule No. 40 says that motions can be moved without notice. Also if you go to sub-section (h), it says that any motion made when the Committee of the Whole House is sitting can be moved.  

What I am saying is that I thought that at this stage -(Interruption)

MR CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ocula, I have ruled on this. Let us not go academic or waste any time. I have allowed the member to move his motion on the grounds that I have stated.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Chairman, this motion is moved in good faith. In 1995 the Constitutional Assembly in its wisdom in trying to guarantee that there would be orderly, regular and peaceful succession of the presidency decided that term limits be imposed on the presidency. Since that time, this particular provision is regarded as one of the cornerstones of this Constitution because the peace and tranquility of this nation will depend on how succession is carried out in the country. As I speak, we have not been able to put this particular provision, which is so important, to the test.

Secondly, in all third world countries particularly Africa, it is common knowledge that elections are hardly free and fair. In our own instance in Uganda we have recorded very serious cases of violence and intimidation in our election process. As you see things going on there is no hope that this particular scourge in our system is going to be eliminated. Therefore, term limits are the atom that guarantees that there will be peaceful succession from one President to another.  

I urge my colleagues to regard this as a very serious matter for our nation so that when we serve as presidents, we are able to live and settle in peace. I do not want to go into the examples and history of this country but we all know what has been happening. I felt and I still feel that this Constitution has given us a very good opportunity to be able, for the first time in our history, to move from one President to another without war or coup.

Our neighbours, the Tanzanians and Kenyans, have term limits. We are moving towards the union of East Africa and we hope to move to the union of Africa. Most of these countries have term limits –(Interjection)- I can hear the Minister of Foreign Affairs saying they will change. I do not know how he got that information because I am also told that there is a person in the Tanzanian Parliament who wanted term limits lifted there but he ended up being suspended from their Parliament. Therefore, I do not know where he got this information from.

As Ugandans, I think there is need to move our political system in tandem with the co-values of democracy in this country. It is on this basis that I urge Members in this Parliament to support the deletion of clause 37 so that we retain term limits. This way we will be able to allow our beloved President Yoweri Museveni to go into peaceful retirement and so that we can all go and ask his opinion whenever necessary. Mr Chairman, I rest my case.  

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman, His Excellency the President of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, wrote and said the problem with African leaders is that they try to cling to power too long. I am wondering why the Cabinet and the other colleagues are bringing this clause, which could easily tempt Ugandan leaders, including His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, to cling to power? 

We all know very well that once a soccer league has kicked off you cannot change the rules of the game. It is also well known and has been argued on the Floor of this House that His Excellency the President is the best captain for the NRM team. Granted. The point is, it does not matter whether a player is the captain of the team. The moment that player collects two yellow cards, that player must leave the field and it is my submission that it is time for President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni to leave the field.

The only way to protect the integrity of our Constitution is to delete clause 37 of the Bill. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MABIKKE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I stand to support the amendment moved by hon. Anang-Odur. My argument has been one I have advanced in this House before and I have argued that the reason clause 37 in the Bill should be deleted is first of all fear of the unknown. 

Today our friends in the Government are very worried about what is going to happen under a Multi-party dispensation and particularly without President Museveni as a leader of the National Resistance Movement. Perhaps we can take that as a growing concern but on the side of those of us who are opposed to clause 37, we also have got one fear. Our fear is that if the National Resistance Movement had not captured power using the gun perhaps we would not have had any quarrels with these amendments.  

The experiences of 1996 up to 2001 are very vivid. Whenever you push the National Movement on the wall, they bring out one element, which is the military uniform. There are also phrases like, “I will not hand over my army”, “You cannot jump the queue”, and “You must first pass through the furnace,” are very vivid in our memories. If we allow clause 37 to be passed we will have closed the last avenue to a peaceful transfer of power.  

All of us are aware that for over 40 years presidents have entered State House after swimming in human blood and walking on human skeletons. We think that this is an opportunity for us to create a condition where we can put somebody in State House without necessarily the spilling of our peoples’ blood. 

Mr Chairman, I want to wind up but protect me from hon. Kutesa, the former Secretary General of DP who fled with our files and is now with Mr Museveni. I strongly believe that clause 37 is not good for Uganda. Yes, it may be good for some individuals and for some in the Movement but it is not good in light of the broader interests of our country. I wish to support the amendment moved by hon. Anang-Odur that this clause be deleted. Thank you.

DR WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am standing up to say to those colleagues who do not support what has been proposed by the Government that they need to think wider and look beyond the target of their ammunition, since they are talking about blood, and see where we are going in this process of building democracy and understanding institutions as they get built.  

When you look at what the Government is proposing, they are not proposing a third term for Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. The Government is saying, as far as I know, that when we made the Constitution, which was promulgated in 1995, we said that we shall have two political systems, the Movement political system and the Multi-party political system. We also said that since the world evolves from time to time, maybe our successors will come up with another type of system. The way I understand this is that we are now moving into a Multi-party era and saying that the way we organize the presidency and the way we look at how we give power to the leadership in the country is to make sure -(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Point of procedure. 

DR WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Can she allow me to finish my sentence? I may be able to clarify and then I will sit down.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there is a point of procedure but what I want to say is that I will give you all an opportunity to make a contribution to this debate. As we deal with these matters, know that I am going to give you all an opportunity to tell us what you think about the motion. However, let us listen to the point of procedure by hon. Ogwal.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Chairman, hon. Kazibwe is formerly my sister but I have –(Interjections)- anyway she is my sister. The procedural problem I want to raise here is that my sister is talking about the democratization process. I do not think this House has disagreed on that process. It is absolutely different from the spirit of the motion, which is to delete Article 105(2) so that we maintain term limits. This has nothing to do with democratization. I just wanted to raise this so that we can move in the spirit of the motion. Thank you.               

THE CHAIRMAN: I think that point was not procedural but clarification, which is different. Proceed.

DR WANDIRA KAZIBWE: I indeed need to clarify to you my sister and I will give you all the clarification you need so that when you go back to Ssalongo in the evening you will be happy that Nnalongo clarified a point to a fellow Nnalongo. (Laughter)

My point was that in making this Constitution open to change and in consonance with the needs of the time, if we were under the Movement system, and the Constitution says that, the President will be elected for two terms and no more. It means that when we come back here to amend this Constitution we must also look at what it means to have a president under a Multi-party system.  

What is the implication of having a president under a Multi-party system? Who will determine the process through which he will come up for elections within the parties? Who will be their flag bearer under multi-party? Mr Chairman, I know that even when we made the Constitution some people were confused about whether we were under a presidential system or a parliamentary system. When we go multi-party and the head of the party can be the leader of the Government, it means that we have to rethink so that we can take back democracy to the parties to be able to determine whether a presidential candidate can go on to be elected.  

What right do I have as NRM/O to determine for UPC not to let president Milton Obote to come back for the 100th term?

DR NKUUHE: I would like to inform you my sister, hon. Dr Kazibwe that you live in America, which has a multi-party system and term limits. So what right does the Constitution have to say that the Democratic Party cannot field any other person? What right does the Constitution have to say that the Republican Party cannot field any other beyond two terms? I would like to inform you that even under Multi-partism in Tanzania, Kenya, Ghana and wherever you are, term limits have worked and they will work in Uganda. Thank you very much.

DR WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Mr Chairman, I want to thank my brother Dr Nkuuhe. Yes, I am in the United States but you should remember that the President of America is the co-ordinator of Presidents. In Massachusetts, where I go at Harvard University, the Governor of Massachusetts can be governor until his party determines that he does not need to be President any more. The Governor of Massachusetts has nothing to do with the road that takes me from Brookline to Harvard school. President Bush has nothing to do with the health status of the people in Massachusetts. That is why I said that when we debate this we should not personalize issues. We should debate with the vision to see where we want to take our country.

The multi-parties have been said that the Movement has suppressed them. Let us give the parties an opportunity to elect their leaders and vote for them freely. Then all Ugandans will determine whether that person can be fit to govern Uganda in perpetuity, because the check and balance is already there in form of parties. For us to sit here and everybody says we want a third term for President Museveni as if we have no heads to think about where we want to take this country, is really insulting to the electorate in this country. 

If you fear President Museveni as an NRM leader who will be floated and we elect whoever will be our flag bearer, just look among yourselves and also get somebody who will contend with the might of the Movement. Why do you want to suffocate the freedom to choose within your own parties?  

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, the former Vice-President who has been away now seems to be debating the White Paper and is not adding any value. We have been discussing this thing for two years and she has just come now to take us back. I want your guidance, if we are at Committee Stage, are we opening the debate again? People are already decided. I may consider raising a motion.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, you have raised it as a point of procedure but when you read the memorandum here, it also mentions the paper you are mentioning, so it deals with everything. Therefore, she is right. But please, let us not waste time on this matter. Can you please wind up? 

DR WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Mr Chairman, I think I have made my point. In summary I am saying that we are now moving into a multi-party system. We have to look at what we are doing in building the institution and move in accordance with what multi-party systems do. Let us allow the parties to elect their leaders and their leaders to elect their flag bearers and since my son hon. Otto has said we are wasting time - he was part of the minority report, I would like to ask: Why do you not put the question, since the whole thing was debated and finished?

MR BIRIMUMAASO: Thank you, Mr Chairman, for according me this opportunity to oppose the motion. I was in the Constituent Assembly and I supported the two term limits for the following reasons: I asked myself why we in Africa and Uganda in particular were backward? Why are we underdeveloped? Why are we having barbaric and atrocious insurgencies, and why are we having the refugee problem? Was it because we are cursed? 

The answer is that we are in short supply of good leaders. That is the fact. We wanted to limit the leaders that we are accustomed to. For ten years now the people of Bukoto West and the colleagues that think like me have seen that Uganda can have good leaders.  

The question put alternatively is, should we open up term limits to allow good and exemplary leadership in the powerful office of the President to continue if the people of Uganda so wish through free, fair and regular elections? That is the question. Because now we have confidence that if His Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni can lead us so well, then any other Ugandan can also do it. Therefore, we should not limit the good leadership that Ugandans have experienced and can continue to enjoy.

To a rational mind the question is simple and the answer is, “Yes, we should open up.” To a tainted mind –(Interruption)

DR KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, in support of what my colleague has just said, this clause must not be deleted because in my view the persons I am thinking about, I Kibirige Sebunya, that would benefit from the clause as it is now are Mr Semmogerere, Mr Mabikke, Mr Mao, Mr Bagalana, Mr Odonga Otto, Maj. Tumukunde and Col. Besigye. Those are the kind of persons that I think would benefit from the clause as it is originally. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR BIRIMUMAASO: Thank you for that very good information. The answer to the simple question I posed should be, to a rational mind, “Yes, why not?  We should open up.” To a tainted mind there are doubts, to a defective mind, the answer is automatically no. I want to appeal to the middle ground - I feel so bad when I see some of my colleagues in mid-ground. They are having doubts, “Are we doing the right thing now?” 

I want to inform this House that there have been two contending sides. At the peak in 1985, the year of anarchy, there was a group that was fighting to change the status quo of anarchy. There was another group that felt nothing was wrong and looked at the National Resistance Army (NRA) as an invading force, a disruptive force. Some colleagues and I decided to support the liberating force. Come 1986 this force brought the RC system. The RC system, to some of us, is the best political innovation of our times. Members of the other group decided to kill the RCs.  

Come the Constituent Assembly (CA), a good majority of delegates were peacefully debating this Constitution and another group marched in protest. This is the group testifying here that it will die defending the Constitution. In 1996 we had the first ever free and fair presidential elections in Uganda in the history of this country. 

Whereas the rest of the Ugandans were peacefully determining their destiny, Joseph Kony and his colleagues were terrorizing and unleashing the machines of mass destruction. For those who were in the middle at this time, if you still have any doubt which group you should go with, let me ask you: who do you give the benefit of doubt? One is a group that has consistently travelled for 20 years of democracy and another has consistently opposed. Where do you go, Ndugu Wandera Martin? –(Interjection)- thank hon. Kagimu Kiwanuka for giving us the benefit of doubt.

I want to repeat the question, should we allow to lift term limits to allow the powerful office of the President to continue if Ugandans so wish through free, fair and regular elections? Mr Chairman, I beg that you put the question.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. When they were making the Constitution all the people in the Constituent Assembly were intelligent and resourceful Ugandans. They instituted Article 105 and in the same Constitution they put two systems of governance: the Multi-party system is there, and the Movement system. It was clearly stated under Article 105(2) that “a person” they never said “this person” must have been in the Movement party or in Multi-party politics. I think we should not lose the reasoning, which was put there at that time. It is unfortunate that it is outdated; that is what you want to hear.  

I am very lucky that I was alive in 1986 and that many of these people who are around, especially on the Front Bench, were not alive. I remember and I want to tell them what took place. When we came from the bush in 1986 - it is unfortunate that many of them were not there - and I can hear Dr Nsaba Buturo asking me which bush when he was in exile after being the DC of Kampala and doing panda gaari. What I want to put up is that on 29 January 1986, the President of Uganda by then, who was swearing in was called Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. He read three fundamental issues, which I have talked about and I want to talk about them for the last time.  

The first one was that, “The change I am bringing in is a fundamental change, not a change of guard.” Number two, he said, “The problem with African leaders is wanting to overstay in power. I President Museveni, will not do it.”  I hope 20 years is one week. He made another statement that, “By 1995 there will be no peasant.” I hope there are no peasants and the definition of peasant is a poor person with bad manners. Are you telling us that Ugandans have bad manners and that is the slogan you are using throughout? 

It is unfortunate to note that I would be very happy if there would be more Articles like 105(2) in place because you can see Dr Kazibwe for whom we paid US $15,000 is here to talk about it -(Interjection)- it does not matter about Mukwano, I have a report. Dr Kazibwe for whom we have paid Shs 2.5 billion is available. Dr Kazibwe, who is earning a salary without working, is available –(Interruption)

DR WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Mr Chairman, is hon. Nandala in order to impute that I am not working, when I have been doing my work as Member of Parliament for Kigulu South in this modern era of information technology? (Laughter) I want to challenge hon. Nandala, maybe he is one of those who are so functionally illiterate that he does not know that you can be in America and be able to –(Interjections)- yes, is it in order for him to impute that because he lacks knowledge that you can actually study wherever you are and still do your work? I would like to challenge hon. Nandala that his constituency is actually less attended to than mine of Kigulu South constituency. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Can you substantiate that the Member of Kigulu South is not working? 

MR MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to thank you for that. I will substantiate. It is fortunate that the Kigulu you are talking about is where I pass when I am going to Bugisu. There are very few poles of power and not many houses have a computer to use the Internet. (Laughter) You sit there and I have never seen that microphone there for which you rise to say, “I am debating on behalf of Kigulu” I have never seen it. I can go further to assure you that Dr Kazibwe can be there in spirit but she is not there physically.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we should not waste time peeping into people’s constituencies. Just concentrate on your constituency and your work here. 

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Having said that, we had a minority report, which was attached to the main report and it had clearly stated that it did a research showing people who are for third term and those against it. It is unfortunate that at the time we never debated it but when you look at it, 60 percent of the people stated that the time limit should stay, and 40 percent said no.  

Currently this Parliament, which I believe - and I want to thank President Museveni for building two classes, he built the high class and the peasants. The high class are the rich like the Sam Kutesas and the peasants are those they give Shs 5 million to change their thinking. This lower class wants to determine the destiny for all the Ugandans -(Interruption)

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am seeking clarification. He seems to be talking about two things: the Shs 5 million or any other that can come as a contribution towards a member. I want to know whether these boxes from Mukwano shop are part of the issue?

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I think what we should do is, you just make your point, justify why you are supporting the amendment and market your views to the House.

MR MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to plead with the Members of Parliament that we should not amend the Constitution because of just an individual. We should amend this Constitution looking at the past, present and the future. I want you all to make informed decisions. I agree that you have come determined to do what you want to do but I request you - even the Bible says that they have the ears but they do not hear. 

I request you, for the first time change and vote in deletion of the proposed clause because this is not good. Our country has experienced wars and this was going to be the first time I was going to see a President handing over power but a few of us or majority of us in the House want to hinder us from seeing that peaceful transition. I believe that time will either help us or it may not, but I would request you colleagues that for the first time change your attitude. It is not good to vote for the sake of voting. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Honourable members, we had a motion for second reading.  The motion for second reading was a general debate and as you may recall, most of you, apart from a few, the rest were about article 105(2). Some were opposed, and others were for.  

Now, in perfecting the position of those who are against, will be during the general debate; proposing the result would be to debate.  But now I see that there are no new arguments and the committee stage is not for general debate.  But I allowed the amendment to come in as a conclusion of what was done in the second reading.  But still, I see people are interested in making contribution.  

What I am going to do is this. I am going to have three people for the motion and three against it, and then we will pronounce ourselves on it.  So, to help me, you indicate which side you belong.  Are you for?  Okay, honourable Patrick Mwondha.

MR PATRICK MWONDHA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am speaking for the deletion of Clause 37.  I can see people are eager to vote and finish business over this kisanja matter, but I want to say only one thing and let me go on record, as you vote today you are going to leave this matter here in this House. It is going to the people of Uganda. So I am appealing to the people of Uganda to vote with the 50 of us, when we come to present Presidential candidates to them -(Interruptions)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr. Chairman, In line with our Rules of Procedure, the dressing pattern for members of Parliament has been ably codified. Mr. Chairman, honourable Onzima has just entered Parliament with a yellow blouse. (Laughter)  Is he in order to dress in a blouse, let alone the colour and sit comfortably on the Floor of this House? 

THE CHAIRMAN:  I do not intend to engage in such trivial matters given the time we are left with -(Interruption)

MR MWONDHA:  Mr. Chairman, as you can see, the House of Parliament has already turned into a public rally and what we are doing now is to actually address the public.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Honourable member, just make your point.

MR MWONDHA:  My case is going to the people of Uganda, the highest court that we have in this country, and I am using this opportunity to appeal to the people of Uganda –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Clarification, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Honourable members, we have very little time, let him make his case and then we see how we can proceed.

MR MWONDHA:  This country is now in the hands of the voters, whose children and grandchildren are going to suffer, and they must take care as they go to vote next year in 2006 to save them of this crime.  

Mr. Chairman, I see T-shirts being put on in the House of Parliament and I know that the time has come; we should not waste any more time in this House.  In fact, as we vote on this clause, we should dissolve and go back to the people.  Thank you.  

MR OULANYAH: Thank you very much Mr. Chairman for according me this singular opportunity to say something on this matter.  Mr. Chairman, I am sure that all the honourable members present are wondering what I am going to say.  I am sure the press is anxious about what I am going to say and I am sure everybody in this country is anxious about what I am about to say.

Mr. Chairman, I had opted to keep it that way.  If I may borrow a leaf from Abraham Lincoln, at the time when he was confronted with a decision, he said something like this “it is better to remain silent and keep everybody in doubt, than open your mouth and remove all doubt.”  

Mr. Chairman, I have not spoken on this matter and it was deliberate, because I was chairing the committee that was handling this matter.  

I have listened to all the arguments that could possibly be advanced, both for and against.  I have listened to threats of war and all kinds of things that are likely to happen as a result of this vote.  We are so eloquent in this House; I have even seen the most eloquent failing to articulate points on this issue either for or against.  It is because we have not gone to the root of it and I would like to speak here as a person who has chaired the fort. 
When the matter came for the first time in the committee that I chaired, the recommendations that had come from the Constitutional Review Commission was not about whether to lift or not.  It was about who should take the decision on lifting term limits.  But when the presentations were made before the committee, it was not about who should decide. Tempers were hot on both sides and this is why I am going to make an appeal.  

When the matter came in the Bill that was first introduced to Parliament, the Constitution Amendment Bill, the tempers were still that raw, emotions were so raw and even now. 

But in all these situations, we found that there were arguments both for and against. As such, they were held so passionately that it was difficult for the matter to be resolved any other way.  We recommended to Parliament, that the two positions are irreconcilable and that they could only be decided by the vote.  

But, why have I decided to speak on this matter now?  When I left the seat and walked out, I had called a friend to pray with me because these are weighty matters and for those of you who are taking it lightly- it is a very weighty matter for us.  

I called a friend to pray with me, if you want the name, it is Former hon. Gasatura, we went upstairs and prayed about how this vote should go.  It is so serious and I would want everybody to pray, even if you do not pray at all, take a moment, close your eyes and utter a prayer.  Why? 

The reason is that the arguments are no longer for the principle of whether you should lift or retain presidential term limits.  The arguments have zeroed down on those who like President Museveni and those who hate him. Yet many people do not fall in either of the categories.  Some people do not hate President Museveni that much and they neither like him that much. I am speaking out because I have personally gone through the debate and I want members to listen.  Friends, relatives and in-laws have hoarded us on this matter.  Each time the committee did anything, we were vilified and ridiculed by the Press and this hurt.  Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA:  I want to seek clarification from the Chair of the Committee and the clarification I want to seek actually comes to the very question he has put forward, which the committee was not able to give a go ahead. That is the question of the size; those who hate President Museveni or love him. 

My question comes on the basis of his research on this question and the basic fact that in the UN Convention on Civic and Political Rights, it is against an individual to have term limits-Article 27. I had waited patiently to hear what the Committee could advise on the situation as it stands today and as it stands in the context of Uganda becoming more conventional with regard to the UN Conventions, Protocols and Rights.  I want him to give me clarification so that I can put away hon. Museveni.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, so far his summary is that both sides have personalized the issue; that is what he is saying and they have not addressed the merits of that particular requirement of amendment. This is what he is saying, but he has not yet come to a conclusion. Would you like to conclude please?

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Chairman, when I moved this Motion, I did in good faith and I want to believe that those who are arguing for and against this Motion, are doing so for the good of this country, from their own perspectives. We must respect them but how can the Chairman of the Committee terms those who are against lifting term limits to be those who hate President Museveni?  How did he come to that conclusion? 

I feel personally touched with that statement, and therefore, is he in order to make such a statement when in fact I doubt whether there could have been a basis for calling us people the enemies of President Museveni?

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I think the honourable member was talking about his experience in the committee, people who went to the committee to defend one position or the other. His assessment is from those he heard in the committee. I think that is what he was saying; but please, conclude as soon as possible.

MR OULANYAH: Thank you Mr Chairman.  As I said, it is not about laws; it is not about conventions. It is not about any of those, it is not even about whether we should amend the Constitution or not. No. It is about the person of President Museveni and I want to show you the difficulty: we have not argued the principles; we have argued the personality and none of the members of the committee who sat there has contributed, because of the rules of procedure. 

With your indulgence Mr Chairman, I would like the members to raise their hands, from where they are sitting. Even in this committee, when they came to the issue of amending Article 105 (2), it is the single issue that we had to take a vote on. That is why I say that we should respect the decisions and votes of the people, because the matters are so entrenched that I would only call upon the hon. Members to respect each other’s vote the way they will vote. (Applause) Thank you very much.  

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Chairman and hon. Members of Parliament –(Interjection)– Mr Chairman, can you protect me?

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order please!

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Chairman and hon. Members of Parliament, the hour has come for judgment.  We have argued and debated this matter. Mr Chairman, this is the time to decide for the future of this country.  The vote that we are going to take now is a vote that will promote peace and stability in this country.

Mr Chairman, I want members to say “aye” to peace and stability. I want Members to say “aye” to the transformation of our country, and this the time, you must say “aye” to lifting the third term.

Mr Chairman, this matter has greatly been debated, this is the time that you must say ‘aye’ to lifting the third term.  This matter has been greatly debated by Members of Parliament and by the public, and the hour has come –(Interruption)

MR BESISIRA: Mr Chairman, I am not contesting your ruling. Before you made your ruling, you had intimated to this House that people had almost said everything and that the Members were repeating themselves.  The way we are preceding, it seems we are continuing to repeat ourselves over the same things.  Mr  –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable Members, I am the one who pointed out that the general debate already took place and I decided that I will give three people a chance, those in support and I intend to follow-

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Chairman, I have already said that we have debated this matter. The general public have debated this matter and the hour has come for us to decide.  I want to oppose the Motion moved by hon. Anang-Odur. I want to call upon Members to oppose that motion and amend the Constitution as provided for in the Bill.  

Mr chairman, since we have debated this matter for a long time, and it seems Members are ready to decide, I want to move a motion that you put the question.

MR CHAIRMAN: Honourable Members, I have decided that I will give three people ‘for’ and three ‘against.’ I intend to follow that.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, I want to thank you for giving me this opportunity.  It is unfortunate that during the general debate, I was one of those who were listed to speak in the afternoon, but the question was put before.  I had seven reasons why I supported the retention of Article 105(2). But because of the limited time and we are in the Committee Stage, I will only dwell on one important reason why I believe Article 105(2) should be retained.

Mr Chairman, following from what my good Friend hon. Oulanyah Jacob has spoken, the problem the committee had on this issue of Article 105- I want to pose what I consider to be a fundamental question.  For us who were in the Constituent Assembly, “why is it that Article 105(2) was the least contentious and the least controversial?  

I want to pose another question: “why is it that after 10 years, this Article 105(2) has now become the most contentious and most controversial clause in the constitutional amendment?”  

Hon. Members of this House, if you can pose and answer those two questions, then you will be able to follow the reason I am now going to advance briefly.  

Mr chairman, the issue of Article 105(2) was the least contentious in the Constituent Assembly because the Members who were there were freshly conscious of the history of Uganda and at that particular time we were making a new Constitution for a new order for this country and we were bearing the history of Uganda not making a Constitution for the past but making a Constitution for the future so that the mistakes and the sufferings of the past are not repeated– (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information –(Interruption)

MR ATUBO: Please hold on, you will give me the information later.  I was one of those and many others who have now changed their mind, who supported Article 105(2).  A few of course as usual did not support Article 105(2).

People in the Constituent Assembly and indeed the rest of the country were conscious that the heart of stability in this country lies in the office of the President.  And I call it the basic cause of instability because people in this country have always fought for that office for whatever reasons, some misuse it others use it properly.  

Of course, when we got independence, the whole idea was for a leader to come, lead the country either as Prime Minister after Kiwanuka or as a President at that time. But the crisis of this country in 1966 cantered around the office of the President and the Prime Minister.  

The overthrow of the Government in 1971 with Amin coming to power had no other intention than mere occupation of the office. So members of the Constituent Assembly said, “10 years is enough for a President”, the important principle was certainty in the occupation of an office.  The principle that somebody who comes to that office is elected for five years and it can be renewed to another five years to make the recommended 10 years.  Those who might not like the President for first five or 10 years, could patiently wait for the change for a new leader with a new vision and direction. 

This is unlike circumstances in which we have a President for 20 years. Those unfortunate individuals who may not be in the President’s favour will permanently doomed.  They are permanently in displaced camps for their homes are permanently destroyed and their areas cannot get any development. Their sons cannot go to school, they are in other words permanently marginalised and they see no future.

But when you are told that this person in power is likely to be there for five or 10 years, you are likely to have new blood to occupy that office; and his policy may be focused in another direction.  So this fundamental point of certainty of the President being in power and not waiting until he is forced out with a gun, is what we would all want to see happening.

Therefore, I warn the members in this House to bear this important point in mind. We who were in the Constituent Assembly had that point in mind and that is why it was not contentious.  We knew the President would be in office for 10 years however bad he was and another person would take over to change direction and policies. 

Now a person comes and becomes President. He can use the instrument and resources of the state, since he will be in power, anyway.  In Africa, with 90 percent of people being peasants who are easily threatened, intimidated and manipulated, it is very difficult to remove this kind of President. Africa has been like this, go to Congo, Togo, Ghana and to many other African states, it is very easy to manipulate peasants.

Mr Chairman, I know that possibly the future of this Article is pre-determined.  However, I want to conclude by saying, that Article 105(2) is going to continue to be the most controversial issue in this country. It would be settled in this House but you have refused to look back at our history and consider why this Article was put in the Constitution. To refuse to see the future of this country with the challenges we face is simply to wreck it. The decision we make here is not going to be final.

It is definitely not going to be final, it is definitely going to be a tragedy for this country. It is going to be a sad day for this country and the people of Uganda may continue to suffer because of Article 105(2). The people of Otuke are likely to continue to suffer because of this Article, where we do not see any possible change coming.  

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA:  Mr Chairman, I thank you for giving me this opportunity. I would like to highlight three main points for us to reflect on as we consider the Motion on the Floor.

My reasoning is based on constitutional principles.  Clause 2 of the Constitution says, “all the people of Uganda shall have access to leadership positions at all levels subject to this Constitution.”  Article 70 provides for the Movement political system and Article 71© provides that the Movement political system is broad-based, inclusive and non-partisan and shall conform principles of accessibility to all positions of leadership by all citizens.

The principle of accessibility to leadership positions is a democratic right and therefore, I wonder why when 105(2) was put in place, it was subjected to this particular democratic principle.  

I have been listening to colleagues talk about this issue and the question is, why shouldn’t all Ugandans have the benefit of this democratic principle whereby they shall have access to leadership positions at all levels?  

I would like to also point out a second principle, which is the right to associate, which is provided for under Article 29. This right to associate is inter-linked with the right to choose. It is very clear that all of us are going into competitive politics where each political organisation fields its best players.

MR OMODI OKOT: Mr Chairman, the House is debating a very important matter. I see hon. Mayombo and former Vice President reading papers, which they have just dropped.  Is it in order?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Chairman, my second point was on the right to associate, which is provided for under Article 29. The right to associate is inter-linked with the right to choose where one wants to belong. As I already said, we are going into competitive politics and where each organisation will give in their best players.  

I am concerned because if we continue debating against the lifting of term limits, we as a country will miss on unique personalities, who are able and experienced.  We shall deny people the right to vote leaders of their choice. 

Mr Chairman, this issue is interlinked with what I have been hearing people say when they talk about the issuing of yellow cards or red cards.  I would like to know who is issuing these yellow or red cards, who the referee is.  As far as I am concerned, the referee is a big group composed of people who have not issued any red or yellow cards, but have overwhelmingly voted for a system, represented by a personality. I do not see the origins of yellow or red cards.  

Finally, I have heard issues of alarmism, tragedy.  I would like to say that the route of amending the Constitution is not closed.  Chapter 18 is part of our Constitution and it still stands.  There is no reason we should be desperate simply because of Constitution amendment. There will be another time in future when Constitution amendment will be necessary; this is not the first and last time. 

I have been hearing people talk about change.  The question is, do we just change for the sake of changing? We are representatives of the people and therefore, our people’s wishes must be expressed and upheld on the Floor of this House. I would like to urge my colleagues to insist on free and fair elections. At this time when we are going into competitive politics, members of individual Organisations have a right to choose their leader just as they have a right to associate with organisations pf their choice.  

Mr Chairman, bearing the above in mind, I would like to oppose the motion and support the lifting of term limits.  

THE CHAIRMAN: We have had a reasonable number of those against the motion. Could we now listen to those for the motion?

MR MARTIN WANDERA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to start by thanking hon. Byamukama for presenting the most thought out argument for the lifting of term limits.  You do Gayaza proud.   However, since we are in Committee Stage, I would have expected you to go further than that, by moving to have other limitations on access deleted.  For instance, Article 102 talks about a Presidential candidate not being less thirty-five years and not more than seventy-five years of age. Is that not a limitation?  

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Byamukama did not move any amendment.  She was only opposing the amendment. However, if you buy the philosophy you are about to, it is up to you, to move any such amendments that you are interested in. We are now considering an amendment, Tabled by hon. Odur.

MR WANDERA: So the point that I want to make is that limitation in terms of access to offices of leadership is admissible.  We cannot just legislate to allow anyone just like that. As we debate the matter of lifting term limits, we should not pretend that it is a new topic. I listened to a senior legislator, hon. Member for Kigulu South, and she sounded as though she was not in the Constituent Assembly.  I have reviewed the records of submissions of all those who were in the Constituent Assembly.  I wish she had submitted –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Kigulu South?

MR WANDERA: Yes, she was in Constituent Assembly.  I have reviewed the contributions of all those people and I do not remember her raising some of the issues they did.  There was unanimity on the matter of term limits then, and what this House should ask, is whether the reasons that compelled the Constituent Assembly to impose term limits no longer obtain.  I want to state that they still obtain.  The reason the Constituent Assembly moved to put term limits in the Constitution is that, most of Uganda’s problems have revolved around the Presidency. Whoever becomes President through whatever means, for reasons that I am yet to know, never wants to leave, to the extent that one of them declared himself life President.  

Mr Chairman, I have listened to Colleagues in this House say that the last 19 years have been peaceful since we have had a good leader and therefore need not to worry about the past.  My response is that the history of independent Uganda starts in 1962.  Therefore, when we analyse Uganda’s politics, it is wrong for us to limit ourselves to January 1986. The circumstances that made Amin emerge, the Obotes of this world emerge and finally Museveni are still here. I want to urge my honourable colleagues not to negate the wisdom of the Constituent Assembly.

Finally, Article 98(1) among other attributes states that the President is the fountain of Honour. We are 26 million Ugandans and the only person disqualified by Article 105(2) is President Museveni. I do not want us to tempt him into abusing the honour that Article 98 gives him. On page 9, 11 and blurb of his 2001 manifesto, he says, “I am seeking my last term.” “The Monitor” of 21st-24th July 1995, the President said that he would be retiring at the age of 55; I am yet to find out how old he is. Ladies and gentlemen, let us not lead the President who has ruled this country well into being dishonorable.

Mr Chairman, soon after my submitting during the general debate, several members came to me and said, “You made a point but you know, Martin, we have a problem. We have children to take to school, and if we do not support this thing –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us be mature and accept the differences. If somebody is not on your side, do not blackmail him.  Just market your views, which may or may not be accepted. Sometimes the person you blackmail may have ended up buying your idea. Please, do not blackmail anybody.  I hope you have concluded.

MR WANDERA: Mr Chairman, I want to state that I am not blackmailing anyone, and if need be, I would go out and consult those members; if they permit me to disclose their names, I will do that.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I have the three people on each side. I am now going to put the vote, on amendment proposed by hon. Anang-Odur to delete lifting the term limits.  

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position is; Abstentions - three, For - 48, Against - 188.  

(Question negatived.)

Clause 37

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 37 stand part of the Bill.

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Chairman, following the presentation by the Committee, on which was appended a minority report; I stated that I was going to move an amendment. This amendment is to the effect that we insert a new sub-clause on clause 37(b) to read as follows: “Article 105 is amended by inserting immediately after clause (2) the following new clause 2(a): ‘Upon the expiration of a period of 20 years after the coming into force of clause 2 of this Article, Parliament shall review the provisions under the clause for purposes of retaining or abolishing indefinite illegibility for persons vying to hold office of the President.’ ”  Mr Chairman –(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Lyomoki, hon. Byamukama referred you to chapter 18, which deals with Constitution amendment.  The chapter does not give the period within which an amendment should be moved.  We cannot tie the hands of Parliament, which has the mandate under this chapter to amend the Constitution. Therefore, to say 20 years is to amend chapter 18, which is an entrenched chapter. 

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Chairman, I have moved an amendment and I should be given chance to present it and –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I am advising you that you are moving an amendment on an entrenched chapter. You cannot tie the hands of the future Parliament to the effect that they should not amend the Constitution until 20 years.  You can go ahead and move it.

DR. LYOMOKI: Mr Chairman, I am a Member of Parliament and I have moved an amendment. I want to justify my amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, you are moving an amendment and nobody has stopped you, but did you address the issues raised in chapter 18?  If you do not accept my advice, crosscheck with chapter 18 and you will see that your amendment has a problem.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The issue of amendment in the Constitution – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us listen to him. We shall then decide how to handle his amendment. 

MR BIRIMUMAASO: Mr Chairman, I really sympathise with Dr Lyomoki but his motion was not seconded. I do not see why we should proceed.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Lyomoki, please conclude your amendment.

DR. LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have moved this amendment with a very sober mind and I have considered the issues that have been raised. I have been a Member of the Committee for Legal Affairs. We listened to the various views that were presented by various sides.  This issue is of a fundamental nature and I request that I am given chance to –(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please. Let him make him conclude.

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Chairman, I know that we have taken sides but it is also important for us to allow proposals from our colleagues. I have supported the proposal to delete term limits from the Constitution and I have never changed my mind.  I also know that there are certain issues are legitimate and it is upon this House to recognise and give them their due importance. 

It is on that basis that I move that even as we are lifting terms limits, we should allow a time in future when this matter can be reviewed.  In some countries, like Sweden, when an amendment is done it does not become effective until a subsequent Parliament pronounces itself on that amendment. It is because they want to allow two Parliaments, a body of two groups to handle that same matter. The Chairman of the Committee made it clear that members of that Committee listened to a contest where honourable members and other groups showed that this was controversial argument. Both sides were threatening war and they have all along intimidated each other with all sorts of threats. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way.  I was also a member of a minority report just like you.  You are giving an amendment that Parliament may review Article 105(2) after 20 years. Supposing they deem it necessary to review it after 5 years, what do you think might happen?

DR. LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, the situation that you are giving is that if we do not provide for this amendment I am moving, Parliament will have the right to move any amendment anytime, even after only 5 years. Introducing term limits is always against the incumbent of the day.  Therefore, it is simpler for the Executive to introduce an amendment to remove term limits than it is to insert one that introduces term limits, at the time when an incumbent is happy with open terms limits.

So, the situation you are bringing in is rather complicated. I do not expect a situation where a President has been in power for a long time with no term limits to allow any Member of Parliament who may want to introduce terms limits. I doubt that such a Member of Parliament would get any support. It would be very difficult because such a member would be considered opposed to the regime of the day. Therefore, the issue of Presidency is controversial and the only way to tactfully handle it is by having a constitutional solution of time frame. It is good that as Parliament we give it time so that the future Parliament reviews this same point when they come into office. 

I know that by persisting to raise this amendment, some of my colleagues might be looking at me in a bad way but my conscience bears me witness. As a Member of Parliament, I should make my stand very clear and the future will bear us witness.  It was very clear from the presentations to the Committee that even the Constitution Review Commission report had recommended that the population should review this matter. The Executive decided that Parliament reviews it, which meant that the matter was fundamental. In trying to make a decision we must be conscious and if need be, allow the future Parliament to take on this matter –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the policy behind hon. Lyomoki’s item has been stated; I am going to put a vote. 

MR ERESU: Mr Chairman, it was raised on the Floor of the House whether there was no seconder for hon. Lyomoki’s Motion. He was however given the advantage to continue to talk. How can we vote on a Motion, which has not been seconded?

THE CHAIRMAN: What is your point?

MR ERESU: Mr Chairman, Rule 41 does not allow us to debate on a Motion, which has not been seconded. The member was continuously advised that his Motion was inconsistent with the Constitution, for he was actually amending Article 18. I think there is no need for us to vote on his Motion; let us dismiss it and proceed  with the main issue.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position is as follows: Abstentions  - 8, For – 1 Against	-179. The Nays have it.

(Question negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 37 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put.)

AYES:
1.	Aachilla John		
2.	Aanimu Angupale	
3.	Abura Samuel		
4.	Ahabwe Godfrey		
5.	Akaki Ayumu 		
6.	Akech OkuLlo Betty	
7.	AKELLO DINAH GRACE 
8.	AKWERO ODWONG JANE 
9.	ALI MOSES (LT GEN) 
10.	ALINTUMA NSAMBU JOHN 
11.	ALISEMERA BABIHA JANE 
12.	ALONGA OTHMAN HARUNA 
13.	AMAMA MBABAZI 
14.	AMONGIN APORU HELLEN CHRISTINE 
15.	ANDRUALE AWUZU 
16.	APUUN PATRICK 
17.	ARAPKISSA YEKKO JOHN 
18.	Ark Lodou				
19.	ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA (LT GEN) 
20.	ASUPASA ISIKO WILSON MPONGO 
21.	AWONGO AHMED 
22.	BABA DIRI MARGARET 
23.	BABU EDWARD FRANCIS 
24.	BADDA FRED 
25.	BAGALANA TOM SAMSON 
26.	BAGUMA ISOKE MATIYA 
27.	BAKALUBA MUKASA PETER 
28.	BAKKABULINDI CHARLES 
29.	BAKOKO BAKORU ZOE 
30.	BALEMEZI NALUBEGA LYDIA 
31.	BAMWANGA STEVEN 
32.	BANYENZAKI HENRY 
33.	BASAJJABALABA NASSER 
34.	BASALIZA ARAALI HENRY 
35.	BASALIZA MWESIGYE STEVEN 
36.	BAZAALE BYARUHANGA PHILLIP 
37.	BAZANA KABWEGYERE TARSIS 
38.	BBUMBA SYDA NAMIREMBE 
39.	BESISIRA IGNATIUS 
40.	BIIRA BWAMBALE LOYCE 
41.	BIKWASIZEHI DEUSDEDIT. K 
42.	BIRIMUMAASO MULINDWA .E
43.	BITAMAZIRE NAMIREMBE GERALDINE 
44.	BITANGARO K. SAMUEL 
45.	BUKENYA GILBERT BALIBASEKA 
46.	BULAMU JONNY RICHARD 
47.	BUTIME RWAKAKAIRA TOM 
48.	BWERERE KASOLE LWANGA EDWARD 
49.	BYABAGAMBI JOHN 
50.	BYAMUKAMA DORA 
51.	BYANYIMA NATHAN 
52.	CHEBROT CHEMOIKO STEVEN 
53.	CHELANGAT KULANY GERTRUDE 
54.	D’UJANGA GIW SIMON 
55.	DOMBO EMMANUEL LUMALA
56.	ERESU ELYANU JOHN 
57.	ESELE JOHN PETER 
58.	ETONU BENEDICT 
59.	FREDDIE RUHINDI 
60.	GABOI KIBAALE WAMBI 
61.	GOLE NICHOLAS Davis 
62.	GUMA GUMISIRIZA DAVID  
63.	GUTTI ANDREW (BRIG) 
64.	HYUHA SAMALI DOROTHY 
65.	KABAREEBE AMON-REEVES .M 
66.	KADDUNABBI LUBEGA IBRAHIM    
67.	KAFABUSA WERIKHE MICHAEL
68.	KAGABA HARRIET 
69.	KAGIMU KIWANUKA MAURICE
70.	KAGONYERA MONDO 
71.	KAJURA MUGANWA HENRY 
72.	KAKOKO SEBAGEREKA VICTORIA 
73.	KAKOOZA JAMES  
74.	KALULE SSENGO EMMANUEL 
75.	KAMANA WESONGA EDWARD 
76.	KAMANDA BATALINGAYA  
77.	KAMUNTU EPHRAIM 
78.	KASAMBA MATHIAS 
79.	KASIRIVU ATWOOKI BALTAZAR
80.	KATIRIMA PHENHAS 
81.	KATONGOLE BADRU 
82.	KAWOYA ANIFA 
83.	KAYANJA ELLY 
84.	KAYIZZI ASANASIO 
85.	KAYONGO TOM 
86.	KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO LAWRENCE 
87.	KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA ISRAEL
88.	KIDEGA DANIEL FRED 
89.	KIGYAGI ARIMPA JOHN 
90.	KINOBE JIMMY WILLIAM 
91.	KIRASO BEATRICE 
92.	KITHENDE KALIBOGHA APOLINARIS 
93.	KITYO HENRY MUTEBI 
94.	KIWAGAMA WILLIAM WILBERFORCE 
95.	KIWALABYE MUSOKE DANIEL  
96.	KIWANDA GODFREY 
97.	KIYONGA CHRISPUS WALTER 
98.	KIZIGE MOSES 
99.	KOLUO CHARLES PETER
100.	KUBEKETERYA JAMES 
101.	KULE MURANGA JOSEPH		
102.	KUTESA SAM 
103.	KYAHURWENDA ABWOOLI TOMSON 	
104.	LOCHIAM MILIGAN ROSE 
105.	LOKERIS APARITE PAUL 		
106.	LOKERIS PETER AIMAT 		
107.	LOLEM MICAH 				
108.	LUBOWA MOSES PAUL 		
109.	LULE MAWIYA UMAR 		
110.	LWANGA HERBERT WILSON 	
111.	LWANGA MUTEKANGA TIMOTHY
112.	LYOMOKI SAM 				
113.	MAATE ROGERS 			
114.	MADADA KYEBAKOZE SULAIMAN 	
115.	MAGOOLA ZIRABAMUZALE BEATRICE 		
116.	MAKUBUYA KHIDDU EDWARD 		
117.	MALINGA JOHNSON 			
118.	MALLINGA STEPHEN OSCAR 	
119.	MASIKO KABAKUMBA  
120.	MASIKO KOMUHANGI WINFRED
121.	MATOVU BYATIKE 			
122.	MATOVU DAVID 			
123.	MAYENDE SIMON 			
124.	MAYOMBO NOBLE 			
125.	MBABAZI KABUSHENGA HAMLET
126.	MBALIBULHA TABAN CHRISTOPHER 	
127.	MEHANGYE IDAH			
128.	MIGEREKO DAUDI 			
129.	MINDRA JOYO EUGENIA 		
130.	MUGAMBE KIFOMUSANA JOSEPH
131.	MUGERWA NAMAGGWA SAUDA
132.	MUHWEZI KATUGUGU JIM (MAJ. GEN.) 		
133.	MUJUZI PIUS 				
134.	MUKAMA FRANCIS JOSEPH 	
135.	MUKASA ANTHONY HARRIS 	
136.	MUKASA MURULI WILSON 	
137.	MUKIIBI BENIGNA 			
138.	MUKULA GEORGE MICHAEL 	
139.	MUKULA RICHARD 		
140.	MUKWAYA BALUNZI JANAT 	
141.	MULENGANI BERNARD 		
142.	MUNYIRA WABWIRE OMUSOLO ROSE 
143.	MUTULUUZA PETER CLAVERI 	
144.	MWAKA NAKIBONEKA VICTORIA MIRIAM	
145.	MWESIGE ADOLF 		
146.	MWESIGYE RUHINDI HOPE 	
147.	NABETA NASANI 			
148.	NACHA LORIKA ROSE 		
149.	NAMAYANJA ROSE 		
150.	NAMUYANGU KACHA JENIPHER
151.	NANKABIRWA SSENTAMU RUTH
152.	NANSUBUGA SARAH NYOMBI 	
153.	NANTUME ERON JANET 		
154.	NASASIRA JOHN 			
155.	NAYIGA FLORENCE SEKABIRA 	
156.	NDAWULA ALI SEKYANZI		
157.	NDAWULA KAWEESI EDWARD 	
158.	NDEEZI ALEX 
159.	NDIWA KAPKWOMU 
160.	NDUHUURA RICHARD 
161.	NSABA BUTURO JAMES 
162.	NSHIMYE SEBUTULO AUGUSTINE 
163.	NSUBUGA WILLIAM 
164.	NTACYOTUGIRA PHILLIP MARY 
165.	NUWAGABA HERBERT MUNTUYERA 
166.	NVUMETTA LUTAYA KAVUMA RUTH 
167.	NYANZI VINCENT 
168.	NYENDWOHA MUTITI JONATHAN 
169.	OBBO HENRY JOSEPH 
170.	OCHIENG PETER PATRICK 
171.	ODONGO JEJE (LT GEN)
172.	OGOLA AKISOFERI MICHAEL 
173.	OGWEL LOOTE SAMMY 
174.	OKOT OGONG FELIX 
175.	OKOT SANTA 
176.	OKUMU RINGA PATRICK ALOYSIUS 
177.	OKURUT KAROORO BUSINGYE MARY 
178.	OMACH MANDIR JACHAN FRED 
179.	ONEK OBALOKER HILARY 
180.	OPANGE LOUIS 
181.	ORECH DAVID MARTIN 
182.	ORYEM HENRY OKELLO 
183.	OTAFIIRE KAHINDA (MAJ. GEN) 
184.	OWORI AMOOTI OTADA 
185.	PAJOBO BRUNO 
186.	PATAKI AMASI 
187.	RUKUNDO SERAPIO 
188.	RUKUTANA MWESIGWA 
189.	RUTAMWEBWA MUGYENYI MARY 
190.	RWAKIMARI BEATRICE 
191.	RWAMIRAMA KANYONTOLE BRIGHT 
192.	SAIDI OKUTI NASUR 
193.	SEBALU MIKE KENNEDY 
194.	SEKITOLEKO JULIET KABONESA 
195.	SINABULYA NAMABIDDE SYLVIA 
196.	SITENDA-SEBALU WILLIAM 
197.	SSEKIKUBO THEODORE 
198.	SSEMPANGI KEFA FREDERICK 
199.	SSENTONGO NABULYA TEOPISTA 
200.	THEMBO NYOMBI GEORGE 	WILLIAM               
201.	TIBARIMBASA AVITUS 
202.	TINYEFUZA DAVID (LT GEN) 
203.	TIPERU NUSURA 
204.	TUBBO NAKWANG CHRISTINE 
205.	TUBWITA BAGAYA GRACE 
206.	TUMA RUTH 
207.	TUMWESIGYE ELIODA 
208.	TUMWINE ELLY 
209.	WABUDEYA MUKAYE BEATRICE
210.	WAKIKONA WANDENDEYA DAVID 
211.	WAMBUZI GAGAWALA NELSON 
212.	WANANZOFU SIMON PETER 
213.	WANDIRA KAZIBWE 
214.	WANJUSI WASIEBA SYLVESTER 
215.	WOPUWA GEORGE WILLIAM 
216.	YERI OFWONO APOLLO 
217.	YIGA ANTHONY 
218.	ZZIWA MARGARET  

NOES:

1.	AADROA ONZIMA ALEX
2.	ALASO ASIANUT ALICE
3.	AMONGI BETTY ONGOM
4.	AMURIAT OBOI PATRICK
5.	ANANG-ODUR LAKANA TOMSON
6.	ANGIRO GUTOMOI CHARLES 
7.	ARUMADRI JOHN DRAZU
8.	ATENG OTIM MARGARET
9.	ATIM OGWAL CECILIA
10.	ATUBO OMARA DANIEL
11.	AWORI SIRYOYI AGGREY
12.	BASHAIJA KAZOORA JOHN
13.	BEN WACHA 
14.	KAJEKE WILFRED
15.	KASIGWA HARRY
16.	KASULE LUMUMBA 
17.	KATUNTU ABDU 
18.	KAWANGA JOHN
19.	LUKYAMUZI JOHN KEN
20.	MWANDHA JAMES ELIEZER
21.	MWONDHA PATRICK
22.	NABWISO BULIMA WILBERFORCE
23.	NAMUSOKE KIYINGI KYAMA SARAH
24.	NKUUHE JOHNSON
25.	NSUBUGA NSAMBU 
26.	NYEKO OCULA MICHAEL
27.	ODIT JOHN 
28.	ODONGA OTTO
29.	OGENGA LATIGO MORRIS.W
30.	OJOK B’LEO
31.	OKOT ALEX 
32.	OKULO EPAK YEFUSA
33.	OKUMU RONALD REAGAN
34.	OKUPA ELIJAH
35.	OLUM ZACHARY 
36.	OMODI OKOT
37.	RAINER KAFIRE JULIET
38.	RUZINDANA AUGUSTINE
39.	SABIITI JACK
40.	SALAAMU MUSUMBA PROSCOVIA
41.	SEBAGGALA LATIF
42.	SEBULIBA MUTUMBA RICHARD
43.	TWAREBIREHO TUNGWAKO
44.	WACHA BEN
45.	WADRI KASSIANO EZATI
46.	WAGONDA MUGULI JOHN WILSON
47.	WANDERA MARTIN

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I have just received a letter from hon. Ben Wacha. He is out of the country, but he says on this Article 105(2) Clause 37 Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill, 2005. 

“Please refer to our discussion above. This is to confirm that I will be away next week to 18 July 2005. 

I beg you to utilize your powers under Rule 7(2) to allow me register a no vote in respect of the above clause.  
Ben Wacha.”  

So, using my powers under Rule 7(2). I think you are conversant with Rule 7(2). I have decided to read the letter to you.

Thank you very much. Honourable members, as they are working out the figures in the public gallery, this afternoon we have a team of computer programmers and the experts from Bill Gates Forest Bridge School of Secret Heart and Mountain Zai High School of United States. They have formed an organisation called Computers for Uganda. They have been in the country for the last three weeks and have been installing computers in schools and institutions of Masaka and Rakai District.  They are guests of hon. Nsambu who has done recommendable work for us.  You are welcome our visitors. (Applause)

Honourable members, again in public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers of Kasubi Church of God School, a school is in Lubaga North represented in Parliament by hon. Tom Kayongo. Please join me in welcoming them to Parliament. (Applause)
Honourable members, you will agree with me that this has been so far the most controversial article, which we want to amend. You will agree with me that people have been free to speak their mind; they have done so. 

Therefore, honourable members, you have been free to vote the way you want and now it is my duty to declare the position on the proposed amendment of Article 105(2).  The position is as follows: Abstentions – 2, against – 53 and Ayes - 220. (Applause)  The Ayes have it.  I thank you very much. 

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 37 agreed to.

THE CHAIRMAN: I want to appeal to you that you should continue to show the maturity you have displayed during the handling of this particular provision. We shall be able to successfully complete this particular bill so that we can handle other business, which we have on our table.  We suspend the proceedings for sometime so that we can have lunch and then I will decide when to come back.	

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.17
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume so that the Committee of the whole House may report thereto. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered Clauses 34, 35, 36 and 37 of the bill entitled, “The Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill, 2005 and taken the following decisions.  

The committee has stood over Clause 34, the committee has deleted Clause 35 and the committee has passed Clause 36 with amendment. Mr Speaker, the committee has passed Clause 37 without amendment. I beg to report. (Applause)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE 
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that this House adopts a report from the Committee of the whole House. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the motion is for you to adopt the report from the Committee of the whole House. I now put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 3.10 p.m. and adjourned to Wednesday, 13 July 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)
 

