Wednesday, 23 July 2014

Parliament met at 2.04 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. The Prime Minister’s question time will start at 3.00 O’clock. The Order Paper is accordingly amended to accommodate that.

2.06
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance but my fear is that the frontbench on the Government side is empty. I do not know whether I should continue to raise the matter. I seek for your guidance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are the one who rose to speak, which means you were comfortable giving your speech. (Laughter) You can still raise it; we will communicate the issues to them. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In March 2012, Uganda Communications Commission in conjunction with telecommunication companies established a one-year project to register telephone SIM-card owners. The project was to be completed in March 2013. This was in accordance with the regulation of the interception of the Communications Act, section 9. 

However, the period was extended by 90 days. The 90 days of extension elapsed on 29th May, 2013 and that was the last Ugandans heard about this project. To-date, unregistered SIM-cards are being used by Ugandans and foreigners, some of whom are criminals. Mobile phone criminals have been targeting mostly young ladies in high schools, colleges and universities. This has beaten security who cannot successfully investigate several cases. 

Already, some girls have been kidnapped and killed while the killers are demanding for money from their parents and tormenting them several months after the murder of their children. The same criminals threaten to kill more people in the same families. Police have always promised to leave no stone unturned; but many months after, we see no stones turned. 

Mr Speaker, some of the victims are: Joan Namazzi a 17 year old girl who was kidnapped and later murdered by unknown people at Kyambogo University; Emily Akile a second year student of Business Administration at Makerere University who was also kidnapped and killed on the 8 February 2014. 

I stand here to question Uganda Communications Commission for its continued failure to disconnect cards, which are not registered to-date to eliminate phone crimes in this country. I also stand here to question Government’s commitment to its own policies and deadlines. 

Without going further into these matters for fear of interfering with investigations, there are several cases involving criminals operating on unregistered SIM-cards, one of them being in my own constituency. 

As phone criminals continue to kidnap, kill and con innocent Ugandans, I request Parliament to summon the Minister for ICT to come and explain what caused the flop of the exercise of registering telephone SIM-cards and deleting those that are not registered. 

Secondly, I would like to know why telephone companies are still operating without complying to the law. And thirdly, can Government clear the allegations that it is their own security agencies and personnel that are frustrating and sabotaging the full implementation of this policy because they are also operating using unregistered SIM-cards?

Finally, could it also be true that some telephone companies are colluding with some Government officials to frustrate the SIM-card registration process because it might make them lose customers? 

Those are the issues, which in my opinion and that of the people of Mukono are matters of national importance and need to be addressed. 

I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, the ministers are not here. Is our Chairperson of the Committee of ICT here or a member of that committee? I think the committee should take interest in this matter while we wait for a response from the minister. 

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I can sense the frustration of my colleague, hon. Nambooze. I can even see the Speaker in his Chair trying to imagine the next course of action in absence of anybody on the frontbench to follow up critical matters that Members raise on the Floor of Parliament. 

on 8th of this month, I rose on the Floor and raised a matter of national importance relating to the barring of one of the key media houses in this country from covering the Presidency. After two days, the Minister of Information and National Guidance wrote to the Minister for Presidency and copied me in as well as the Office of the Speaker demanding that the minister comes and explains. Mr Speaker, the ministers simply did not care about the issues Members raised on the Floor of Parliament. As a procedural matter, I seek to be helped. How are we going to compel ministers to appear in Parliament and answer to critical matters Members raise? 

Otherwise, Parliament shall continue sounding hollow as though going through a ritual; rising matters that are not followed. Somehow, ministers take it as though they can afford the luxury of not responding to issues raised on the Floor of Parliament and get away with it. 

Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence on how we are going to proceed when the frontbench behaves as though they can get away without answering issues. I am one of the Members who cannot afford to raise a matter and let it lie without being responded to. 

Thank you for your indulgence. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I will grant you time to raise that question with the Prime Minister at the Prime Minister’s question time coming in at 3.00 O’clock and he will make an appropriate response on that.

2.15
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. It is about the construction of the 600 megawatts power dam at the Karuma Falls, which is the biggest infrastructure development or investment that this country has undertaken in recent times.

I want to bring to the attention of this House that on 20th June 2013, the Government of Uganda signed a Memorandum of Understanding with Sinohydro Corporation Ltd. This Memorandum of Understanding was on the basis that there would be an EPC +F contractual arrangement. EPC+F stands for Engineering Procurement Construction and Financing agreement. This was supposed to give rise to a turn-key project.

With this arrangement, the Government of Uganda entered into an agreement, on 16 August 2013, with Sinohydro but on a single-sourcing basis. All the procurement regulations were put aside – and I am sure none of us in this House raised any issue because we all want to have enough electricity for Ugandans. An agreement was signed on 16 August 2013 of $1.7billion for the construction and transmission lines to the national grids.

Clause 3.5 of the agreement provided for the amendment of the agreement, which is a standard practice. However, on 16 May 2014, the Government of Uganda signed an addendum to this agreement. There was addendum No. 1 and 2 to this agreement, which gave rise to a clause that provided for advance payment that had not been envisaged originally because this was supposed to be an EPC+F contract.

The original contract provided for the Government of Uganda funding 15 percent of the contract sum and the Chinese contractor in an EPC+F arrangement funding the 85 percent. When this addendum was signed, on 12th May Sinohydro immediately after executing that addendum, wrote a letter requesting for the payment of that 15 percent from the Government of Uganda. When this was raised, hon. Paul Mwiru, hon. Geoffrey Ekanya and I convened a press conference on the 5th June of this year, in which we raised our concerns that we had been looking at Sinohydro bringing on board the 85 percent and not asking for the 15 percent from the Government of Uganda, which they were not even guaranteeing. They just wrote a letter. I have all the copies of these documents; with your indulgence, I can lay them on Table.

Mr Speaker, let me lay on Table, a copy of the MoU that was signed, a copy of the contract, a copy of the two addendums that were arrived at and a copy of the letter dated 12 May 2014 in which Sinohydro was requesting for the release of 15 percent to be paid on or before 30th June of this year.

When I raised this issue at that press conference, Sinohydro responded by getting a guarantee for the 15 percent of the Government of Uganda contribution. Here is also a copy of that guarantee laid on Table. In the press release that they published on 17th June of this year was to convince Ugandans that Exim Bank had actually given a guarantee for that project. However, I would like to confirm that that the guarantee the Exim Bank gave was for the 15 percent, whose copy I have just laid on Table. I also lay on Table a copy of the press release that they published and which only talks about the 15 and not the 85 percent.

In conclusion, my concern is; where is the 85 percent? Bridge financing that Sinohydro promised to inject into this project as equity partners with Government, where is it?

I also want to know the relationship that the Government of Uganda has in this Sinohydro - is it an equity partnership arrangement that Government is running with these investors as partners in this project? Or it is all about an employer-contractor relationship. I think this country deserves to know that.

But I also want to tell Government that a project worth $1.7 billion, which translates into Shs 4.5 trillion is very big project, that this House must be kept abreast about at all times. And in any case, can we hear the story since the inception of this project up to day? What are the things that have transpired and where are we headed with this kind of project?
Finally, I would like to lay on Table a copy of the research report that was carried by our own research department at my request to compare the cost of construction of dams around the continent. I am convinced that this dam at Karuma was overpriced because of the reason that the Chinese were coming on board under bridge financing, which we do not have.

But the event that it turns out as it appears now, that Government of Uganda is the one that is actually sourcing for this money from the Exim Bank of China, then I think this dam was overpriced, Mr Speaker, because it is going to be built before we talk about the transmission costs. The construction costs stand at $1.4 billion for 600 megawatts, yet the people of Ethiopia have constructed a 1870 Megawatt dam at only 1.5billion.

So, we want to know who is cheating who? I now lay on Table a copy of that research report that shows the construction of dams that include Karuma and others around the continent. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, hon. Otada has raised a very pertinent question. But I can say only two things for now. One is that when the contract was given to Sinohydro, the understanding was that they would bring in the funds. They assured Government of Uganda that the Exim Bank of China would give them the 85 percent of the funding but on the understanding that Government of Uganda would cater for the remaining 15 percent. I can state that Government of Uganda is ready to do that.

If, in the unlikely event, Exim Bank is not ready to advance that money, then Sinohydro themselves would bring in the 85 percent and the project goes ahead. What I would suggest, I will brief, because we have just been discussing this very item in Cabinet. (Interjections) Can I – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him finish what he was saying. 

MR KASAIJA: I suggest that the minister responsible for the project, the Minister in charge of Energy and Mineral Development, should come to this House, appraise how far she has  gone in this, including why did we give this to Sinohydro, how do the costs compare etc. I could hear my brother hon. Otada saying in Ethiopia a project of a bigger size has been constructed at a less amount. So, the minister should come here and bring this august House an up to date position as far as this project is concerned. 

I submit, Mr Speaker.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I wish to thank the minister for responding to the concerns raised by hon. Otada. I wish to concur with hon. Otada in his submission and to ask the minister a few questions. The first question is, the Memorandum of Understanding that was reached on the 20th of June 2013 did not have any element of advance payment. And, Mr Speaker, I would just like to inform the House that the amount of money we are talking about in advanced payment is not little money. It amounts to $253,173,296 –(Interruption)

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I have stated and said the minister is going to come here and give this House the up-to-date position. Are we proceeding rightly by raising issues, first of all, the minister to answer them is not here and two that she is preparing to come here. Can I beg you, Mr Speaker, that questions be reserved and they will be raised at the time when the minister comes before this House. 

I beg your pardon.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we can spend time asking questions, which questions the answer will be “we will relay to the minister” and that will not help the House. So, why don’t we go on with other business and we direct this matter to the Minister of Energy and at an appropriate time, she comes here and explain to the House all those issues that have been raised by hon. Otada and then, we move from there. The debate will then follow from there because even when you raise these issues now, there will be no response.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, if the questions cannot be answered now, I just want to make a few proposals.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think let us deal with it when the minister is here. 

MR AMURIAT: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us wait when the time is ripe, then we can deal with the issue. We will handle this when the minister is here.

2.44
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First, I should take this opportunity to appreciate and associate with the remarks you made if they were true, in the media, on the economy of our country and on the performance of the Members of Parliament. I thank you. (Applause)

I rise on a matter of national importance, which I also think is urgent and it is a matter of the crisis in the Rwenzori sub region. This crisis has been characterised by confusion, selected truth, disinformation and to an extent lies. We think this is an internal security matter but Government has treated it as a defence matter and that is why the Minister of Defence came and made a statement instead of the Minister for Internal Affairs, which statement, I am sure not many still remember. It was not clear and not convincing. 

He did not explain to us what the motive for the alleged attack was, who were the organised group or individuals just woke up one morning and attacked. 

There have been reports of over 100 civilians, some of whom were said to have been running for protection in the barracks, who were massacred mostly by UPDF and the police. So far, no apology has been made for these extra-judicial killings. 

There have been reports of mass grave. Actually, they had only talked about one mass grave where the UPDF buried people in the open but until we mentioned it here that there are two more mass graves where they are refusing people to go and look for their loved ones. Government had kept quiet about it but a week later, they have now acknowledged that there were another two mass graves. It is not clear who were buried there and by whom. 

Then there were remarks by the IGP in the media again of genocide. That there was genocide in Rwenzori area and the IGP promising to train a certain section of our population and arm them, according to him, for self-defence. I thought that was a very unwise statement for a head of Police to make. 

We have heard reports that some peasants who were involved in this so-called attack saying that they were actually committing suicide. That they wanted to be killed by a Government, which has refused to serve them in a manner they want, because they think the Government discriminates against them. 

There have also been reports that there were tribal conflicts in the region among the four major nationalities in that region and the gap between them is widening. 

There have been reports of unfair distribution or access to land, of neglect of veterans, of unemployment mostly among the youth, of dismembering the sub region; all these are said to be at the heart of the crisis in that sub region. 

Immediately after the attack -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt hon. Leader of the Opposition, are you now making a statement or raising an urgent matter?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I am making a statement so that I pray at the end, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, if you are making a statement, then, you would have come under a different rule.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: This is a background to what I want to tell you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you are raising an urgent matter, that is why I have allowed you to do so. So, then, why don’t you just raise it as an urgent matter, pose the question and we move on? If you are making a statement -

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, I think it is an urgent matter but it is broad. I think it is a very serious problem.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I am saying is, if you are raising it as an urgent matter, raise it as such but if you are making a formal statement, then there will be another way of handling a formal statement. If you are raising it as an urgent matter that needs redress, then raise it as such.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, most obliged. We see it as an urgent matter and we would like this Parliament to see it as such and as a crisis because it is not only in the Rwenzori region; there are other areas where we see similar incidents. We would like this House to set up a select committee to inquire into this matter so that we can stop similar incidents happening in other regions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Honourable you raised this as an urgent matter and it should be addressed as such. If the ministers want to make a response to this urgent matter that has been raised, then they can make a response and we can decide how we want to handle this matter. Do you want to make a response?

2.51
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank my brother hon. Wafula Oguttu for the concern he has expressed concerning the sad incident that took place in the Rwenzori sub region. Let me first advise that as we have said constantly in this House, we should pay due respect to each other –(Interruption)

MS IBI EKWAU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Ever since the question of Kasese came on this Floor, I completely got lost and I do not know whether I can be helped out of this. We have the Minister of Security, the Minister of Defence and the Minister of Internal Affairs as well as the Minister of Information who would be identifying questions of phone tapping and the rest. At the heart of the question in Kasese, the hon. Minister of Defence comes from Kasese and I find it very difficult to bring someone who is aggrieved to be at the heart of the proceedings of what is happening in Kasese.

Yet, we have the Ministers of Security and Internal Affairs and the people who were killed in the conflicts in Kasese included police officers. Is it, therefore, procedurally right to have the Minister of Defence take tyrannical possession of the question of Kasese and yet, in my heart of hearts, I feel that possibly there is a conflict of interest because he is supposed to be mourning the loss of his people. How does Parliament, at the end of the day, make the Minister of Defence, hon. Chrispus Kiyonga take control of the proceedings concerning Kasese? Are we really proceeding in the right way?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I rule? Hon. Member, you raise an important point but in the same line, you raised the issue of three key ministers: Minister of Security, Minister of Internal Affairs and Minister of Defence. The other two are not here, the only one of the people you mentioned is the Minister of Defence and he is in the House and he is answering in that capacity as one of the key ministers you pointed out.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was just making the point that even in very tragic events like this, we should maintain our cool and respect each other.

I made a statement here, which attracted a debate and the Speaker in the Chair then said, “Minister and Government, you have heard the expression of Members of Parliament. We want you to return here in a month’s time” and that is on record. Since hon. Wafula Oguttu has made some very important points, I think I need to make a brief response and of course, the House can decide how they wish to move.

First of all, when I made the statement, I did indicate that the numbers I talked about as the people who had died in this crisis was most probably a minimum. I did indicate that sometimes, when attackers are withdrawing, sometimes, members of the population get hold of them and either bring them to the Police or sometimes, take the law in their hands.

The question of the mass graves that has appeared in the press is not new and I would like to inform the House and the Leader of the Opposition of this. Immediately this situation occurred, in meetings that I had with leaders in the district, they indicated that they heard rumours that in a particular sub county, there was a mass grave. Our instruction to the Police was that this must be followed up. They must go to the area and confirm the existence or otherwise of the mass graves.

I followed up this matter with the IGP and what the IGP did was first of all to secure the area where the mass grave was said to be but he told me there was a procedure. If they were going to exhume bodies, they needed a pathologist whom they could only procure from headquarters as well as other logistics. 

Right now, these logistics have been procured and either today or tomorrow, the exhumation is going to take place. In the meantime, immediately this accusation came, a number of people were taken in for questioning including the GISO of the particular sub county and the chairman of that area as possible suspects as people who may have killed or ordered the killing of those people who were either retreating or on their way and someone was either taking revenge or something like that.

I want to assure the House that investigations are on and the court martial is already sitting. The allegation of the existence of a mass grave is under investigation and today or tomorrow, the exhumation is going to be done. From there, we shall get to know the truth of how many people, if any, who the suspects are and what investigations are taking place.

That is the brief explanation I would like to give at this stage, Mr Speaker.


MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker and hon. Minister, thank you very much. I have just said that most of the people who were killed were killed by the UPDF and Police. Is it possible that the UPDF and Police are going to investigate themselves and give us an objective and fair report? I doubt - (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition for giving way. I would like to give you this additional bit of information that of those that have survived and have been arraigned for court martial, information available is that they are no longer within Bundibugyo. Is it something that we can ask the hon. Minister to account for the whereabouts of all the people that were arraigned before the cour0t martial, at least by midnight of yesterday? Where are the people now?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I would like to give this House credible information. The first time we reported about mass graves, there was denial from the Ministry of Internal Affairs. He is talking about the two mass graves; that the first group of 57 people that was buried on Sunday was buried in a mass grave.  The killings happened on a Saturday and on Sunday – that is the first mass grave and forget the two – those were buried by UPDF. You need not an elaborate pathologist and all those technical people. You did it yourself and you have to account for that number of Ugandans. 

Two, the two other mass graves are in an area that is fundamentally for Basongora and the information that we have is that the Bakonjo in those areas were running away and could have been rounded off and consequently, killed. The people in the area know very well who did the killing. You do not even need that elaborate information and they are very much at large as we speak now.  

In addition, all of you who watched NTV on Sunday you saw despicable torture at the hands of the UPDF – “kandoya” as it is called. Even if they are captives of war, there are UN conventions on how to respect prisoners of war. What happened is massive abuse of human rights at the hands of security, which is of great concern to us.

Secondly, and this is very potently dangerous to the security of this country, the Inspector General of Police has gone to one community, recruited them as crime preventers and he is arming and training and so far, the recruitment is of about 300 people – and he is recruiting one ethnic group against the other.  

So, as we speak now, this is not a matter – and my good friend, the Minister for Defence also has his hand in this. The information I have is that you are actively involved at a primary level and that is why –

DR KIYONGA: I rise on a Point of Order, Mr Speaker.  In the House, obviously, nothing should be covered up but this is a serious accusation that my colleague is raising. Can he substantiate? Is he in order to just throw a statement without substantiation?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Butambala County, you know the rules against imputing motives that are improper to a Member unless you have information that can substantiate.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I was very categorical with the words that I used. I used “primary information” and that is why we are fundamentally making a case that we need an independent investigation where he will also be brought to book and questioned because – (Interjections) - I have used my words technically and those in security know that when you use the words “primary information” and that is why I said that I used the words, “primary information”. It needs to further be collaborated and therefore –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you cannot make an allegation of that quantum and hide it under “primary.” (Laughter) The rules of this House do not recognise “primary”. So, please, if you have the information, bring it and if you do not, withdraw.  

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Yes for now, I can withdraw but at the point of investigation, I intend to sustain the same argument because as the shadow minister –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That point is not for now. So, withdraw and continue with what you wanted to say.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, in light of all that – that is why even as we speak now, a matter can be sub judice and I am very careful about it because many people have been lined up in the court martial including headmasters of schools that were picked from their premises, shop owners that were picked from their own premises, innocent people who were picked from their homes. [Hon. Members: “How do you know?”] In Uganda, you are innocent until proved guilty.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi is saying that the people that have been picked from their premises like teachers and shop owners are innocent. He is saying that they are totally “innocent” an indication that possibly hon. Muwanga Kivumbi has clue of who is not innocent and who is innocent. 

Now, is it in order for hon. Muwanga Kivumbi to assume to be a judge in this case when we are still doing investigations? Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have the presumption of innocence. Everybody is presumed innocent until proved guilty. We also have a law on arrests and the orders are that one can be arrested if has committed, is committing or is about to commit an offence. It is within the prerogative of the Police to do that; innocent or not innocent, you can still be arrested if you are found to be committing, you have committed or you are about to commit a crime. 

At that stage, there is no question of whether the presumption of innocence does operate because if the presumption of innocence says that you are presumed innocent, that does not mean that you will not be arrested or detained. It means that you will not be treated as if you are already guilty until that guilt has been proved. That is what it says.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Therefore, Mr Speaker, I want to implore this House, very passionately that much as we as Parliament are under obligation to protect and defend the observance of human rights, we must be very careful. When this matter was tilted from the Ministry of Internal Affairs –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure.

MR KAFEERO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been following the proceedings and I remember very well that hon. Muwanga Kivumbi stood on a point of information to give to the Leader of the Opposition. Mr Speaker, it looks like the honourable member is making a submission. 

Are we moving procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member was giving information but there was also a point of order as he raised the information. But it is acceptable that the information is getting a bit too long – (Laughter) – and beginning to cross into a debate. So, the honourable member should take note that he is not the substantive holder of the Floor. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. So, the point I would like to inform this House is that we have every obligation to uphold, promote and defend the enjoyment of human rights at all times, even if you are presumed. Therefore, the conduct of the security forces in arraying people in a court martial – we must be very careful as a country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, have you handed over the debate to the Member?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBU: That is why we are making a big point here. We fundamentally need an independent inquiry into what is going on in Kasese in light of all the above that I have told this House. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, hon. minister for internal affairs since the other one is not here. Mr Speaker, it is sad that this matter is turning partisan; it is not partisan. A matter involving killing of Ugandans should not be partisan. We had a similar matter, in 2007; people were killed in Kampala here. I saw with my own eyes people being shot by policemen and soldiers. Government admitted responsibility for only 27 of them in this House but they were more and nothing has happened. Nobody has been arrested for the killings; nobody has been tried and the government has forgotten about it.

So, I implore this House, Mr Speaker, that we look at this matter as nationalists and as Ugandans but not as NRM, FDC or Opposition. Therefore, we need an independent select committee of this House to inquire in this matter so that we know the truth. 

This is my humble prayer. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Member. But the information that the minister gave is that upon the statement he made on the request of the Members, the Speaker then presiding gave the government a month to come back to the House with a comprehensive statement on the situation in Kasese. That ruling would still be valid; you cannot alter it because that is what was ordered by the Speaker. 

It was supposed to be one month; I do not know from what period to what period – please, I do not want to call the Hansard and start reading it here. What is going to happen is, whatever timeframe was given by the Rt Hon. Speaker to the minister to respond will be the time when the minister will give that report and those subsequent issues can come and we see how to move this matter forward. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, what is really troubling us is not the question of innocence and guilt but civilians have been arrested in their homes, unarmed and they have been taken to court martial. Under what law is that happening?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, you are now calling upon the House to address factual matters where none of us was present. Whether they were unarmed or not, we do not know those facts.
 
MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, even if they were armed, and they are civilians and they were not in combat –(Interjections)– yes, it does not mean that whoever has a gun should be arrested and taken to court martial, even if you have an arrow, you should be taken to a civilian court. So, we want this stopped. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, my recollection of the law, which I have to cross check again is to the effect that if you are found in possession of equipment ordinarily used by the army, you would be treated under that law. But I need to cross check that. 

MR BIREKERAAWO: Mr Speaker, it is you who recently mentioned about the calibre of debate in this House. This is a very serious matter. My colleague and friend, hon. Kiyonga, you are very much aware that during the struggle to liberate this country we said that Ugandans would never be subjected to “Kandoya”, human abuse and extra-judicial killings. 

Today, on a matter of this nature – for this House to gloss over this matter, it was yesterday – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, kindly resume your seat for now. This is the issue. This is not the first time this issue is coming to this House, from the information I have been given. When this matter came before the House, the minister was directed to give a statement to the House. The minister came with a statement the week I was not chairing this House. When debate ensured, the Speaker directed that the minister should come back within a month with a comprehensive statement on this question. 

So, for me to do otherwise, I would need to look exactly at what the Speaker said. I do not want to act contrary to what the Speaker has directed. That is what I said; I do not want to call the Hansard to find out what the Speaker said. I said, whatever timeframe was given to the minister to respond – if it was yesterday, it will be yesterday if it is today, it will be today, if it is tomorrow, it will be tomorrow. But whatever period or timeframe that was given to the minister to come back with that statement, that will be the time when the matter comes before the House. 

Then the issues raised by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi and the Leader of the Opposition would then be comprehensively handled in terms of finding a way forward. Whether you want to do a select committee, whether you want to hand it over to another committee – whatever you want to do, that will be passed by the House when the minister makes that statement. I do not want to overstep what the Speaker directed. 

HON. MEMBERS: Guidance, 	Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is nothing like guidance in the rules.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Reading and listening to the law, my sense was that the Leader of the Opposition put into perspective the issues raised then when the Speaker was in the Chair and guided that the minister be given a month to come and give a comprehensive statement. The presentation by the LOP sounded very desperate as though the issues and their nature has changed and my sense – I am using the phrase “my sense” to try to understand what I read of him and perhaps get your guidance – is that the issues explained then by the minister seem to have taken a fresh dimension and direction.

The minister who was implored to come and offer a thorough explanation is now facing emerging issues that perhaps he cannot mention them. And given what the Members did not make as a possible line of interest, there seems to be a kind of fear, if I got the LOP right, that perhaps the minister given his earlier position compared to his current position, may not be in position to bring out emerging issues and two that actually is so long when fresh abuses and violations are taking place.

My sense is that he was trying to implore the House to consider whether it can call back its own decision to take into perspective emerging issues to perhaps curtail potential further abuses and violations.

Mr Speaker, that is why I am seeking to be guided as to whether we are proceeding rightly when we do not try to amend our own position to rethink afresh given the new developments variously by Members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, all I am saying is that there is a directive by the Speaker that is subsisting. For me to change it, I need to look at that first to determine what it was about. But as of now, I have not looked at it. So, I will not allow any emotional debate to push me into taking a decision contrary to what has already been laid here.
So, it is just about how administrative issues are handled. The Speaker made a ruling and I need to look at it so I can get to know what the circumstances were at the time. If they are different, I can make a fresh ruling. Otherwise, I cannot be pushed overstep what the Speaker said when I do not have all the facts. That cannot be proper management of public affairs. For that reason, debate on this matter will stop here for now. 

The issue is that I will find out what the instructions of the Speaker were; the circumstances and I will come back to you in tomorrow’s sitting and give guidance on how to proceed with this matter. Let us not lead people into making mistakes. We are a fairly careful lot of people.

Hon. Members, it is now 3.05 p.m. and it is time for us to handle the Prime Minister’s question time. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there were issues here that I think Members will raise about the registration of SIM-cards – people using unregistered SIM-cards to commit crimes. It may be raised again but that is one of those I hope to be raised. We have one hour up to 4.05 p.m. and we will stop.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

3.10
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you much, Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

MR BIREKERAAWO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last time the Rt Hon. Prime Minister was here, I asked him a question regarding the chairman of the Democratic Party, Mr Misayiri Mukwenda who was arrested and has been court martialed and he said he did not have information. He promised to inform this House about that matter. Now that he is here and it is time for him, Mr Speaker, can he start with that? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that a procedural matter? If it was the Prime Minister’s undertaking to do so, has he failed to do so for you to raise a procedural matter? Let us use the time properly.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime, Government of Uganda promised to build a sustainable non-oil economy even during the development of the oil sector and that is catered for in our oil and gas policy. Unfortunately, in the Bunyoro areas, whereas we have tourism, agriculture, fisheries, we have a community that has been waiting for the construction of a road to Butiaba, through hon. Kajura’s place Butoba, Biiso, Wanseko, which road connects to West Nile and the DRC and Nimule – the construction has been abandoned.  For the last two years, the only road that has been under construction is an oil-syphon road to the refinery site as if there are no people in that area and as if there is tourism, fisheries –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, what is the question?

MR MUKITALE: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can we know if Government has diverted from developing a non-oil economy and is now concentrating on oil development?

3.12
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): The answer is no. (Applause)

3.12
MR WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Some time back, the Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs brought an issue on this Floor about a Ugandan who died in Guangzhou China, a one Suzan. The body has been in Guangzhou since 2012. The grandmother of the late wanted to sell her only old building to bring the body of her granddaughter to Uganda. But still, if she sold that building, the money would not be enough to transport that body back here.

We debated this matter and it was referred to the Office of the Prime Minister under the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness. So, Mr Prime Minister, how far have you gone with this matter?

3.13
MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am sorry to hear that this matter has not been sorted out yet. But I undertake to follow it up and find out exactly what is happening. Thank you.

3.13
MR DENNIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Aleptong): Mr Speaker, is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister aware that the inception, through an Act of Parliament in 1990, the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology has been operating without a board. And if so, what plans are underway by Government of Uganda to ensure that the board is established in conformity with the law? Thank you.

3.15
MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The Prime Minister will take keen interest in that issue to find out what is happening and take corrective measures. Thank you.

3.16
MS CHRISTINE ABIA (FDC, Woman representative Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, Sir, last year, there was a serious undertaking in Arua District regarding Hepatitis B vaccination and there was a pledge by Government that effective this year, there would be the beginning of vaccination of children who are beyond 12 years particularly the secondary school-going children. 

To this day, there has never been any exercise to that effect and in the current ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Health, there is no budget provision for Hepatitis B vaccination in the country. 

What do you intend to do about this disease which is escalating especially in Northern Uganda and it is chocking the people because a combination of Hepatitis B and HIV is very dangerous and now, the prevailing rate is 37 percent in Northern Uganda. What is your intention and that of your Government as far as vaccination is concerned?

3.17
MR AMAMA MBABAZI: What the honourable member is saying is accurate and Government is only too keenly aware of this problem and the major constraint has been resource constraint but the good news is that the process of vaccination is starting. Actually, it is starting with medical workers and it will spread out and the extent of the spread will depend on the availability of the resources. (Interjections) The good news is that something has started when there was nothing. Thank you.

3.18
MR STEVEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. Government has invested a lot of money in the coffee industry through the supply of coffee seedlings and also supporting nursery beds. But unfortunately, a lot of this coffee that has been planted by farmers is getting lost through some weevil that destroys the leaves and the stem and in the process we are going to lose all this coffee and the investment that has been put in this project.

I would like to know from the Prime Minister what steps Government is taking in addressing this matter, for example, Government spraying all the coffee that has been supplied so that we do not lose the coffee in which we have invested a lot of money. 

Thank you very much.

3.19
MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I thank the hon. Steven Tashobya for that good question and the good answer he provided, that spraying is the right thing to do. 

I do not have the details about the response of the relevant department but obviously, as honourable members know, we are putting emphasis and focusing on fighting poverty in the country side by, among other things, promoting the growing of cash crops like coffee and others. And whenever we encounter problems, you can be sure that we will find solutions for those problems. Thank you.

3.21
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. A few days ago, it was reported in the local media that a delegation coming from the rebels of South Sudan came into this country - the rebels led by Dr Riek Machar, who at the moment is engaged in battle with the Government of the Republic of South Sudan. 

Upon their arrival, they had actually expected to meet Government officials and their intention was to discuss a peaceful resolution of the conflict in South Sudan. Unfortunately, Government officials gave them a cold shoulder reception. 

I would like to know if the Government of Uganda is interested in a peaceful resolution of the conflict in South Sudan and why they shunned the delegation from the rebels in South Sudan whose intention was to meet the President to discuss precisely a peaceful resolution of the conflict in South Sudan.

3.23
MR AMAMA MBABAZI: There is no doubt that the Government of Uganda does encourage and, in fact, promote peaceful resolution of conflict situations wherever they may be. That is very well known of this government and in the Republic of South Sudan, the situation there is no exception. 

I do not have the details about the visit of these comrades from South Sudan. (Interjections) Every African is my comrade. There is no doubt about that. My answer to the interjection by hon. Nambooze is that if hon. Nambooze is my comrade, how on earth could hon. Anite not be my comrade? 

So, I am not familiar with the details about the arrival and the arrangement they had made. I was in a meeting with the President when the arrival was reported to him and he did inform the officials that he would be ready to meet them. My expectation is that if they came in without being announced when they arrived, the presence was recognised and actually, a message was given to the President that they wish to meet him and he declared his readiness to do so. 
Thank you.

3.24
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is that in 2010, the Interception of Communications Act was passed by this Parliament and it mandated Government to establish a monitoring centre to operate, acquire and install inter-communication systems, connections that would enable transfer of information and detection of terror. I would like to know if this monitoring centre is in place and operational and how effectively it is helping Ugandans in terms of alerting and detecting terror and any other security threat. You were the Minister for Security then, so you must be very knowledgeable about this matter. 

3.25
MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Any answer that enhances the effectiveness of the enemy of this country to fight Uganda will not come from me. Thank you.

3.26
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in December last year, over 50,000 were evicted in Bukinda Parish, Kyangwali sub county. I immediately reported to your office and I am very happy that you quickly intervened and even instituted an inter-ministerial committee to handle the eviction-related issues and challenges that we met.

The committee did its work but among the issues that we came up with and which you directed yourself was that those people who were evicted from their land should return to their land and be compensated. Second, was that those people should be given food. Up to today, while some returned, over 6,000 people are still stuck at that sub county headquarters with no food. To make matters worse, five people died in the course of time and they were buried at the same sub county headquarters.

I would like to know from you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when is the directive to be implemented for those people to return to their land?

3.27
MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Yes, that is true but as the hon. Member is well aware, we have given attention to this issue. The vast majority of the people who had been displaced have returned to their homes. The honourable colleague has given me this report before that there are a small number that remained. I have asked the office responsible to check and determine the reasons why these 6,000 have not gone back; whether they had places or they did not because as he knows, there were very many questions that were being looked into.

I do not have an update on that as I have not received a report. When I do, I will inform him and I should be able to inform this House. Of course, it is regrettable that five people died. I think most of them died of natural causes, according to the information I got and that is the nature of life. 

Thank you.


3.28
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. The 132 police officers who were working on the mass enrolment exercise kits in the district of Sironko were paid only Shs 50,000 for the month of June instead of the Shs 240,000 they were entitled to. When they complained to the Ministry of Internal Affairs through the DPC and the district registrar, the ministry responded by laying them off and reduced their number from 132 to only 40.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to know when these police officers are going to be paid their balances for the month of June that they worked for. Two, why were they laid off after having raised a complaint for being paid that little money?

3.29
MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I have taken very careful note of that point and we will certainly find out if that is the case and the explanation, if it is proved to be true.

3.30
MR STEPHEN BAKA MUGABI (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are you aware that Bugiri Hospital is in a very sorry state with broken sewerage systems, broken and falling ceilings, water systems and dilapidated buildings? 

If yes, what is Government doing about it? If no, would you accept an invitation to Bugiri such that you see for yourself?

3.31
MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I accept the invitation to visit Bugiri and I will take it upon myself to visit the hospital as well as to establish –(Interjections)– Yes, I will visit the district of Bugiri and go to a number of places. One of those places I will visit will be the hospital to familiarise myself with the extent of this problem. I had received this report and Government is aware. I think I have spoken about it before in this House. So, the answer is certainly in the affirmative.

3.32
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, many people have been arrested by the IGP Gen. Kayihura in Kihihi, Kanungu District, which is actually your constituency. Can you tell this House why these people were arrested - because majority of them are in the cells? 

I am asking right now as the Opposition Chief Whip; so allow me to ask another question.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the rule is one.

3.33
MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Yes, I am certainly aware. I am absolutely aware that Gen. Kale Kayihura, the IGP visited my constituency and people were arrested. The report is that there was a structure that was burnt down. Again, that is also true. This structure was a shack. A shack is a temporary structure made of timber and grass. One young man was arrested and according to police reports, he allegedly confessed that he was the one who burnt it and they went ahead to arrest leading personalities in my constituency and charged them in court. I did speak to the officer who was in charge over the phone and asked him why he had arrested these people. He told me that they had been arrested because this young man who was alleged to have confessed that he burnt the building or structure, had named them. I asked him if there was any collaborative evidence from anyone else, he did not have any but they went ahead and charged them and of course as you must have seen in the papers, the young man actually denied in court that he had told the police that.

It happens that the people who were arrested are very closely associated with me, they are very strong Movement people, they are leaders in their right and I did say that the police must be very careful in handling its work. The police should go about – I was amazed because this shack was burnt – I got reports that actually the owner – it was a bar selling beer - had taken out the furniture and everything and so the suspicion there is that it was an inside job. It actually appears to be a frame up. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, this is Prime Minister’s time. Is it in order for some members to really keep interrupting the Prime Minister when he is giving answers to questions raised in accordance with rules of this Parliament? Is it in order, really? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the decorum of the House is our responsibility and making noises or sounds that are not supportive of debate disrupt the cause of debate. So please, desist and respect the House.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: This matter went to court before the Chief Magistrate of the area who did grant bail to all of them. But before he did, this young man stated in court that he had not made such a confession. They had reported that he was an orphan but his father stood up and informed court that he was the father of the child and the court decided to grant them bail.

The police, after that, did arrest this young man and his whereabouts are not known. So, I am taking all the necessary steps and measures to make sure that this does happen and that the rights of our people are not violated by those who are meant to protect them –(Applause)– so, you will be hearing what will be happening. I thank you. (Applause)
     
3.41
MR SIMON PETER ALEPER (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order members.

MR ALEPER: I have been interacting with our young people and I observed something. Two weeks ago, I was in Lira after coming from Karamoja. The rate at which our young people and population is entangled in the consumption of waragi is too high more especially this waragi packed in small kaveera and manufactured by small companies. 

I just wish to know from the Prime Minister what the government plan is to regulate the production of this alcohol which is rooted in our population. I thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, this is an issue that Government has looked into. I have myself chaired a committee that was looking at some of the drugs, some of them narcotics – hon. Medard Bitekyerezo, as you may recall, raised the question of “Kubba” and other things. So, we have been looking at these in their totality and as I said, when I came back to Parliament, we were coming up with definite recommendations on what we could do in terms of legislation and actually the administrative action we will take to safe guard the young people from the consumption of these highly destructive substances. When we are ready, we will inform the country. I thank you.

3.44
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt. hon. Prime Minister, you must be aware that Government has been implementing SAGE (Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment) - money given to the elderly in about 14 districts in the country for some years now. 

My question is; is Government committed to rolling out this SAGE programme to other parts of the country and if yes, when do we expect it to cover the other parts of the country that have never benefitted. I thank you. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, as the honourable colleague knows and Government has stated many times in this House including my own statements on this, SAGE is a good programme that Government supports as it really responds to the need that exists in our society especially among the elderly. I personally witnessed what it means to them when I launched this programme in Kyankwanzi District. 

But as the colleague knows, we started it with support from the British Development Agency and this programme is, I think, coming to an end. When we look at the cost, it is a lot of money that will be required to spread it out. We had at the time 14 districts and we have added Yumbe. So they are 15 now. 

So, slowly, and in accordance with the resource envelope available, we will certainly spread out to all the districts of Uganda in time. Thank you. 

3.46
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sheema): Mr Prime Minister, your office developed a national nutritional policy and year in year out, the greater Bushenyi including Sheema had been implicated as one of the districts with high malnutrition; I do not understand whether it is due to economic constraints or something else but when are you operationalising that policy?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The policy is in operation. It is true that although Bushenyi is the food basket of Uganda, it is one of the areas that have registered the highest rate of nutrition deficiency in the country. This simply means that people do not have enough knowledge about nutrition. When I launched the community based programme in Mukko, in Kabale District, the constituency of hon. Banyenzaki, that area is also one of the areas that registered high levels of stuntedness among the young people. Yet, as you know, that is where most of the Irish potatoes that we eat in this country and those that are exported are grown. 

So the problem is knowledge; awareness and we have started rolling out the programme. We started with 14 districts. We have not spread out to many and we are going to cover the whole country. I did attend the nutrition summit in London, United Kingdom and we raised a lot of money, very close to $5 billion to help out. So the international community is coming in. We are members of the (SUN) the international nutrition support group. So we have all the confidence that not only will we spread out this policy but with the international community, to mainly spread knowledge, we shall overcome it. 

3.49
MS MARY NALUBEGA (Independent, Worker’s Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, workers are principle advocates of equitable and better remuneration. Secondly, when it comes to salary discrimination, they are major victims. Something happened of late; good enough, we have the statutory instruments of 2011, No.56, which mentioned that whatever happens to the workers’ environment, they should be involved; for example, policy implementation, policy formulation, policy monitoring and evaluation. 

But of late, the salary commission was formulated, but the workers were not involved. So I am asking the Prime Minister, why weren’t the workers involved in the formulation of the salary commission? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The salary commission is still an idea; I will come to Parliament on this issue and we are in the process of finalising it. And I would like to invite the representatives of the workers to please present whatever input you have to enrich these sources. 

3.52
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Some time last year, there were reports in the media that government was intending to withdraw the USE programme from private secondary schools. This information has caused a lot of anxiety among the stakeholders. So, may I find out from the Prime Minister on the status of this programme especially in private secondly schools?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The issue was one of logic. Government had built schools in almost – I think now about 75 percent of the sub-counties of Uganda. And where we have a government school – what you call USE school, of course they can provide the services to our children. But where we do not have them and we have private schools, we use private schools and of course we pay. 

Now, the question was, should we as a government spend so much money paying private schools when we could use this money to complete the construction of government Universal Secondary Education schools and obviously, the answer is, we should not. 

So the matter is under consideration on how on the one hand Government can act without interrupting the education of the children who are already in the private schools and giving these private schools adequate notice to know that Government will be pulling out while at the same time we are generating sufficient funds to build secondary schools in existing sub-counties. So we have not come out to announce how this will be done. The matter is being considered. As soon as we are ready, we will make this position known publicly. 

3.55
MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (DP, Woman Representative, Luwero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware we have veterans throughout this country. I want to know from you when the government plans to pay the veterans, especially those in Luweero District and also pay up the cows and goats that were consumed by the rebels that were promised to be paid when you get to power.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: We are not going to pay rebels. As the hon. Brenda Nabukenya knows very well – and may I take this opportunity to congratulate you, hon. Brenda Nabukenya, upon that victory.

Mr Speaker, allow me to congratulate the hon. Brenda Nabukenya. I welcome you to the House once again and on behalf of the ruling party, I would like to pledge our total determination to cooperate with you –(Applause)– in representing your constituency. But of course, I also welcome the hon. Rose Mutonyi on this side because I had not had the opportunity to welcome her –(Laughter)– upon that victory.

As for the honourable colleagues – they have had some tactical point in their favour. We are still waiting for the substance.

As the honourable member knows –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I have tried to pay attention to both aspects of the question that was asked in regard to the payment promised by the former rebels to the people of Luweero and the response of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, which is bordering on a congratulatory message.

Mr Speaker, a story has been told of Mr Heir, who when was given boiling water to drink, he went about showing all the people in the crowd how hot the water was. And by the time he drank it, the water was so cold but everybody thought he had done a miracle.

Mr Speaker, is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister proceeding correctly by using the Prime Minister’s Question Time to allocate and allot his congratulatory messages away from the question that he was asked? Is it procedurally okay?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt hon. Prime Minister, there is a procedural matter raised. There is such a rule in our Rules of Procedure about relevance. You might have to observe that. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I thank you for that point, Mr Speaker. The Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda who is also the Leader of Government Business in this House but also the Secretary General of the mighty party, the NRM –(Applause)– finds it appropriate and certainly on demand that he voices, on behalf of the parry and Government, a welcome to those he had not welcomed, who recently won elections. So, I support the idea that this question that came from a new member be answered and the answer is: yes, Government is certainly aware of the veterans’ entitlements. 

As the Minister of Defence and I have also said this myself here before, our outstanding entitlements to veterans and pensioners and so on actually is about Shs 800 billion very close to Shs 1 trillion. We had to go through an elaborate exercise and registration of these people and the good news is that this has been concluded and actually we have started paying. Last year, we paid off some after this Parliament appropriated money for that purpose. In this year’s budget, we have put in a figure that you are going to consider appropriating money for that purpose.

So, I would like to assure the veterans that yes, it is slow because of the lots of money involved, but we have taken a decision that like this year, the surplus revenue collected – and you know that – we have proposed that Shs 450 billion of that be paid to enhance the salaries of Government workers especially school teachers; we have done that.

We have focused our budget on infrastructure but we are determined that next year when we get extra revenue, which we hope to get, we will pay attention to this issue. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is 4 O’clock now. The rules give us 45 minutes but I allow one hour to give time to the Leader of Opposition to raise some issues and also to see if there any other issues to be discussed between the two as we conclude the debate. The time is up, honourable members.
 
4.04
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Ogutu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and thank you very much, Rt hon. Prime Minister for answering the questions posed. I come from Bugiri and we will welcome you warmly to Bugiri. We just want the date because when you are visiting the hospital, you come with gumboots, because you will find a lot of water and blood in the maternity ward. 
Mr Speaker, also, I would like to appreciate the Prime Minister’s remarks on the Kanungu arrests. It was quite a statement from a statesman and we appreciate that. Thank you very much. Most of us are bombarded by the old people in our constituencies about the Shs 20,000. We would like the Prime Minister to tell this House whether there is any roll out plan for covering the whole country so that we know what to tell these peasants who are dying expecting money which they will never get. 

I know the Prime Minister is aware that I was visiting a number of hospitals and health centres in the East and I discovered that presently there are no medicines in most of the hospitals except a few drugs for AIDS patients. Through you, the minister of health could tell us what is going on because it is an acute situation at least in the Eastern part of Uganda. 

This morning a student from a University in Bushenyi-Ishaka, a second year medical student wanted to apply for this loan under the new loan scheme and he was told by the bank official that the loans are only for fresh entrants to the university. We would like you to clarify to the students all over the country if this loan scheme is for only freshers as they are called. 

The issue of Dr Riak Marchar delegation, the answer you gave us was not convincing. We also heard the minister for foreign affairs talking yesterday, is it possible that actually a delegation of that nature and calibre; rebels actually would visit our country without the Government knowing and then staying at the airport and then going back. Is it possible?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank my honourable colleague, the Leader of Opposition in Parliament, for the words of welcome. I appreciate the warmth and the tenor of his speech, and I will bear that in mind when I visit Bugiri and especially Bukooli Central. 

I want to repeat what I said about Bugiri hospital. We are only too aware of the state of that hospital. We have made statements before and as the honourable colleague knows, Government had a programme of rehabilitating hospitals. Actually, you remember the money which we were getting from the World Bank, the 90 million dollars which had been affected somehow, which we have sorted out. That money is part of the money that Government is using to rehabilitate these hospitals and Bugiri is one of the 30 hospitals that we plan to rehabilitate fully. 

If there are no medicines, generally, the reports we have are that the supply of medicines in our health care centres has tremendously improved. Medicines are available in most places. But of course I can’t rule out the possibility of a case or two or three where this is not the case. Maybe in Kitgum, I don’t know. The minister of Defence says he was in Kitgum and he knows he found medicine there, because I know he recognises medicine. So, if you, colleagues, find this problem of lack of medicines in health centres in your area of responsibility, please do inform the relevant department and that situation will be attended to immediately. 

On the welfare programme for the elderly, again as I said before, we have a plan to roll it out throughout the whole country; the only constraint is funding. As soon as we solve that, we will come out and announce the programme for rolling this out. 

Regarding students’ loans, again as you know, because you are the ones that appropriate funds, with the policy is that the student loan scheme, we have started with a few people because of the limitation of funds, and again because of that reason, the number of beneficiaries is still small and we felt that maybe it was prudent to start with science students. So it has yet started with the fresh students, those who are entering university for the first time because they are few. Because the idea is that once you start, you go on until you finish your course.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Rt hon. Prime Minister, for giving me the opportunity as the secretary general of the great party. I keep hearing about the loan and the fact that we have made the law, but where is it in this country? How has this information been disseminated? It looks like a rumour to some of us. We do not even know where to direct the students who would apply for that loan. So would the minister of education or somebody please come here and help the country at least get information. Even if it is sciences, like you indicate, let us get that information. If I, the representative of the people of Serere, up to now have no idea, what about those people in those villages really? Thank you. 
 
MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you Rt hon. Prime Minister. As a way of testing the idea of the loan scheme, how it can work easily, or what challenges the repayment may face, don’t you think it is better to start off with people who are already in school but are faced with this problem? For example, third year students of medicine, or law; why don’t you put some fractions to handle people who are about to finish but are stuck with fees? Somebody may have only one semester to go. You could test this person with repayment and see. I am not saying you should object to the pressures but why don’t you try the student loan scheme with a small fraction of people who are already in the school but are stuck? Thank you.

MRS NANTUME EGUNYU: I thank you, hon. Prime Minister. The clarification I am seeking is that all children are equal before God and before the Constitution of Uganda. Which committee sat and agreed that only science students would benefit from the loans scheme? I would expect Government to value those studying Arts and Sciences and they share the same percentage.

Secondly, having not known the committee that sat and agreed that only science students must benefit, we have rural constituencies with schools that do not have laboratories. Do you think these schools, including those in Buvuma and other rural districts, will also benefit from such schemes - because they will not have science students?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: First of all, the question that my very good friend and colleague, hon. Alaso, raised is one that I have answered before. Had it not been that the question came from hon. Alaso, I would not answer it again.

How does one access these loans? That is the question in summary and first, I would like to ask the Minister of Education to prepare a statement about these loans and bring this statement to this Parliament so that Government can benefit from the very many ideas that honourable colleagues may have.

As I said before, these loans can be accessed. The forms can be found either on the website, from Centenary Bank or from the Ministry of Education. The Ministry of Education, as you know, is spread everywhere in the country.

Let me ask the Minister of Education to prepare a statement as soon as she is ready, maybe next week. If the Speaker can give us room, we will make that statement here.

I answered the question about the reported rebels from the Republic of South Sudan. I did not have anything more, I just happened not to have any information about their coming but I am saying the day they arrived, I happened to be with the President and I know that the President got that information. Actually, he was asked whether he would receive them and he said, “Yes, he would.” So thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Members. Let us leave it now. Hon. Members, we have statements that were supposed to be made today. I think we will handle that. Let us go to the next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

STATEMENT ON THE SUSPENSION OF AIR UGANDA OPERATIONS

4.20
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr James Byandala): Mr Speaker and dear colleagues, as I promised you yesterday, I am presenting my report today. Copies are around, I submitted them to the officials of Parliament and I request that they are given out.

Mr Speaker, in my statement, I started with a background in which I tell you about how ICAO came into existence and I also tell you that Uganda joined and is a member of ICAO.

In 2.0, I inform you that in 2008, an audit by ICAO was done on Uganda in November 2008 under the Universal Safety Oversight Audit Programme. Following the 2008 audit, a collective action plan was developed to address improvements recommended to address the audit findings. The corrective measures for improvement, which were agreed upon between Uganda and ICAO are:

    1. Amendment to the current CAA Act, Cap 354.
    2. Strengthening the Uganda safety and security inspection system.
    3. Advanced training of safety inspectors.
    4. Reviewing the existing civil aviation regulations and aligning them with amended ICAO standards and recommended practices.

Mr Speaker, let me go to the recent 2014 just concluded audit on Uganda. To establish the status of implementation of the agreed upon corrective action plan to the audit conducted in 2008, ICAO conducted another one from 11th to 17th June this year and these were the audited areas:

    1. The previously recommended amendment in the CAA Act, Cap 354.
    2. The CAA organisational structure review.
    3. Strengthening accident investigations.
    4. Upgrade air navigation services.
    5. The aerodromes.
    6. Airline operations procedures.
    7. Aircraft maintenance centres.
    8. Aviation training institutions.

These are the current audit findings conducted this year and one was on CAA. ICAO auditors conducted a successful three-day audit within CAA on the following areas:

    (a) Status of aerodrome facilities and operations at Entebbe International Airport.
    (b) Status of Air Navigation Services and relevant equipment support
    (c) Inspection and Licensing procedures, documents and records management
    (d) Inspection of Airlines
    (e) Inspection of Aircraft Maintenance Centres 
    (f) Inspection of Aviation Training Institutions
    (g) Professional Status of safety inspectors
    (h) Status of Civil Aviation Regulations
    (i) Amendments made to the CAA Act 
    (j) CAA organisational structural review

The findings were accessed as satisfactory and Uganda earned a 10 percent increment in the satisfactory percentage. In 2008, we had 49 percent mark and after this inspection, we rose to 59 percent.

The second inspection or audit is on the Uganda international airlines. The ICAO team ended with an audit on Ugandan registered international airlines, namely; Air Uganda, Trans Afrik Uganda Ltd and Uganda Air Cargo Corporation. It is mandatory for airlines to regularly revise their operating procedural manuals. These have to be submitted to CAA for approval prior to their use and any amendments made to those, must be submitted to CAA for approval before they insert them into their manuals. These airlines are supposed to be checked and approved by CAA.  

The audit findings in Air Uganda, Mr Speaker, are as follows: Air Uganda was the first to be audited and the following irregularities were found out:
    (1) Hand written amendments and revisions with no record of approval from CAA;
    (2) Photocopied pages and alterations showing difference from the documentation approved and in custody with CAA, the regulator;
    (3) Some pages in operational procedures manual had super impositions showing different information from approvals kept with CAA;
    (4) Absence of some of the CAA approved original pages; and 
(5)	The professionalism and conduct of Air Uganda safety employees was doubted because of the following shortcomings they displayed to the auditors:
    (i) Submitting to the auditors unapproved soft copies by CAA; 
    (ii) Presenting three different uncontrolled versions of aircraft Minimum Equipment List;
    (iii) Keeping unmarked “For-Reference-Only” manuals together with Controlled Manuals contrary to airline industry practice;
    (iv) Presenting a computerised quality system that failed to indicate calibrated tools’ expiry dates; and 
    (v) Failing to present to the auditors approval and contract documents of Brit Air which they contracted to maintain their aircrafts.

Mr Speaker, it was a really terrible moment for us when we were there. We were not supposed to talk but only look. It is like coming to you and asking for your birth certificate and somebody produces a marriage certificate and it shows that you do not know what you are doing and this is what happened when these auditors went to Air Uganda.

It is important to note that approved manuals of procedure are representative of an effective safety process in an airline. All that I have been talking about is documentation and people will say that this is documentation but this is where the cracks are in this industry.
 
The above irregularities represented a significant gap in the safety assurance process within Air Uganda. These cannot be tolerated by CAA on behalf of Uganda and ICAO. 

They also audited TransAfrik (U) Ltd. TransAfrik Uganda Ltd was found to be carrying items that were not authorised in their Air Operator’s Certificate. They tried to be clever and got a power point and tried to show but in the process, they showed things that they were not supposed to carry. 

Uganda Air Cargo

They did go there after finding this and they already had many problems. So after this, what could we do? Based on the above shortcomings found within the operational procedures of the sampled Ugandan registered international airlines, the auditors advised CAA to choose one of the two options;

    1. To accept ICAO to register significant safety concern over Uganda. This option would imply that any airline that would be licensed now and in the future would have difficulties of being accepted to either overfly in the airspace or land in airports of another country. This would be perceived that Ugandan registered airlines coming from a state with significant safety concern could be dangerous to that state.  

    2. Option two, Mr Speaker, was to suspend and withdraw Air Operators Certificate of the licensed international airlines. The suspension and withdrawal was to be verified or confirmed by the ICAO team before closure of their audit. The word audit here may be confusing because people here know that when an auditor comes, you ask for a management letter but here, there are no such things like management letter. What they find is what is taken as the truth. So, nobody should come asking whether there were management letters.

This second option would not affect licensing of newer airlines in Uganda. Secondly, this option would not raise Uganda to be registered internationally with Significant Safety Concern Record which I have talked about above. There would still be confidence in safety to users and other states regarding Ugandan registered international airlines.   

Let me now talk about Uganda’s chosen option. From the above two options, CAA after consultation with me, had to withdraw the air operators certificates of the three Uganda registered airlines. All the three airlines were requested to apply for re-certification. 

What are we doing now? The affected airlines have since been furnished with re-certification packages, including the applicable regulations and guidance materials used in the pre-application process. A team of experts was constituted to expedite the certification process – these are experts in CAA.

Due to the need to fast-track the re-certification process, CAA requested the East African Safety and Security Oversight Agency to render support with additional personnel. These have since joined the Uganda team of experts to expedite the process. All these affected airlines have responded to the call made. 

However, Air Uganda has gone out of the norm of the conduct of airlines and is opting to use unwarranted practices. Painfully, both my ministry and CAA have been compelled to go into a practice similar to where a medical doctor would have to expose the status of health of his or her patient. Let me touch the deep concerns of Air Uganda. In spite of Air Uganda’s unwarranted steps which it is currently taking; it has the following safety concerns:

    1. The airline has been having many safety related incidents that were not being reported to CAA as required by law. The concern has been repeatedly brought to the attention of CAA and we have written to them. You can see in annex A; we have been writing to them to behave. 
    2. The airline has shortcomings; it was not meeting the minimum requirements in their aircraft maintenance organisation as reflected in appendix B.
    3. Safety concerns have been a big issue within 2014. I requested CAA to list them out for me. They are attached as appendix C. You may remember that in the State of the Nation Address, we proposed that we should all be travelling by Air Uganda. But if you look at appendix C – you may avoid it. I do not know how many people should die before we can intervene. I want to hear this from you, honourable members. 

But let me say this also, Mr Speaker, Government of Uganda has made efforts to promote Air Uganda. Having been convinced that Air Uganda had the potential of growing into a strong home based airline, government has been supporting this airline in the following areas:

    1. It has been designated on various routes inspite of difficulties in acceptability since there is no ownership in the airline by the state or individuals in Uganda. In other words, it is not a national airline. But we have gone out of our way to convince other countries to support us in developing this airline. In this support, bilateral air service agreements with countries like South Africa and Singapore were accepted. Similarly, informal gestures were given by Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda, Burundi, South Sudan and Somalia.

    2. The airline was licensed for self-handling on the appeal that this would enable it to be operationally profitable. They came to me and said, “Honourable Minister, for us to make money and grow quickly, allow us to make self-handling at the airport”. I said, “That is very good”. I allowed them using the powers I have and it is now over a year. They had promised to bring things from abroad to do this work but they have never done it. 


    3. The airline has benefited from the incentive given through CAA of having every seven frequency operated within a week all free of charge. By seven frequencies, I am not talking about waves. This means we have allowed this airline to land in Entebbe, land in Gulu – they can land in different places in Uganda. We have done that to assist them to grow.

    4. With the hope that the airline may team up with other investors, we recommended that a brainstorming investors conference be convened with stakeholders with the purpose of making a foundation to establish a strong home based airline. In a few months from now, I am going to hold a strong meeting here; people in this industry will come to together and we try to get a home based airline. This is of particular importance to match traffic with government plans to upgrade and expand Entebbe. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

4.34
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to give my opinion on the statement made by the minister in charge of the sector. The minister is a good friend of mine –(Interjections)– by raising concern about the closure of the three airlines, I was not asking for the defects which has just occurred and led to the closure. 

The problem these ministers have – I do not think he is the only one. They think that we do not read widely. The auditing done by the International Civil Aviation Agency is for the Civil Aviation Authority; they do not audit individual airlines. 

My concern was and it still remains, what has the Civil Aviation Authority been doing all these years? (Laughter) I was expecting my dear brother to come here and say, “Look, we as a government have failed to build capacity of our own civil aviation.” That is what I expected from him because it is not even his fault neither is he a technical person. He has not bothered to read the report of 2008; the report of 2011, yet all those are audits on the Civil Aviation Authority of Uganda and some of them are not even ashamed to stand and say that the concern we raised was over Air Uganda. Who cares for Air Uganda? I still cry for -

HON. MEMBERS: Uganda Airlines.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Yes, Uganda Airlines up to now. (Applause) I still cry for Uganda Airlines; I still cry for Uganda Commercial Bank – yes all those assets of Uganda that were vandalised by fellow Ugandans. Those are the ones we are concerned about. I am concerned about why Uganda Airlines was closed. But now you are telling me about Air Uganda – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, would you need some water? (Laughter)

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I had donated a daughter to serve on the other side – hon. Rebecca Otengo – she can bring me a glass of water. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, in summary, what I am saying is that let the minister go back and bring us a holistic analysis of what Uganda needs to put itself back on the international map as far as civil aviation is concerned. 

But also, Mr Speaker, Ugandans are not being told the truth. The world knows that Uganda is so strategically placed that if were to build our base, Kenya would go down. That is a fact. Even South Africa would go down because we are strategic and they know. Even the minister knows about this. So, if we could build our own civil aviation – and can you imagine, Mr Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, our own property that we had set aside to build our own airline and our own airbase was sold to individuals. It was sold to individuals who are leaders in this country and they are holding titles that should be held by officials at the Civil Aviation Authority. And you come here to tell us about cheap stories?

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker –

HON. MEMBERS: What is the order about?

MR BYANDALA: No, sit down. Mr Speaker, I am responding to a letter I got from the Clerk to Parliament. The letter from the Clerk to Parliament never tasked me to write about Uganda Airlines. It told me to come and explain why Air Uganda was suspended.

So, I am a man of procedure and so I could not just go astray to please anybody. I was supposed to answer to facts. The letter from the Clerk to Parliament was about why Air Uganda was suspended. Is my great friend and sister, hon. Cecelia Ogwal, in order to try to divert this House to issues that the House asked me to come explain about? Is my sister in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members and honourable minister, I don’t know what value you assign to your statement if the actual question was about the operations of the Civil Aviation Authority. And if the fundamental question was why the airline – those airlines operating had their licences were suspended and if your reply is that the audit done by the international people produced results about Air Uganda – the hon. Member is saying that those international agencies do not audit individual airlines, they audit the Civil Aviation Authority of Uganda. Your response does not seem to be connecting to what the member was saying.

If indeed it is true that ICAO audits the Civil Aviation Authority and not individual airlines, then hon. Minister, your statement would have some issues to clarify on because it will not have dealt with that particular issue why the Uganda Civil Aviation Authority has not been audited and in terms of what you have presented that the results of that audit do not reveal the weaknesses of the Civil Aviation Authority itself. Anyway, I am not sure of what the particular issue was. I am also not aware of the content of the letter that the Clerk to Parliament sent to you because that could have been the basis of your statement.

Otherwise, there is need for harmony here, honourable members. We need to know what issue was raised and whether the answer has dealt with that issue properly. In the circumstances, I don’t seem to see how we proceed with this matter.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I think the Minister also has to read and get acquainted with the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. Anyway, if I were to be in the minister’s shoes, I would have received that letter from the Clerk to Parliament and read the Hansard to get to know what exactly was raised on the Floor of Parliament.

So, in the circumstances, Mr Speaker, allow me to inform the minister who seems not have been in the House at that and who did not even care to read the Hansard that never once did I mention Air Uganda in my statement. Read the Hansard and you will bear me witness. Never! It was because that is not my concern. My concerns were about why the operations of airlines have been suspended. My concern is about how Ugandans are suffering as a result of that action. My concern is because we have been using the Uganda Air Cargo, that carries sensitive matters on behalf of the Uganda Government because Government is carrying out sensitive activities in neighbouring countries – now we have to compromise our security. Those are my concerns as a Ugandan.
Mr Speaker, I would request that the minister recomposes himself – (Laughter) - himself, and also I want the minister to be reminded that I am actually not his sister but I am a friend by association. I am married from your side, you are married from our side so we could be in-laws but I don’t think ever I will be your sister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, could it be because you are Cecilia Barbara and he is Abraham that is why he calls you sister?

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, by virtue of my age, I don’t know now how I can ever be a sister to him. But I could possibly be a sister in-law, but I can now be a mother in-law because he is Abraham so you can marry from the clan and you qualify to call me mother-in-law, not sister-in-law.
 
I want to go back to the subject that will let this Parliament address with seriousness the question of establishing a national airline. It is very important. Really, we must have an airline that carries the flag of Uganda. I am so ashamed to have to fly KQ, Air Rwanda and that is the nearest we can go and yet Uganda Airlines was the best airline in the region but was vandalised and nobody has brought to this Parliament reasons why Uganda Airlines was vandalised. 

I thought in your response, first of all, you would have told us why Uganda Airlines was ever abolished and who took what from Uganda Airlines and how we can get it back and if not, how can we build another airline that can give Uganda back its pride. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to reply to the minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there seems to be some slight disharmony in the communications. I think we need to go to the root of this. I have just got information even when we were discussing this to prepare the order paper, I asked a question of why on the order paper there is a statement on the suspension of Air Uganda operations because that is what is on the order paper.

And I said; was that the issue that was raised? They said, “No there was a general issue.” Now, it is clear that also the committee on infrastructure asked the minister a direct question in relation to Air Uganda specifically, so there must have been a miscommunication as to which request the minister needed to deal with. So given this, I don’t think there is anybody to blame for this, not the minister, not the honourable member because the committee on infrastructure actually asked the minister on the suspension of Air Uganda and that seems to be what was captured by the clerk and communicated to the minister. 

But now, it seems there is a pending issue on what the honourable member from Dokolo raised, which was not addressed to the minister in which case we might need to rephrase the questions and have it handled properly.

4.59
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Ndorwa East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I believe this statement somehow captures the issues raised by honourable Cecilia Ogwal, particularly when you look at page 3, on audit findings on civil aviation authority (CAA), coupled with the original audit findings of November 2008, and these are now audit findings of 2014. 

Almost seven years after and on each of the queries, CAA has only improved by 1 percent on each of the queries raised. CAA has improved by only 1 percent in eight years. So the issues raised by honourable Cecilia Ogwal are captured here, the only thing is if we could be allowed to direct the debate towards CAA because in my view, the actual condemnation is on CAA which even authorises and licences airlines without inspecting their maintenance centres, and  without looking at agreements of those maintenance centres for those airlines. So I believe this statement can be debated in light of the issues raised by hon. Cecilia Ogwal.

5.01
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Mr Speaker, in calamities, there are opportunities sometimes and given the situation where we are now, the issue of Air Uganda deserves questions and has questions and has answers. The issue raised by my beloved mother Cecilia Ogwal are correct. They also deserve answers. With due respect, honourable members and my colleagues, we should not throw away the statement of the minister; there is something good in it. There is something very good which we had never known and which if not addressed is going to put the lives of Members of Parliament who use Air Uganda at risk. 

I have used Air Uganda and I loved it, but I did not know that fact observations which are contained in the annexes. Appendix A, B and C were there. For example, Air Uganda knows, we travelled as a committee of parliament to Somalia and back using Air Uganda. For me, on my return, I came back with Air Uganda but I went with a different airline because I missed the first flight. From here to Juba, I have used Air Uganda many times; now suppose any accident occurred, with Members of Parliament on board. 

So, honourable minister, relax, you have done something good here, what we will need to ask is; on this particular issue of Air Uganda, does Air Uganda want to speak to Parliament? Do they believe that what the minister has reported here about them is malicious, is not correct? Then there is where the debate will be. Are these results of malicious audit or not? Otherwise for me, what the CAA is required to do on particular airlines taking Air Uganda as an example is done here. 

The other question about the failure of CAA as my brother, hon. Niwagaba, has pointed out has also been done here. The international civil aviation organisation has done some audit about our civil aviation authority. So here we have also an opportunity to look at our own CAA, how it has failed or how it has performed in its responsibility. We need to balance the debate. There are also questions about this feeling that we do not have our own airline – a Ugandan airline. This is a separate subject, which must be addressed separately.

I would like to conclude by saying that if Air Uganda does not disagree with the audit report given here, let them correct the mistakes which have been cited here and come back to work, if they can be allowed and if they can be qualified by Civil Aviation Authority. This is because we have not given any other body the mandate to manage the air worthiness of all the air operators in Uganda; we still have Civil Aviation Authority.

Two, we need to really question our own Civil Aviation Authority and how we can make it effective. There is a big delay in the licensing of Arua Airport; we have been waiting for this in Arua. If I want to go to Juba, I am forced to come hundreds of kilometres –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me clear this issue first because it is my responsibility to structure the debate to achieve a result. What is on the Order Paper is the suspension of Air Uganda operations. Now, the debate should have been on that but the minister’s report also covers an audit on CAA and raises an issue, which I need clarification on from the minister. 

If you look at page 3, which the honourable Member for Ndorwa has just referred to, the ICAO team ended with an audit on Ugandan registered international airlines namely, Air Uganda, Translink Uganda and Uganda Air Cargo. The point being made by the honourable Member for Dokolo is that it is not the mandate of the ICAO to audit individual airlines. That is the issue that we need to resolve now. Can the minister guide us on this because if that is resolved, then we can see how to structure debate, if it will be debatable? If it is not, then we are going to have to think of a way of splitting this debate or putting it together but in a framework that can be debated by this House so that good results can be found. (Members rose)

Honourable members, I have made this statement before: I have looked at the rules from the first rule up to the last one and I have not found this issue of guidance. So, let us go with the rules to help the Speaker. Let us resolve this issue. I posed the question: can ICAO audit individual airlines? That is the question I have posed.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. During my submission, I made it absolutely clear that ICAO audits countries. They came to audit Uganda and after auditing Uganda, which is represented by the CAA, they said, “Let us go to the field and see what is happening there.” So they went on field visits to see the airlines, which are operating internationally. It was through those interactions that they found out that these airlines were lacking. They did not come here to audit these airlines; they came to audit Uganda.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. From your guidance, it seems we are dealing with three different situations. One, we are dealing with the situation raised by the honourable Member for Dokolo. Two, we are dealing with an answer provided by the minister, which is not a direct answer to the question raised. Three, we are dealing with the procedural aspect of the Order Paper. In other words, the Order Paper did not marry the two but created its own different situations. From the way the debate is moving, it will likely lack guidance in the sense that whereas some Members of Parliament are going to discuss along the lines of the question raised, some are going to discuss the minister’s statement and we are bound to get lost.

The Member for Dokolo has raised a more fundamental issue of Uganda Airlines and in the minister’s answer, he says that when ICAO came for this mission within its mandate, it strayed beyond its mandate and did what we failed to do. My procedural question therefore is: are we proceeding well without direction? Isn’t it now procedurally correct for the minister to go back and to refocus his answer on the question and the broader issues that have been raised here, because it is about our safety and our economy? 

I think it is equally important for the minister to tell the House, as you rightly guided, about what happened to Uganda Airlines and who ate what. This is because, among other things, we are suffering the effects of the absence of our own airline. Are we proceeding well, Mr Speaker? (Mr Mukitale rose_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member for Buliisa, do you want to guide on the procedure? (Laughter) 

Honourable members, that was my difficulty because the issues that are being raised are not what the minister addressed his mind to. I think, as I said, there was some communication that lacked some of the aspects that the honourable Member for Dokolo raised. So, the minister focused on what was on the Order Paper, - why Air Uganda was suspended – but now that is a very limited response if you look at it in relation to what the Member for Dokolo said she raised substantially, which could have been the result of this. As I said, this is because there was another matter with the infrastructure committee that had come up so it kind of created this situation.

The proper way to proceed, therefore, would be for the minister to take care of this whole situation and come back to the House with a broader response that captures the whole picture, so that the debate can be structured properly. Would it be proper to proceed that way? So, let us proceed that way, honourable minister.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, I totally agree with you and as you can see, I obediently responded to what was on the Order Paper contrary to what hon. Cecilia Ogwal thought, and I am sure she is internally apologising for having said that to me.

I want clear instructions from the Clerk to Parliament on what I should bring here because what I responded to was what the Clerk wrote to me about. So, whatever the Clerk writes to me, I will bring a robust report.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have heard your guidance but I am also wondering about the other issues. The minister’s statement has literally biased us to Air Uganda because he provided information on Air Uganda, which he volunteered, and has not given us any information on other airlines operating in this country. 

The procedural issue that I want to raise is that as he returns to brief this House in relation to your guidance, wouldn’t it be good for him to give comparative information concerning the audit, which I suspect he does not have. This was not just a stray on only Air Uganda as they could have also strayed on other airlines because you said that as they made field visits, they tried to check. So, it would be very good for us to get all those details as he returns to the Floor of the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The issue is that those three airlines that are registered here are mentioned here - Air Uganda, Trans Afric Uganda Limited and Uganda Air Cargo Corporation. However, the question that was directed to the minister was only in relation to Air Uganda, and that is the missing link. So, now when the minister comes back, the question should be on the suspension of airlines in Uganda by the CAA; that was the broader question that was raised. So, would it not be proper to allow the minister deal with this comprehensive picture and we have the debate properly structured? Should the minister take back this one? - [Mr Wamanga-Wamai: “No, Mr Speaker”] - But you see, we cannot have a debate on the same subject twice - 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, it is because the information here is very important.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The information will come back when we now have a comprehensive picture - [Mr Wamanga-Wamai: “Including this one?”]- Yes, including this one and all these, so that we do not debate piecemeal. This entire information is already in the House and it would be part of the minister’s report so that we have a comprehensive debate on the subject. 

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for your guidance. I would also wish to advise that it would help us if the minister could also advise or give us an analysis on the ability of the Civil Aviation Authority in supervising the airline operations in Uganda. We want to know the ability so that we will know how we can handle the whole thing in totality. I thank you. 

MR TIMOTHY LWANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to agree with hon. Cecilia Ogwal because actually, we have letters that were written by the Civil Aviation Authority and are very clear that the inspection by ICAO was on Civil Aviation Authority and that the findings are that it has not measured up to expectation. Therefore, I think that when the minister comes next time, he has really got to tell us whether the Civil Aviation Authority of Uganda is capable of doing the job that it is supposed to do. What are its shortcomings?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us give the minister the opportunity to come back and then we debate it properly. Okay? I thank you. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE KILLINGS AT OPIT IN GULU DISTRICT

5.20
THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I did promise yesterday, I now return to the Floor of the House to respond to that specific question of the killings that occurred at Opit Trading Centre in the district of Gulu.

Mr Speaker, this report is already on our iPads and yesterday, Members did confirm that. It will be recalled that on 26th February this year, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business in this august House, during his question time, promised that the Minister for Defence would make a comprehensive statement on the matter of the deaths at Opit Trading Centre in Gulu District. This promise arose from an inquiry by hon. Betty Aol –(Interruption) 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I am failing to follow what the minister is actually reading from his iPad because it looks like around where I am seated there is a deficiency in the network. Under the circumstances, how would I be expected to follow a ministerial statement, which is really supposed to be written under our rules to facilitate debate on the reports?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know how you now expect the Speaker to come and regulate the internet services in that area. (Laughter) Please, let us seek technical assistance and then proceed because there is no way I can come and assist with that situation. The technical people should assist the Members so that the statement can be read. Can we do this, Members? The report is there and we can listen and take notes. Are all the iPads not responding? 

HON. MEMBER: The network is off.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we then listen to the minister since we have it, because he is going to read the statement. We can take notes and then make responses to it.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In light of that reality, I will try to be slow so that colleagues who do not have the statement on their iPads are able to follow. 

Following that promise by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Clerk to Parliament wrote to us in the Ministry of Defence on 28th February asking us to make this statement. It is against that background that I am today making this statement.

Let me, from the very onset, apologise to the Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable members for the delay in coming out with this statement. This delay was occasioned and imposed by the length and depth of investigation into that incident. Investigations are now complete and I can now state as follows:

On 7 February 2014, Private Drani B. Alfred, a local defence unit soldier of A Company (A Coy) of Alpha Battalion in the Fourth Infantry Division of the UPDF shot and killed Mr Obongonyinge Richard and injured four other people. Investigations have established that indeed on that day at about 3.00 a.m. while drinking alcohol at Mr Luwum Janani’s Bar at Opit trading centre, Mr Obongonyinge Richard attacked and beat up Pte Drani Alfred. Mr Obongonyinge also took away a drink, Shs 40,000 and shoes from Pte Drani. 

Pte Drani reported this incident to Mr Luwum Janani, the bar owner. Mr Luwum did nothing, according to the investigation. Having been beaten, in his interpretation Pte Drani thought he had been neglected by the bar owner. Now injured and embarrassed, Pte Drani felt humiliated. Following this humiliation, Pte Drani run back to his detachment, which was nearby, picked his personal weapon – an AK47 rifle and the serial numbers are given here - and he returned to the bar. On reaching the bar, he stood at the doorway and started shooting indiscriminately into the bar instantly killing Mr Obongonyinge Richard and injuring four others namely, Mr Odongonyero Stephen, Mr Ochow Geoffrey, Mr Odongo Denis and Ms Adong Night. All the four were rushed to Lacor Hospital. Sadly, Mr Odongonyero Stephen died on 17th February this year at Lacor Hospital where he had been admitted. We deeply regret these needless deaths. 

The UPDF took care of all the hospital bills as well as the burial expenses of Mr Obongonyinge and Mr Odongonyero. Following this incident, Pte Drani was arrested and handed over to the Uganda Police. He was subsequently charged in Gulu Magistrates Court pending committal to the High Court. Due to the desire to have the suspect tried at the scene of the crime, so that justice is seen to be done, we requested the Director of Public Prosecutions to hand over the suspect to us to enable the Fourth Division Court Martial try him at the scene of the crime. 

The Fourth Division Court Martial sat at Opit Trading Centre and tried Pte Drani. On 17th April, Pte Drani was sentenced to 15 years imprisonment. He is now serving this sentence in Gulu Government Prison. 

There was the matter of compensation to the families of the dead and the injured. Checking the law, Mr Speaker, we find that we are in a difficult position because the soldier was not on official duty and, therefore, the act which he committed, according to the legal advice we got, would not warrant Government to make a legal compensation. 

In conclusion, let me express our deep-felt condolences and sympathies to the bereaved families. As I mentioned earlier, these deaths were needless and highly regrettable. The actions were of an errant soldier which we condemn in the strongest terms. We never condone indiscipline of any kind and our record of handling of indiscipline speaks for itself. 

This sad incident should serve to remind us all that the safety and security of each and every one of us depends on all of us. Mr Speaker and honourable members, thank you for giving me the opportunity to make this statement. 

MR SSEGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. May I ask the minister to clarify; if this man was not on official duty, how did he get out of the barracks with the gun?

5.28
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This issue has been disturbing me; I am not a soldier, I am a civilian and I hope the Minister of Defence will educate us. The war that took place in Northern Uganda made life very difficult for the people to the extent that this respite of peace has caused our people to drink too much. People drink up to late into the night and that is very difficult for us to control. 

When people come to our Parliament with guns, they have to deposit them at the entrance knowing that here, tempers can rise and some hot-tempered people can point guns at others. So, what disturbed me about this incident was how Pte Drani got hold of the gun. Was he keeping the gun in his house? If it was in his house, then we are going to get more deaths of this kind. However, if it was not in his house, how on earth could the people in charge of the armory allow a drunkard to come in and grab a gun? 

Finally, I attended the funerals of these two people that died. I know it is very difficult for us to push for compensation, but how can we put an end to such needless deaths? How can we make sure that this does not repeat itself again in our villages? –(Interruption) 

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Betty Aol. First, I am not a soldier but all soldiers, unless on leave, are regarded as on standby and you are on duty. The fact that you leave the barracks and go outside, your superior should take note of that and when you do anything which is not right, your superior should be answerable. I thank you.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Minister, in a layman’s sense, I thought that when a barracks is set up in a particular area, each and every soldier in that barracks is on duty. What I mean is, when a barracks has been created in a particular sub county, the soldiers are supposed to be on standby 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. In case of any emergency happening, that particular soldier is on duty. 

I was perturbed when you mentioned in your statement that Pte Drani was not on duty and yet he was armed. He was welding his gun which he took from his place and killed people. That means he was on duty because he had access to his weapon and was ready to face any enemy who would attack. 

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, honourable colleague, for allowing me to give this information. We are here on duty as Members of Parliament but the record has it that as we do our parliamentary work, we go to our constituencies. We have heard court trying Members of Parliament for rape; were they on duty in their constituencies? 

In this particular case, Mr Speaker, I would like to inform this House that you are on duty when you are doing the duty you are deployed to do. Soldiers, as human beings, can be off duty like that Member of Parliament who left his parliamentary work and went to murder somebody, according to the case, and even raped. Once you get off your duty, as a human being you are tried for your mistake and it is not your superior to be held responsible for the crimes you commit; that is not always the case. If he was supposed to be on guard and he left his guard point and went to a bar where he had not been deployed, then he was not on duty.

MS AOL: Thank you for all that information, but I would like to comment on the information provided by Gen. Tumwine. I think when you move with your gun and use it to rape, that is an issue that cannot be dissociated from you because you have to move with your gun wherever you go. You cannot compare that with the gun that is used to kill because the gun for raping is different from that one –(Laughter)–  Yes, that gun for raping is always with the rapists wherever they go. So, you cannot compare it with the other gun. 

That is why I think that that information was intended to defend soldiers, which is not right. When we are here we always try to help our people, so let us help. The two people who were killed were very young people who still had a lot to do for Uganda. So, it is bad for you to try to reduce and belittle their death as if it is nothing to you. That is wrong –(Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, we have witnessed many such incidents. This is not the first incident of that nature to happen. In Ntoroko District, we lost so many people in a similar manner and we have seen similar incidents happen at Bombo, and the Minister of Defence even made a statement here. 

It has now become very common all over the country for soldiers to move out of the barracks in civilian fashion and, of course, the civilians are not aware that they are soldiers. It is only during an exchange that the soldiers bring out their true colours. This is a serious matter that the Ministry of Defence and Government should take very seriously.

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you have heard from the minister’s statement, we highly regret what happened. Also, as you have heard from the minister’s statement, this was an errant soldier. This soldier had not been deployed at the bar. So, that bar was not his point of deployment. That is why the court martial took the action that it did.

So, the information I want to give is that this soldier was not on duty because according to his deployment, he was never sent to the bar. He was supposed to be on duty in the barracks and if he was not there, then he was at the wrong place at the wrong time. You see the time – 3.00 a.m.! This was the wrong time for him to be out there. That is the information I want to give.

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, it has already been said that such incidents are not specific to Gulu. However, the loss of the lives of those two young people must not be reduced to that extent that the honourable Gen. Tumwine did.

For soldiers who normally take responsibility, we were not happy with the actions of one person in Gulu but very happy with the cooperation given by some others in Gulu. We were together at the funeral and they were very cooperative and they even helped us transport the bodies. 

I am also happy that in trying this soldier, he was taken back to the crime scene. However, I would like to say that it is our responsibility to make sure we get a way of completely doing away with such unnecessary deaths because when someone is drunk, their level of madness increases and they can do anything. So, those weapons that can be controlled should be controlled. That is my appeal to the Minister of Defence. Thank you.

5.41
MAJ. GEN. JULIUS OKETTA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to again sympathise with the situation that happened in Gulu as narrated by hon. Betty Aol. 

I would like to give three scenarios. One is that the people who are recruited into the Army come from societies where we all come from. If I was a wizard and I joined the Army, I would wish to practice the same while there. Even when the Army does what we call bearing of a soldier, - transforming you from the civilian life into the military circle - it comes to a point where the wizardry in that individual will want to come out and beat the system of the Army. We call it grooming.

The situation here is that we should not say this is an issue for the Army alone. Let us join together to identify those individuals who try to go beyond the role they are supposed to play in the protection of the people of Uganda while in the Army. If you see that, please let us know.

Two, the Penal Code Act or the UPDF Act is very clear. We do not condone drunkenness, taking marijuana or forcing people to do the wrong thing. Once you do that, we penalise you properly.

Thirdly, if somebody is on standby, it does not mean they are on duty. Standby means that they have to be ready to be deployed in the areas of their operation; you do not have a gun but you may be in uniform and when you are assigned for duty, you go to the armory, collect and sign for the weapon and get ready to go for the mission and you must be at that point of deployment. So, the moment you stray out of that – (Interruptions)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable Gen. Oketta for giving way. Of course, we are learning from your military knowledge but the simple knowledge I have about military operations is that within a barracks, you have a quarter guard, which is well guarded. It means that anyone either going in or out has got to be monitored and checked. So, how do these soldiers who live in the barracks get to have easy access to guns in the wee hours of the morning to cause all this harm, General?

MR ALEPER: Mr Speaker, I was following what the General said about what usually happens when a soldier is not on duty. Yes, there is an armoury in the barracks where the guns are kept but I wonder how this soldier who was not on duty was able to get a gun from the armoury, if it was not from his house. From the General’s statement, guns are kept in the armoury but at this time, this soldier was able to access a gun. So, could we know whether this soldier had his gun when not on duty or he was able to access the armoury? Thank you.

MAJ. GEN. OKETTA: Thank you very much. First of all, I totally agree with what you have put forward. When the gun is in the armoury and the person is on duty and he is assigned to report at 7.00p.m., he goes to the armoury, signs for the gun and goes to his duty position. There has been experience about connivance between soldiers. There have been instances of somebody stealing guns from location. There have been people going through what they call panya roads. 

If you know very well how barracks are, you will know that they are not fully fenced in most cases. Some of these soldiers connive with colleagues in order to go and revenge. When you follow up such cases, you will find that either he was influenced by civilians through money or he had a quarrel outside and he connived with his colleagues and went and committed the crime. That is why I am saying that it is very important that we should be on the lookout. 

The incident that happened recently in Bombo and the case that happened in Kasese were witnessed by civilians on time and they reported and the soldiers were apprehended. So, what we are trying to say is that the UPDF will never, whether in day time, night time or in rain, condone any indiscipline, whether by a private or a General, against a civilian. It is not in our practice, but we would like to work together to make sure that those undisciplined soldiers are identified and punished promptly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Learned Attorney-General, is there such a thing as compassionate compensation?

5.47
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL AND MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fredrick Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, compassionate compensation exists under a form of ex gratia, and the Executive has on many occasions enabled some aggrieved parties to access ex gratia payment. Ex gratia payment simply means payment out of favour and not out of right and it is a known practice. The lawyers here know that very well and we have extended it to some families. 

Secondly, in criminal law, we do not have vicarious offences. Offences are personal; whether you are on duty or not and you committee an offence, you are personally responsible; you cannot attribute it to any other individual or organisation. This is because in criminal law, you have to prove two ingredients, as you know; there must be establishment of the actus reus or the act itself and the mens rea - the guilty mind. The two must be present and that must be attributed to the individual doing it. Whether you are on duty or you are off duty and you do it, you are personally responsible. No one else will be held responsible for your act. So, the only way one can come in is through compassionate compensation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, are we debating? If we are debating, then we have 15 minutes for this.

5.50
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the Minister of Defence for bringing the report to this House. There are just two things that I would like to inquire from the Minister of Defence arising from his statement. 

One, listening to the arguments on this matter that have already been made I have the impression that beyond the soldier who pulled the trigger, there should have been somebody responsible for the weapon. I wonder whether the military court martial can revisit its decision on this to probe into how that gun left the armoury, went through the quarter guard and was used for shooting an innocent person. Why would it be only these soldiers – the Dranis - going to jail for 15 years and yet they did not own a gun?  The second issue –(Interruption)

CAPT. LAKOT: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. In the minister’s statement, it was clearly stated that the soldier had his personal weapon, an AK47 and the number is quoted. This means that this soldier went and signed for this weapon from the armory and he was on duty. 

The minister went ahead to say that this was an errant soldier. Being in a bar at 3.00 a.m., I do not think this soldier was deployed at the bar. Also, Opit Barracks is not fenced; so the issue of the gun going through the official quarter guard cannot arise because Opit Barracks is not fenced. 
This means that this soldier could have left his place of work and gone to drink. When he was assaulted from there, he just came back for his weapon and went and did what he was not supposed to do. That is how the gun could have got out of the barracks but not officially through the official quarter guard.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Capt. Lakot, for that expert information. But that again points at a weakness - how do we control the movement of guns in and outside of a barracks? Given the circumstances under which the barracks is operating, I think what Capt. Lakot has brought out is very important. The Ministry of Defence needs to see how to secure their facilities so that we do not have a repeat of this kind of thing. 

Secondly, I want to talk about what the minister chooses to call “errant soldiers”. This is not the first case; we had a case of a soldier coming from Nakasero. A soldier guarding the President came down to the streets of Kampala and after being fleeced by prostitutes, he went back and collected a gun from such a secure environment. I am sure that at least State House is fenced. The President’s residence is secure and he must have passed through the quarter guard and he came and opened fire on innocent people killing many of them and himself too. 

In Karuguto not long ago, in Mbale not long ago, in Bombo not long ago, this happened. Is there a problem in the Army and with the orientation of our people? I would like to propose that some form of psychosocial support be given to our people in the Army. They have been in battle everywhere – in the Congo, in South Sudan, in Somalia - and you cannot get used to the effect of the sound of guns and seeing people die. 

Some of the people who were recruited in the Army are actually ex-rebels and so they come with a rebel mentality into the Army. Do you have some kind of psychosocial support for these people as is happening elsewhere in the armies in the world? The US Army does this, the British Army does this and close to Africa, some countries do this. Is this happening in the UPDF, so that we can minimise incidents of errant soldiers picking up guns and killing innocent civilians? I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.56
MR GODFREY LUBEGA (Independent, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have heard from those concerned and I am worried. When an officer says he was not on duty and another one says he was on duty, then that is confusing.
Secondly, when he says that they can use panyas, then anybody can use the panyas to attack the barracks. If somebody says no, they can pick the gun from a friend. I am worried that there is no administrative authority. By the way, we used to hear of officers’ messes. Why do you allow officers to go outside the barracks through panyas to drink with wanainchi? There are a lot of issues but my advice to them is to check the administration of all the barracks, otherwise we are in trouble.

The punishment itself is not enough. For somebody who intentionally killed more than two people to get only 15 years when people are given more than that when they have unintentionally done something - There is also a question mark about why they decided to bring the case from the courts to the - (Interruption)

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I had to give this information because I wanted it on record. 

At the beginning of this year, another soldier picked a gun after disagreeing with my constituents over a football match. They were watching the premier league and they had some disagreements in Mbiko in Jinja. The soldier went, picked his gun and came back and started firing indiscriminately. He fired seven bullets at a young man and killed him instantly. What the UPDF did was to transport the body from Mbiko to my constituency for burial. I raised this matter with the commandant of the Army and what he told me was similar to what has been said here. 

If there is an issue of compassionate compensation, I think it needs to be taken very seriously otherwise the UPDF is murdering people. They may be errant but they are using government guns, and they are getting them officially by virtue of being soldiers. We cannot just sweep that under the carpet this way. This is the information I wanted to give. Thank you.

MR LUBEGA: To conclude, Mr Speaker, I just want to give a word of advice to our beloved commander - you need to check the barracks administration, otherwise these issues are coming out day and night. I think when you have a weakness in the house and you get some people complaining, it is a matter of checking yourself and improving things. Thank you. 

5.59
DR KENNETH OMONA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I offer my condolences to the bereaved families and those who were injured during that incident. 

Mr Speaker, I must say that anger and killing is not a preserve of the Army. I think we miss the point when we only look at the Army in regard to killings in bars. My argument is based particularly on alcohol and the uncontrolled consumption of alcohol as well as the insecurity in bars and places where people drink. 

It is not the first time that we have heard about these incidences happening in bars, and I am sure if any other person had a gun they could do what these soldiers did. Alcohol is consumed uncontrollably in Uganda, but alcohol per se may not be a problem. It is not only in Uganda that alcohol is consumed; alcohol is consumed in other countries too. Alcohol is a social thing in many of our societies that it is used to welcome visitors, for example in Rwanda they have the urwagwa which is used for welcoming visitors and the ikigaji. So, it is part of society but this must be controlled.

Mr Speaker, alcohol compromises our ability to control our emotions. There have been a number of killings in this country and they occur in bars. Another thing is that they occur late in the night and in the wee hours of the morning. This means that one, we need some laws that control consumption of alcohol. Secondly, these places of entertainment where people drink must have some form of security.

In Uganda, there are some bars that only exist at night; places that have been registered for selling other commodities turn into bars at night. So, it makes it very difficult to control security in such places. I would propose that all premises registered as places where alcohol is consumed should have some kind of security compliance. In all these cases where there have been killings, if there were security measures, the security officers would detect that this person carried a weapon and could actually cause death. Unfortunately, these places are open and not monitored. So, I think this is a problem. It is not only the soldiers, there are also others who carry guns and there have also been killings by civilians.

I also must say that these incidents may still continue if we do not control alcohol and if we do not regulate security in the places where alcohol is consumed. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the gallery this afternoon we had pupils of Unique Valley Primary School located in Kasese Municipality. They are not here now; I think they have left. They are represented by hon. James Mbahimba and hon. Winnie Kiiza. I think they have left.

We also have pupils of Nasa Parents Primary School located in Kyegegwa District, represented by hon. Flavia Kabahenda and hon. William Kwemara. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) I do not know who the others are. 

6.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHERN UGANDA (Ms Rebecca Otengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in sending condolences to the families who lost their dear ones. I agree with my sister, hon. Betty Aol, and thank the UPDF for the steps they took in punishing the officer who committed the crime. 

As the Minister in charge of Northern Uganda, I would like to say that this may not be unique only to Northern Uganda but I would like to pick up on the situation of Northern Uganda. We had been involved in war for the last 20 years or so and we had so many weapons not only with the rebels but also in the community. This time it is the UPDF using the guns wrongfully. 

Mr Speaker, you will agree with me that recently, we had a report here saying that there have been a lot of gun robberies in Northern Uganda. We dealt with unexploded ordnances and the UPDF and the UN helped us and we managed. However, I still believe that we have a lot of guns in the community and it is up to us as leaders, right from the local leadership, to make sure that we weed out these guns. We may talk about it or we may not accept to talk about it but I know this as the Minister in charge of Northern Uganda.

Mr Speaker, my proposal is that we must make sure that we ask our people, especially the local leadership, because we know ourselves, we know where these weapons are and we know how wrongfully they are being used. Let us try to make sure that these weapons are weeded out. Sometimes the weapons do not stay in one location as they are mobile, and this has created a lot of groups in different areas where they transport guns and they are harming our people. I think that this issue is bigger than the two young people who died and we must make sure that we scrutinize it deeply.

Secondly, on the issue of drinking, hon. Betty Aol has said that these were very young people but at 3.00 a.m. they were in the bar. This is another area that we must look into, like Dr Omona has said. To me, it is unique to Northern Uganda because for many years, our people lived in the camps and they were not active but now that they have got out, most of them have taken to heavy drinking. We should also look at other areas like suicide following disagreements and so on. 

When it comes to Northern Uganda, I want us to go deep into the issues and see what can be done. That is why I can say that recently, we agreed in the last PMC that it looks like we touched the hardcore part of the rehabilitation of Northern Uganda but we need the software now; we need to reach the households and see how we must make sure that we rehabilitate the people from the household level. 

I would like to thank the Member who brought this issue to the Floor of the House. I would also like to say that this is not all as it is deeper than what we are discussing. So, as leaders, we must look into it. I thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tumwine, you have already spoken on this subject and you can only rise on information. The rules say that once you have contributed, you can only come back on information; you cannot debate twice. 

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to again remind the House why the UPDF was kept in Parliament - it is there to ensure harmony between the armed forces and the other politicians. 

I want to thank the Members who have contributed on this topic and I appreciate the anger from the Members of this House about such a matter of a criminal nature. I would like you to put yourselves in a situation where your son or close relative is being accused of doing wrong. I want to assure the House and the public, and that is the main reason that I stood up, that the UPDF is angrier with our indiscipline than you feel or perhaps more than you think. We seriously take the matter of indiscipline within the UPDF - (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: The clarification that I am seeking from the General is that if the UPDF is very angry and very bitter, what is the deterrent? An errant soldier picks up a gun, goes to a bar and shoots people and it is not only once but it has happened in many places - it happened in Mbale, Kampala and everywhere. Is 15 years a deterrent? Is that what you can do to deter those errant soldiers? You must take serious measures like giving 25 or 30 years in prison. After 15 years, he is going to come out tomorrow and do the same thing.

GEN. TUMWINE: Mr Speaker, I was yet to say that one thing that the gun cannot shoot is sin in a human being. The gun can shoot all other things like animals and human beings but cannot shoot sin in a human being. Soldiers are human beings. We have come a long way in taking serious action against errant soldiers who annoy the population, starting from the bush when we started the first NRA code of conduct. We have executed many undisciplined soldiers, we have arrested many, we have tried many and we shall continue to do that. 

The message that I want to share with you is for not only you to listen to but even the UPDF wherever they are; any undisciplined soldier who carries our uniform and commits a crime should know he or she will be subject to disciplinary action. I would like all of you to cooperate knowing that these are your children –(Interruption)  

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, General, for allowing me to seek clarification from you. Mr Speaker, we must also be fair to the UPDF. At the risk of being misunderstood, I want to know, apart from condemning and calling these soldiers undisciplined, have we tried as a country to think about the welfare of the UPDF? These barracks that have been built, do they have officers’ messes where we expect these officers to go and socialise? 

Yes, you have assured us that you will ensure that our officers are disciplined, but away from that, where else do we expect army officers to go and socialise? Are they not human beings also? What are you doing as an army to have barracks that are properly constructed and have fences? We give the UPDF a lot of money; why are you not taking care of the welfare of our soldiers? That is the clarification that I am seeking.    

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you very much. I am happy that this clarification is coming from Members of Parliament who approve our budget. We are very happy and we are moving forward to ensure and to keep asking and requesting for more funds to improve the welfare of the UPDF. 

The priorities of the UPDF have been to ensure three main things: One, ensure the life and property of everybody in security and the territorial integrity of Uganda. The second one has been to ensure the discipline of the UPDF in the whole region and continent. The record of the discipline of the UPDF is undisputed as among the best, if not the best. Therefore, it should not only be compared to situations where individual soldier indiscipline takes place and we take action. 

The courts have even removed this death sentence which we have been using quite a lot. So, really, our court martials are very strict and I will just give one example. When we were trying one of our undisciplined soldiers and the lawyers started to argue that he was under the influence of alcohol and therefore not responsible, we sat down afterwards and the Commander-In-Chief asked, “Who was responsible for putting the alcohol into him so that we punish that person?” This helped us deal with those who were undisciplined, whether drunk or not drunk. 

Who put the alcohol into you? You are the one responsible and therefore, you are liable for all your actions. So, I really want to say that be sure that the UPDF will do the best it can to ensure discipline and do all the necessary things –(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much for giving way. I have been silently listening to what the soldiers have been articulating and I need some clarification. General, are you aware that the defence sector and the political administration sector are the sectors on which we spend most of our money according to our budgetary standards?

Are you also aware that much as you do clever moves to give you more money as the defence force, we do not even know the number of soldiers in this country? The numbers keep on multiplying unceremoniously; what are you talking about? (Laughter)

GEN. TUMWINE: I will give the clarification on that matter. I would like you to do research because everything should be measured with relativity or comparison. I would like you to do research on the percentages on each country depending on their income. Find out what percentage they spend on security and compare that with the percentage of Uganda’s budget which is spent on security, taking into account the operations that are taking place within the whole continent. What percentage of our budget is the Ministry of Defence taking? Compare it before you can say you are giving us a lot of money. I want to say that the UPDF sacrifices to ensure that the economy continues to grow and we grow with it. 

On indiscipline, which is the subject on the Floor, I want to end by stating that we carried out research after we retrenched to reduce the numbers. After some time, we carried out research in the population to find out whether the rate of crime among veterans was higher than that of the civilians, and it was at 50 per cent; check it. So, the society we are dealing with is such that there is more crime within the public than within the armed forces. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MAJ. GEN. OKETTA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister in charge of Northern Uganda has presented the issues, and I want to confirm to honourable members, the civil authority here, that the Chief of the Defence Forces had already sanctioned the operation for disarming elements that are illegally armed. So the Fourth Division has worked together with the respective Resident District Commissioners to do that work. 

In the Fifth Division, particularly in Kaabong, currently there are people who are being chased from South Sudan and they are armed and there is an operation by the Fifth Division going on. So the Army has realised that they need support from the district leaders to disarm these elements that arm the civilians.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we hear from the Minister of Defence finally?

6.18
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank colleagues for the very deep consideration they have given the discussion on the statement I brought. In summary, I will make five brief points:

First, I want to repeat the fact that we regret these incidences. Our heart and feelings are with the families that got bereaved as a result of this shooting. 

Two, as the discussion progressed on the Floor, I noted that this particular incident should be seen in a wider context of the performance of the Army. First, the conduct and practice of the Army is very strict with their own members. We do not condone indiscipline; you can see how expeditious and transparent the trial was. I am sure that for the punishment, the judge had a good reason for giving him 15 years but in many cases, they have been sentenced to death. So the Army is doing very well and in a very difficult situation, doing as much as possible to prevent similar situations. 

The third point, Mr Speaker, is that we in the Army and in the Ministry of Defence appreciate what my sister, hon. Ocan, said and we know that she is speaking for the population. The population in a situation like this are indeed aggrieved but they are happy that we come in a transparent way to make a trial and we do it quickly. The encouragement is very welcome and we shall keep in that line. 

The point has been made that even more efforts should be made to prevent such incidences, and I think three points have been referred to. First is the issue of welfare and accommodation of the soldiers. It is no secret to all of us - We all come from the countryside and we know how our soldiers live and we know the kind of barracks they live in. We look forward to the day when we will have enough resources to have proper barracks, fenced barracks, and that will no doubt contribute to lessening such sad incidences. 

Reference has been made to mental health and psychosocial attention. Within the Army, using the limited resources we have, we do have very highly qualified psychiatrists and we try as much as possible to attend to their mental health. This is because we are aware that given the long service the soldiers have been giving, given the varied circumstances which they have fought, some of them indeed do get some mental illnesses that require attention. You will be impressed if you go to the army units and even the public units; sometimes you will find our soldiers there receiving mental health attention. So that advice is also well received. 

On the question of places where soldiers can socialise, this is a point in the right direction but all these are issues of resources. Once we get these resources –(Mr Olanya rose_)– Please, just hold on Ndugu Olanya. I wanted to go to my last point, but let me have the clarification. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Minister, you are not very clear as far as compensation is concerned. Even though the Attorney-General tried to bring it up, I did not understand it clearly. I feel that Government should not run away from compensation. 

From your submission, you said Pte Drani was not on official duty but to the best of my knowledge, I know Pte Drani does not come from Opit; he was recruited by the UPDF and he comes from West Nile. It is the UPDF that deployed him to work in Opit Barracks. Therefore, when he is asked for by his relatives in West Nile, the UPDF will say, “Pte Drani is on official duty in Opit”. So, the fact that he was in Opit means he was well deployed to work there. 

Therefore, Government should not run away from compensation by saying that Pte Drani was not on official duty. Let the families of the five people who were shot – three of them are still alive –  be compensated by the government. 

DR KIYONGA: I think we have to conclude, Mr Speaker. The case has been made very clear – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Attorney-General came and explained something following your request. However, I heard the minister say in his report that the private picked his personal gun. I do not think there is a gun which is personal in the Army; they all belong to the government –(Interjections)– It is the weapon he uses but it belongs to Government.  

The procedural issue I am raising is that the barracks is supposed to be fenced by Government; the barracks is supposed to have a quarter guard and when somebody is not on duty, the weapons are supposed to be in the armory. So, is it procedurally right for the minister to come here and say that they cannot compensate because the soldier was not on duty yet he used government property?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the point is clear that there are other ways of following up.

DR KIYONGA: Good, but for the record I think what the Attorney-General has stated is clear. Also, the court has advised us that this cannot be a case of compulsory compensation. However, as you asked the Attorney-General whether there are no other considerations outside that, I undertake to make further consultations within the mechanisms of the state and see if we are able to do something, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we have not been fair to our colleagues who are in the holy month. We have exceeded our time by 25 minutes. I think it is time for us to adjourn. We have a lot of pending business; this House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock. Let us start at 2 o’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.25 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 24 July 2014 at 2.00 p.m.) 





