Tuesday, 3 July 2012 

Parliament met at 2.23 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good afternoon, honourable members. You are welcome to this sitting. As usual, we have a lot of business and we shall do our best to finish on schedule. 

Honourable members, I need to clarify on the issue of statements of urgent public importance. We did not have occasion to treat this substantially when we amended the rules, but it keeps coming up. The rules require that you come to the Speaker and agree with the Speaker on which format this matter will take and how long it should take. The debate is limited to 15 minutes and it should be for information on things that have happened so quickly that you have had no opportunity to walk through other parliamentary means, for example, parliamentary questions or petitions, to access Parliament to address the issue. It becomes so urgent that you have no other way of communicating about it. So, you come to Parliament through this particular method. 

However, the development now is that even on matters that occurred last year and are not even urgent, we are still being consulted whether they should be matters of urgent public importance. We are trying to see how we can improve on this so that the programmed business of the House contained in the Order Paper can receive the treatment it deserves. By the time they set up the Order Paper, it is timed that the business of the day will be taken care of by the Order Paper. Now you find that the debate on the matters of urgent public importance, which were not part of the Order Paper, constitute more than 50 percent of the time we use to debate the business on the Order Paper.  I do not think that is fair. 

For us to be orderly, from today, as long as I am in the Chair, unless the matter is really urgent in the sense that it is really urgent, I will not be permitting it. You will use other parliamentary mechanisms - questions for oral answer, petitions - to deal with those outstanding matters that require the attention of the House. I do hope I am clear on this. So, please if you have a matter that is long standing and you think it is your opportunity to speak to the House, I will not allow that to happen. However, I have left some exceptions today because rules are supposed to be set before the game not during and not after the game. So, I thought I should communicate that early enough so that all of us take note. 

There are those who are kind enough to just send notes to the Speaker’s Office. Notes cannot discuss with the Speaker. You need to come over and we sit down and discuss. If you have not been able to access the Speaker, that means your business cannot come; it is as simple as that. You need to have a face to face discussion with the Speaker before the matter can come, but even then, I will still make exceptions to that.  

Today, we have urgent business, which has been on our Order Paper for a long time. We need to finish with this report on the national ID project today, whichever way. The chair has been very patient; right now he is meeting some people but he will be here by the time we finish with the rest of the business. Honourable members, you are welcome and let us see how to proceed with this matter.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you for that communication in a bid to guide us on how we can use time maximally. However, there is another issue; for instance, the petition, which I brought from Kawempe South from Katanga. There are petitions, which we bring here and read out before Parliament and we give them a timeline. You, for instance, specifically gave that petition two weeks way back in April and this is July and there is no report, yet it was urgent. I understand even the people have petitioned the President saying that Parliament has not helped them. They even singled you out as the Speaker; they said that they met you and you have not helped them. It was an issue that was so important. There is a leadership vacuum and you know what happens in those slums of ours. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. You are a member of this House; have you had a discussion with the chair of the committee? The committees have a maximum period within which to handle this within the rules. A time of 14 days was given to this particular committee; please consult with the chair of the committee and advise the Speaker on how far they have gone etcetera. Please, clerk, take note of this and the clerk to whom this matter was sent to. 

I will have the hon. Chemaswet raise his matter in three minutes. 

2.28
MR ABDI CHEMASWET (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance pertaining to an issue that occurred in my constituency on 30 June 2012; a truck carrying 75 students had an accident on the road from Ngenge connecting to the road from Kapchorwa to Bukwo. One of the students died, 41 were injured and admitted in Kapchorwa Hospital but the attention that was given to these students in the hospital was not enough. The X-ray machine in the hospital is not working and so they had to get these services from outside. 

The government has not intervened to see to it that the health of these students is okay. In fact, some of them have already been discharged from the hospital without proper medical attention. Some have been referred to other hospitals like Kumi for medical attention.

The cause of this accident is the bad state of roads in the Sebei sub-region. Our roads are not even supposed to be called roads. They have been affected by floods; we had called for attention from Government to work on these roads before but nothing has so far been done. What I want to know is whether the government is going to accord any attention to these students who had an accident in Kween Constituency. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. The urgent issue is the students who have been affected by an accident. As for the issue of the roads, you can raise a parliamentary question and we deal with it later. Honourable minister, do you have anything to say on the students that got injuries and are hospitalised? 

2.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakabulindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the member for raising that matter of national importance. I sympathise with those students, but I am just hearing it for the first time and I would like to request the honourable member to formalise the communication to the Ministry of Education and Sports so that we can see what to do urgently.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The communication has already been given to you and it is up to you, honourable minister, to take action. There are no more details required. Just liaise with him and finalise. No letter is going to be written to you anymore.

MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of importance regarding guidance. In your opening speech, you said that today’s deliberations are going to tackle a number of important matters. Important matters remain important matters. The guidance I need is, how can we proceed in a House where there are just countable ministers and neither the Leader of Government Business nor his deputy is present? I am acting Leader of the Opposition. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Lukyamuzi. You said countable ministers; this means there is some number. 

Honourable members, there was an oversight on my part. Let me take this opportunity to pass my personal condolences to the hon. Gilbert Bukenya for his loss. I was not there to be able to be with you at that time. This is the only opportunity I have got to see you. Please take my condolences. Thank you. On that note, can we observe one minute of silence.

(Members stood up and observed a moment of silence.)

2.34
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA LULUME (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of public national importance, which is urgent in nature. I represent countrymen who are fishermen by occupation and they form almost one-third of the population which I represent in Parliament. 

One of the fishing sites most affected by certain grabbers of landing sites is called Buliiba fish landing site near Senyi landing site in Ssi sub-county. Certain gun-wielding men are claiming to have rights to evict and take over that fish landing site and establish a cage fish farm there. These men did not have any letter introducing them to the authorities and the people had to rise up to defend their rights of occupancy of the said landing site. This landing site is occupied by not less than 2,000, people and that is where they eke a living through fishing. 

One wonders how people get documents, which are not even communicated to the local authorities, not even to me, the Member of Parliament, who even happens to be the chairperson of the forum for fisheries in this Parliament. We are well aware of the Land (Amendment) Act, which was passed in 2010, which gave the right of occupancy for people-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is the urgent matter?

DR LULUME: Mr Speaker, the urgent matter is to ensure that Government halts those who are claiming rights of occupancy of that landing site and who are seeking to evict my people from their occupation. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have something to say? There is a threat of violence in some place.

2.36
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank Dr Lulume for raising that very important issue. I want to give an undertaking that we are going to investigate this matter and be able to come back to the House on Tuesday next week with a clear answer. In the meantime, we shall make sure that corrective action is taken.

2.37
MS SARAH KATAIKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this chance to make a statement of national interest about my district. Last Friday, 29th June, a calamity befell my district where six people from the same family drowned in a river. That river is the famous Namatala-Tirinyi, which crosses right from Mbale through Bunyole and it is a great threat. The names of the deceased are Ben Kairanya, 45; Matayo Kisakye, 30; and two students from Rainbow High School who were in S5 and S6.

This is the fourth time in a row that such incidents are happening in my district. Last November, three people drowned at a landing site called Kyali. Other people drowned at another landing site. All this happens while people are trying to cross the swamps to look for economic survival.

Another imminent calamity is in the pipeline; a bridge, which connects Budaka District through Naboowa, is three quarters washed away. Our concern as the people of Budaka is that all this is happening while Government is looking on and no immediate action is being taken. 

You are all aware that our Constitution clearly states in Article 22 that the government has the obligation to provide right to life to our people as well as health, and even to ensure that they work in a safe environment. My prayer is that Government immediately puts some preventive measures to ensure that safe transport is provided to my people across these landing sites. I am sure that our government can afford to put canoes and make sure that lives are not lost. People are going there to look for economic sustainability.

Lastly, the government approved a road within that area-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the urgent matter is that there is a bad river and people are drowning. Let us deal with that. Is there any response from the government on that?

THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Kataike for bringing this critical matter to the attention of the House and Government. We have had serious floods in the eastern part of the country and many areas are affected. I will accordingly bring this to the attention of the Minister of Works and Transport so that this area can be put on the priority list of areas to be worked on. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Olanya. 

2.40
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. This is pertaining to the land grabbing in Amuru District. On the 22nd of last month, a UPDF officer by the names of Lt Col Obwona Panson went to Amuru District, at the sub-county of Pabbo, and told the local community who were living in Kal parish that the land where they are living currently belongs to the UPDF. He did mention that the land was given to UPDF in 1982 and so they have now come to work on their land. 

That Friday morning, he went with a team of surveyors and one taxi of military men. They started putting mark stones on the 6,900 hectares of land and they told the people who are living there to find their own way of reallocating immediately. On Saturday, 23 June, the community became very annoyed; they went and removed all the mark stones forcefully but thankfully they did not fight or do anything harmful. They took all the mark stones to the police. 

Mr Speaker, the urgent matter is that Lt Col Obwona Panson promised to go back and get their land immediately. Right now, my people are living in terrible fear. People of Pabbo sub-county are now fearful that the soldiers are going either to kill them or to do something harmful to them. I would like to say that the government should take very serious action. This is not the only case of UPDF grabbing land in Acholi. You remember some time back-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us deal with the matter on the table, the land that you requested to speak on. 

2.42
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the member for raising this matter. It is Government to ensure that citizens are not harassed or evicted from their land without following the law. Being the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, I will take this up and I will also get the Ministry of Defence, which is responsible for the UPDF soldiers, to make sure that the officer you have mentioned is engaged over this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Would you like to give a timeframe? 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to sympathise with my colleague, hon. Daudi Migereko, who has been on the defence line for all matters being brought to various ministries. This is a matter which borders on life and death; the people of Pabbo are in total fear as the said lieutenant colonel is insisting that he is going to get the land. 

Now that the people have reported the matter to the Police and the minister, – the Minister of Internal Affairs is also not here - can we try to really put a stop to this threat so that the people’s anxiety is taken care of? We need a specific timeframe and we need that lieutenant colonel to be restrained forthwith until the matter is finally dealt with judiciously rather than leaving people in fear and without any timeframe to console them. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I was of the view that you give a timeframe within which we should expect this response. 

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, it is a very urgent matter which requires virtually instant action. As soon as I get out of here, I am going to raise UPDF so that the officer involved can be engaged and restrained. We can then be able to follow the due process of the law to ensure that our people are not made to suffer as a result of an unlawful activity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Olanya, please liaise with the honourable minister and then get back to us if there are laxities in any action. 

Hon. Kase-Mubanda, the issue you are raising is similar to the issue going to be raised by hon. Mpuuga. So, I would like you to raise it together. I will have hon. Kase-Mubanda and then hon. Mpuuga. 

2.46
MS FREDA KASE-MUBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of great concern to the nation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it urgent?

MS KASE-MUBANDA: Mr Speaker, it is also urgent. (Laughter) The matter I wish to speak about is the matter of school fires. A fire broke out in my district, Masaka, just last week and it killed five innocent infants. The fire occurred in the deep of the night, at about 3.00 a.m., when everybody was deep asleep.

The media in the country is full of nothing but school fires with the exception of the Bududa landslides. It is very alarming for a catastrophe of this nature to befall our children in schools and to be recurring so many times! The newspapers are listing about 70 school fires that have occurred in a space of about four years. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to urge the Minister of Education to take a serious course of action and to be proactive in looking at the causes of these fires and try to institute measures to guard against these fires. The police have instituted reports and investigations, which is well and good, but we do not get these reports. This is very alarming as well. The Inspector General of Police said after this recent fire that the fire that occurred in 2008 at Budo is still under investigation. This is really terrible! 

I request that the Minister of Education immediately institutes measures to promote the safety and security of our children in boarding schools. Such measures include fixing fire extinguishers in every school block, having an emergency exit in every dormitory, having smoke detectors on the ceilings of each room, fixing fire alarms in every building and having ample walking space in between the beds.

There was terrible and severe overcrowding at St Leo’s School in Nyendo where the fire occurred -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Your matter is raised. Can I have hon. Mpuuga.

2.51
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my sister for bringing up this matter. This particular fire happened in my constituency and she has raised all the issues ably, only that when I observed the school environment and the nature of victims, I was very concerned. The children that died ranged from four to six years of age. For me, this is the biggest concern. While the Ministry of Education has guidelines on who puts up a boarding section in a school, I have tried to find out whether there are guidelines on who goes to a boarding school. I am afraid parents are about to take toddlers to boarding schools and this is very dangerous! 

For me, this is the gist of the matter; I imagined a four-year old attempting to escape a fire in a crowded dormitory environment in the dead of the night when they are deep asleep at 3.00 a.m. It is improbable! I think as Parliament, this is our work to this country. 

The Ministry of Education must clearly come out because I envisage parents weaning children and immediately sending them to boarding schools to have space to do other things. I appreciate the stress parents go through to have these children at home while working, but something has to be done immediately in regulating the nature of children and which age group goes to a boarding school.

We know that the regulation is that only a six-year old can go to primary 1; why do you take a three-year old to a boarding school? This is the problem. These are children who are not able to help themselves, and I do not think as parents we are helping them to learn. This is like a punishment. We are not helping them to learn, and this is the gist of my concern to which I would like the ministry to respond and offer an immediate solution. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Mpuuga. Yes, you wanted to say something. I will come to you then we conclude this matter. No debate on this; 15 minutes are up.

2.54
MR MOHAMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My colleague has hinted on the issue I wanted to raise - sending underage children to school. What we need to do as Government is to develop a comprehensive policy even taking care of day-care schools. Some parents just have children for the sake of having children and then do not take up other responsibilities that they need to do.

I also want to mention that normally, the school fires happen when children or students go in for preps or night reading. Recently, Merryland High School in Entebbe burnt twice and both times the students had gone for night reading. That means that there could be a kind of terrorism attack on schools because how could it happen when students are out for prep. The Ministry of Education and other relevant ministries should take interest to find out the causes of such fires.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I will have the minister make a statement on this and we close.

2.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakabulindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the members who have raised this timely and important issue. As you can see now, all my colleagues are not around. We are having a very big top management meeting on the fires. All the technical people, including the school inspectors, are attending that meeting. I was requested to remain behind and after getting all the issues raised after your communication, I will also join them. We are handling the issue.

I know there are so many factors that do cause fire outbreaks in different schools. I also get concerned about the issue that has been raised about the children that are being taken to boarding schools; this is also another issue that we need to look at. We need to look at not only the causes of the fires but also the people themselves who should be in boarding schools. This is the meeting that is taking place now and I will be joining my colleagues very soon.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you taking clarification?

MR BAKABULINDI: I have no problem with it.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, thank you very much and I thank the honourable minister. A few years ago when Buddo Junior School caught fire, this House made such a passionate appeal to Government to issue guidelines and to ensure that there is inspection and there are standards to be followed in every school in this country. What I need the ministry to do to this country is to explain to us why they failed to put the guidelines in place and to ensure that the guidelines are followed. How many children must die and how many statements must we receive from Government before actually our schools become a safe place?

Secondly, I would like to know from the minister whether he is even aware that besides those children who are taken in to boarding at three years, there are schools in this country where children never go for holidays; from January to December, parents abandon children in schools. Four years and you find children who have never gone for holidays! What has the ministry done because this is unhealthy? Thank you.

MR BAKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, I think it would be prudent for the honourable members to wait for the comprehensive report of which today’s meeting will form part of. She has raised a very pertinent question of the Buddo incident and passing the policy. You are aware that the majority of these children going at the age of four years to boarding schools are ours; we are the people who are able to take children at this age. However, passing the policies and implementing them are two different issues. What I can promise is that we are going to come with a comprehensive report. As of now, we have started our meeting and it will include all the concerns of the members. I can promise that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When are you likely to do this, honourable minister?

MR BAKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, now that we have started our meetings today, I can promise that towards the end of next week, we shall be able to come with a report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, Thursday next week, the minister should come back here with a statement -

MR BAKABULINDI: Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi’s clarification will also be catered for in advance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.00
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I stand to raise a matter of national importance that needs the urgent attention of this Parliament and the Ministry of Lands. The matter I am raising has been on the Floor of this Parliament and I am raising it today because-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been on the Floor of this Parliament and it is still urgent today? Please raise the urgent matter. 

MR ATIKU: Yes, it is urgent –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please raise the urgent matter.

MR ATIKU: It concerns Barifa Central Reserve Forest in Arua. Sometime in 2010, around November –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is part of the issue; please sit. This is part of the issue I was dealing with. If a matter was of 2010, it was raised in Parliament. Why don’t you raise a parliamentary question to deal with it?

MR ATIKU: I need to give you the background.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, I need you to raise a matter which is urgent for now.

MR ATIKU: The matter which is urgent for now Mr Speaker, is that around the period I have told you, four acres of Barifa Forest were uprooted. After the uprooting of the forest, the land was occupied by Gen. Salim Saleh who is a brother to the President. According to the information at that time, this land was supposed to be used for four months within which period they would pay the ex-servicemen. A number of activities have taken place there, but of late, the developments which are taking place on the four acres which were uprooted have raised a lot of anxiety among the stakeholders. 

Reason one, the stakeholders from the district local government to the municipal were not consulted when these people were uprooting these trees, including the National Forestry Authority, which is in the neighbourhood.

Last week, I visited the National Forestry Authority offices and they told us they are living in fear -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, a, honourable member is raising a very important issue; an issue which needs investigation because some of his statements are allegations, which need to be investigated to prove whether they are right or not. I think that does not tantamount to an emergency. Is it procedurally right, therefore – if a Member wants that issue to be investigated, he should formulate a normal question to the minister and the minister should give a comprehensive answer -(Interjections)- because these are very serious allegations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you already ruling on it? I thought you are raising -(Laughter)

MR BYABAGAMBI: These are very serious allegations. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to know whether it is procedurally right for that issue to be treated as an emergency whereas it needs investigation and comprehensive answers to be given on the Floor.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. You see, this is part of what I said in my earlier communication. Matters which are very involving, not urgent, have been subsisting and they need a more comprehensive coverage. You do not have to raise them under this item. It will serve your people better when you raise a parliamentary question and a properly investigated report is brought to this House for debate. Now you are raising issues of 2010; issues of the previous Parliament. All those are old issues. They cannot be urgent for today’s purposes. 

I am, therefore, going to ask the honourable member to find a parliamentary question and send it to the minister. We will try to fast-track it and give it two weeks within which they should come back with a comprehensive report. That is it. Honourable member, that is my ruling. Please raise the parliamentary question and we’ll see how to make it move quickly so that they can come back. That is what you should have started with in the first place. 

Honourable members, in the distinguished Members’ gallery this afternoon, I have a delegation of Members of Parliament and staff of the Committee on Government Assurances of the National Assembly of Ghana. They have been led by hon. Haruna Bayirga and are here to share experiences with our Parliament. Please join me in welcoming them to witness our proceedings. You are welcome.

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we also have students and teachers from Woodland High School, United Kingdom, led by their headmaster, Mr Allan Bradley. They are part of the UK Chapter members of Project Uganda. They have come to observe the business of today. You are very welcome.

Honourable members, we also have students and teachers from Teso College, Aloet from Soroti County, represented by hon. Osegge Angelline. They have come to observe the proceedings of – where are they? Teso College Aloet? They are on this side. Please join me in welcoming them.

Honourable members, on a sad note, I wish to communicate to you the death of the son of the former honourable Member of Parliament, Ofwono Yeri. His son, Samuel Ofwono passed away in Mulago Hospital. Burial will take place in Tororo, Osukuru village on Wednesday, 4 July 2012. That will be tomorrow. Those of you who can find space to support our honourable colleague, please do so. Thank you very much, next item. 

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Guidance? What was the issue?

MR BAKALUBA MUKASA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking guidance from you. Sometime back, we raised a very important issue in this House concerning the fishing communities in our areas in respect to the lacustrine gazetted area, where our people have been stopped from fishing and other activities. We have waited for a response from the minister for two months, but we have not heard anything from the honourable Minister of Fisheries. It is very important and we need this response so that we can know what to do.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can these be combined with that matter, which was raised by the honourable Member from Buikwe, so that we have a response on Tuesday? 

Next item.
  
BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2012

3.09
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesigye): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Local Governments (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2012” be read for the first time. In keeping with the Budget Act, Section 10, I hereby lay on Table a Certificate of Financial Implications. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. This bill stands committed to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. The 45 days start ticking now. We should have a report on this Bill within 45 days from the time I stop speaking on the subject. Forty-five days. You can note the time.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION OF THE NEW MEMBERS OF THE PHARMACEUTICAL SOCIETY OF UGANDA
  
3.09
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Rt Hon. Speaker, thank you very much. I am presenting this petition under Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament. To: the Parliament of Uganda, 

The humble petition of new graduates of pharmacy from various universities inside and outside Uganda showeth and states that:

1.	The subject matter of this petition is that your humble petitioners have been frustrated in their endeavours to get registered to practise pharmacy.

2.	The petitioners are new graduates of pharmacy who are aggrieved by the failure of the pharmacy board to register them as qualified pharmacists eligible to practise in Uganda.

3.	Despite the fact that they have obtained the academic credentials and other prescribed requirements, their attempts to be registered at the Ministry of Health have been futile.

4.	As a result, the petitioners have been subjected to a desperate situation with no source of income to support themselves and their dependants. Additionally, the means for survival and their general welfare have become too expensive to afford.

5.	Furthermore, the failure of the aforesaid ministry to register the petition has robbed the health sector of energetic qualified and technical personnel which is much needed in providing health care and treatment to the sick.

6.	There have been several pleas for intervention that have been made by the petitioners to the Permanent Secretary and the Director General of the Ministry of Health but all has been in vain.

7.	The concerns of your humble petitioners were stated in a letter addressed to the Director General of the aforesaid ministry on the 4 May 2012, but up to date there has been no appropriate action taken. 

Therefore, by this petition, your humble petitioners pray that Parliament resolves that:

1.	The Registrar Pharmacy Department in the Ministry of Health registers the petitioners immediately as qualified pharmacists in the Republic of Uganda.

2.	That the Ministry of Health compensates the petitioners for having delayed and caused them financial loss in the period before their registration. 

And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray and hereto append their signatures. 

Mr Speaker, the representatives of the petitioners who have appended their signatures are only eight: Atim Goretti, Kintu Brian, Wegulo Badru, Wainana Joseph Wathika, Sunday Alex, Kabagambe Keith Samuel, Mukungu Andrew and Kamulegeya Derrick. 

Mr Speaker, I would also like, as part of this petition, to lay on Table a letter which was written to the Speaker of Parliament, which you actually received from the petitioners dated, 13 June 2012. And in that letter, your petitioners highlight their plight. I beg to lay. 

Mr Speaker, together with this letter, attached is a communication by the petitioners to the Director General, Ministry of Health and this was received at Ministry of Health on 7 May 2012. It is signed on behalf of the petitioners by Opio Sammuel. 

Together with this petition is another letter written to the Registrar Ministry of Health dated, 20 March 2012, and it is also signed by Opio Sammuel, Secretary, Pharmaceuticals Society of Uganda. Mr Speaker I beg to lay all these three documents on the Table. I would also like to lay a copy of this petition on Table. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the records capture the petition and the attached documents. The matter is referred to the committee on Health and the 45 days rule applies. And for petitions we should have a shorter period because these are more focused matters which should be handled more quickly; we have a responsibility, these are citizens being affected by these delays and we should do something to help them. 

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION FROM THE RESIDENTS OF PURONGO, ANAKA AND KOCH-GOMA IN NWOYA DISTRICT

3.14
MR RICHARD TODWONG (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, I bring the petition under Rule 27 of our Rules of Procedure and the petitioners from the areas mentioned above –(Interjections)

The humble petition of petitioners from Nwoya District, specifically, from Purongo, Anaka and Koch-Goma sub-counties stating that:

1.	They are the true residents of the sub-counties mentioned. 

2.	The subject matter of this petition is the continued destruction of gardens and homes, as well as harassment and killing of residents of the area caused by both wildlife and game rangers from Murchison Falls National Park. 

3.	Several reports have been made to the Wildlife Authority both at the operational and head office levels. The response has been that in order to mitigate and address the effects of human-wildlife conflict in the area, the authority has given the sub-counties a share of revenue and the authority has also taken remedial action to dig trenches around boundaries of the national park. But all the above have yielded nothing and the end result is that the wild animals and rangers are on rampage to disorganise the petitioners. 

4.	In particular, on the 30 August 2012, at Purongo at a place called Lagaji – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you say, 30 August 2012?

MR TODWONG: Yes, 30 August 2012. –(Laughter)- It should be 2011; there was a problem with the draft. The Legal Department of Parliament should have corrected it. 

In particular, on 30 August 2011, at Purongo Lagaji area, one person called Opio Justine was murdered by game rangers using a Motor vehicle No.UG 0220T driven by a man called Suleiman Muhammad under the command of Berochan Thomas. His body has not been recovered up to now. 

5. 	On the 27 December 2011, at Tangi gate area, a man called Ojok Jacob was shot dead at the boundary of the park and his body has not been recovered up to now. 

6.	 On the 7 July 2011, at Lulim Latoro, a man called Oloya Oulanya Richard was killed by rangers who earlier used him to porch and later on turned their guns against him. The petitioners are wondering whether the rangers have become cannibals, because they are not producing the bodies of those they kill.

7. 	Due to these incidences, the people of Nwoya District are extremely aggrieved, and that is why they are petitioning this Parliament. 

8. 	Unconfirmed reports have revealed that activities relating to the exploration of the oil could be sending out animals from the national park. 

9. 	We the area Members of Parliament are also finding it difficult to access our constituencies located in the park area. For instance, they cannot access parts of Chobe and Paraa Safari Lodge and neither can they ably address staff who are working within the oil fields. 

Mr Speaker, the petitioners, therefore, pray that Parliament:

1.	Resolves that the Uganda Wildlife Authority immediately compensates the affected people for their crops, animals and other property that have been destroyed by wild animals.

2.	The Uganda Wildlife Authority should immediately compensate the families of the dead for loss of their loved ones and produce the bodies of the deceased people for decent burial.


3.	The Executive Director and any other official of the Uganda Wildlife Authority found to have been involved, facilitated or sanctioned the offending actions mentioned above should be asked to relinquish his or her office and be prosecuted for criminal liability.

4.	The borders of the national park be clearly demarcated to avoid conflict with the local community. 

5.	All people arrested from Nwoya by the Wildlife Authority should be detained only in detention facilities nearest to their areas as required by the law, and immediately be produced in the nearest courts, specifically in Gulu or Amuru instead of Masindi. Them being in Masindi is denying their family members access.

6.	All elected leaders of the district while on official duties should be allowed free access to the national parks to address their constituents. 

AND your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.

Your petitioners Mr Speaker, have hereby signed the petition and I would like to present their signatures as mentioned, but:

One, these are signatures of the petitioners from Purongo sub-county; it has their names, parishes, villages and the properties that have been destroyed and their telephone contacts.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How many are they?

MR TODWONG: These ones are about about 480 members of the sub-county. 

Two, I also request to present to you a list of petitioners from Koch-Goma sub-county who have signed for the petition and are 270 in total. I seek to present.

Three, this is a list of petitioners from Anaka sub-county, and they are 20. I also request to present to you photographs of the destruction caused and especially of people who have been killed as mentioned in the petition. Here with me is a photograph of one Mr Opio Justine whose body is missing up to now. 

Mr Speaker, I also would like to present to you photographs of homesteads and other properties that were destroyed by the wild animals. As you can see in these photos, elephants are feeding within the people’s settlements.

Lastly, I request to present to the House the petition itself. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the petition and the attachments to it. I refer this to the Committee on Tourism and Antiquities to handle this petition within the timeframe provided by the rules. It should be handled quicker because it is a more focused issue that should be dealt with. I thank you very much.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION OF CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Katoto?

3.23
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi District): I thank you, Mr Speaker.  Under Rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under what rule?

MR KATOTO: [HON. MEMBERS: “Rule 27.”] Rule 27.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. (Laughter)

MR KATOTO: It was an error made by the printer. 

To: The Parliament of Uganda, 

The humble petition of representatives of children with disabilities against violation of accessibility to their fundamental rights, presented by me, hon. Hatwib Katoto, MP, Katerera County, Rubirizi District.

SHOWETH AND STATES THAT:

1.	In Uganda, there is lack of respect for the rights of children with disabilities by family, communities, fellow children and other people and as a result disabled children do not get the care and protection they are entitled to like other children;

2.	Children with disabilities are rejected, mistreated (tied on trees, locked inside houses, denied food) not allowed to play  or attend parties, and considered curses, which makes them discouraged and stigmatised; 

3.	The petitioners are concerned about the inadequate accessories or aids for mobility, like wheel chairs, walking sticks, clutches, special shoes for physical impairment and learning aids, such as hearing aids, Braille and Braille papers;

4.	As regard to education, parents deny children with disabilities the opportunity to go to school considering them useless and, therefore, a waste of their resources;

5.	There are few teachers trained to provide education to children with disabilities and most teachers regard such children as slow learners;

6.	Communities, families and fellow children consider children who have albinism as ghosts, hence require protection;

7.	Children with disabilities are sexually abused by adults, thereby putting them at a risk of HIV/AIDS and other related diseases, yet in most cases they cannot seek help because of their physical and other conditions;

8.	The petitioners risk being poisoned because they are neglected by their parents, thereby becoming susceptible to all sorts of abuse;

9.	The petitioners are denied healthcare services because their parents do not take them to hospitals when they are sick, and even the health facilities  are inaccessible due to lack of specialised care for disabled persons;

10.	The representation of Persons With Disabilities (PWDs) does not adequately advocate for the protection and fulfillment of rights of children with disabilities.

THEREFORE by this petition, your petitioners pray that Parliament urges Government to:

1.	Ensure that all schools have facilities and learning materials that promote the learning of children with disabilities;

2.	Support secondary schools to include specialised education for children with disabilities;

3.	Develop special curriculum, examination and academic timetable that is friendly for children with disabilities to benefit from formal education;

4.	Include special needs training in all universities and teacher training institutions;

5.	Promote sign language in other professional courses to enable children with disabilities communicate with others;

6.	Provide or reduce prices of assisting devices or appliances;

7.	Monitor the implementation of laws, policies and programmes for children to ensure that children with disabilities are also protected.

8.	Increase awareness among communities about causes of disabilities in all its forms, including albinism; 

9.	Ensure accessibility to social services and public buildings;

10.	Fulfill the promises made towards the protection of children, particularly children with disabilities.

AND your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.

And hitherto, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures.

I beg to lay on Table the petition. I thank you, Mr Speaker and the whole House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have the signatures also, honourable member - for the signed petition, do you have the list?

MR KATOTO: The signatures are here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you honourable member. The petition is received on the record as laid on the Table. I refer this to the Committee on Social Services - Committee on Equal Opportunities, Gender – looks like it is a multi cross-cutting issue now – okay to the appropriate committee for immediate action to kick in. The 45 days rule still applies and then we take over from there. Please observe this time because there are so many petitions that this House has received and not worked on. 

I urge the committees to which these petitions have been referred to finalise with them and bring the issues back to Parliament. Those are the real issues affecting the people who brought those petitions and we need to deal with them urgently to give them the confidence that we are acting on their behalf. Please let us do that as it is only good manners to do that. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

VALUE-FOR-MONEY AUDIT REPORT ON THE MANAGEMENT OF THE ACCOMMODATION BY THE UGANDA POLICE FORCE

3.31
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a member of the Committee on Public Accounts and I am holding brief for the Chairman of that committee with instructions to lay these reports.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Report entitled, “Value-for-Money Audit Report on the Management of the Accommodation by the Uganda Police Force.” I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that.

VALUE-FOR-MONEY AUDIT REPORT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF FISHERIES MANAGEMENT MEASURES ON LAKE VICTORIA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, chairman of the committee.

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a report entitled, “Value-for-Money Audit Report on the Implementation of Fisheries Management Measures on Lake Victoria.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that.

REPORT ON THE VALUE-FOR-MONEY AUDIT REPORT ON THE MANAGEMENT OF THE PRESIDENTIAL INITIATIVE ON THE BANANA INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a report entitled, “Value-for-Money Audit Report on the Management of the Presidential Initiative on the Banana Industrial Development Project.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that too.

UNFPA/GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA EXECUTED PROGRAMMES/PROJECTS FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2011

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Chairman of the Committee on Public Accounts. But isn’t that for the year ended 2011?

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a report entitled “UNFPA/Government of Uganda Executed Programmes/Projects Financial Statements for the Year ended 31 December 2011.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that.

VALUE-FOR-MONEY AUDIT REPORT ON THE PROVISION OF MATERNAL HEALTH SERVICES BY THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a report entitled, “Value-for-Money Audit Report on the Provision of Maternal Health Services by the Ministry of Health.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that.

THE NATIONAL EMPLOYMENT POLICY FOR UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Excuse me, was six already presented?

MR MWIRU: No, it is the one we are handling.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How about five?

MR MWIRU: We already presented that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, continue.

MR MWIRU: (Expunged.)

THE SECOND NORTHERN UGANDA SOCIAL ACTION FUND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2011

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a report entitled, “The Second Northern Uganda Social Action Fund Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2011.”

MINISTRY OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT JOINT PARTNERSHIP FUND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2011

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a report entitled, “Ministry of Water and Environment Joint Partnership Fund Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2011.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

THE SECOND NORTHERN UGANDA SOCIAL ACTION FUND PROJECT - IGG COMPONENT IDA 4626-UG FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2011

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report entitled, “The Second Northern Uganda Social Action Fund Project/IGG Component/IDA 4626 UG Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2011.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.


REPORT AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
OF THE RURAL COMMUNICATION DEVELOPMENT FUND (RCDF) FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2011

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a report entitled, “Report and Opinion of the Auditor General on the Financial Statements of Rural Communication Development Fund for the year ended 30 June 2011.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and congratulations, Mr Chairman, for laying all the ten reports. Thank you. (Applause)

Hon. Members, in the distinguished strangers’ gallery, we have members and staff of the Parliament of South Africa. (Applause) They are led by hon. Humphrey Matome Mokgobi. They are here to share their experiences with their counterparts in this Parliament of Uganda. Among this distinguished delegation is hon. Alfred Nesi Bonisile who uses a wheelchair and will, therefore, not be able to take position in the Speaker’s gallery. I ask him to be allowed access to sit at the bar in order to join his colleagues. (Applause)

Honourable members, that is the full delegation from the Parliament of South Africa. Please join me in welcoming them and receiving them in the House. (Applause) You are very welcome. 

Guidance - hon. Rose Akol.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of guidance to do with the issue of value-for-money audit reports. So far, since the Eighth Parliament to date, the Auditor-General has managed to produce, in total, including these five reports, 45 reports. But in the history of both the Eighth and Ninth Parliaments, only one value-for-money audit report has been considered by the Public Accounts Committee and, therefore, debated here in Parliament. 

During the review of the Rules of Procedure, as a member of the Finance Committee, we tried to raise this issue of non-consideration of value-for-money audit reports due to the heavy backlog of work with the PAC, but somehow we didn’t go through in having a new committee that we had proposed to specifically look at value-for-money audit reports from the Auditor-General.

As I speak now, the Public Accounts Committee has 45 reports of which only one has so far been considered by the PAC since the Eighth Parliament.

My point of guidance, Mr Speaker, is on how we are going to proceed on this matter now that we have a backlog of 44 value-for-money audit reports still pending since the Eighth Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, but before I respond, may I ask the members sitting behind the bar to move in because by sitting there, you are not considered to be formally in the august House. Let the guest who has been allowed to sit there, sit there.

This matter definitely came during the review of our Rules of Procedure. It was debated, submissions were made, but somehow it was not captured. It is now a real situation that we have to deal with - 44 reports - only one having been given attention. The Public Accounts Committee is very busy, overwhelmed with on financial audit reports. Value-for-money audit has not received any attention.

Administratively, we should be able to do something to create some specialised team to help the PAC and Parliament in dealing with this matter. We will handle that administratively.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker for that guidance. The suggestion I have is exactly in line with that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If it is in line with my ruling, what else are you saying?

MR TUMWEBAZE: That is okay, but may be you could listen to my suggestion because I think it could help your ruling to be implemented well. 

The responsible committees of COSASE and PAC, because they have too much work, if their numbers could allow the members to make sure that attention is given to those reports, they could form sub-committees within themselves that are purely dedicated to those other pieces of work. And then, the committee could empower the sub-committees to act on their behalf to consider the reports, and then at the end, the committees own up the reports. Otherwise, the concern raised by hon. Akol, which we all share is that those reports will keep on piling up.

Mr Speaker, value-for-money audits are real time audits. They are time-bound; two years later, even the evidence can be tampered with. If it is an audit report on a road, the status of a road now, where an engineer auditor has established a fault, the same evidence cannot stand two years later. Maybe the sub-committees within the responsible committees could be tasked by the chairpersons of those committees, with your guidance, Mr Speaker, to specifically pay more attention to those reports as the mainstream committee handles other business.

THE SPEAKER: As I said, this matter will be handled administratively to see how best it can be used to solve this.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, this matter has been discussed by the accountability committees and we have agreed to share some of this work. For example, roads and other areas will be shifted to local government and other committees.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is why I said we should handle this administratively. I am sure some way will be found to deal with this matter in a more comprehensive way.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I thank the chair of the Public Accounts Committee for the report, but on number six he laid on Table the national employment policy for Uganda according to the Order Paper.

I just want to inquire under what circumstances a committee of Parliament would be the one to bring a national policy. Did we capture it right on the Order Paper? The National Employment Policy for Uganda is laid on table by PAC or it should be the minister responsible to lay on Table that policy? I just wanted some guidance and clarification from you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was that a policy document that was laid? Can I have a look at it? Actually, this is the National Employment Policy of Uganda. It is not a report and the letter is signed by Harriet Luyima for Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. It is addressed to the Clerk.

I order that the laying of the policy document under item 7(vi) stands expunged from the records of Parliament. It is improperly brought, it will be brought at an appropriate time or it can still be laid by the appropriate person. So be it.

Hon. Dr Epetait. We need to make progress, there is a huge debate coming up.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. You earlier on directed that any Member who is seated behind the bar should come out of the bar otherwise he would not be counted as being in the House. But fortunate enough, today, there is no Member seated behind the bar. 

But I want your clarification, Mr Speaker. Many a time many Members, actually for want of space, sit behind the bar. Can we take it that from now on, Members should not access those seats behind the bar?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is fully constituted as a bar once the bars are drawn. But once the bars are withdrawn it becomes part of the House. Each Member who wants to make a contribution – and I made this ruling earlier - should not use the Sergeant-at-Arms’ microphone; he/she should use the microphones here. Otherwise, he will be speaking from behind the bar.  

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE INQUIRY INTO THE PROCUREMENT OF THE EQUIPMENT FOR THE NATIONAL SECURITY INFORMATION SYSTEM, THE NATIONAL ID PROJECT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable Members. This matter has been on the Order Paper for a while and it is time we dealt with it comprehensively and finished it. May I know before I receive the report from the chair how many Members would like to make a contribution? You can rise and I see how many people are interested because that will determine the amount of time I will allot for the debate -(Members rose_)- you can now resume your seats.

You have made my work very easy, what that means for the chair is that I have to be very tight on the time I am going to allocate to each Member. I will give the chairperson of the committee 15 minutes to speak on the report, and I will give each Member who is going to contribute three minutes. So, organise your thoughts and accommodate them within three minutes.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Simon Mulongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As per the Rules of Procedure of this House, I have the liberty and honour to Table the minutes of proceedings of this committee pertaining to the investigations. I beg to lay them on Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let it be captured, the minutes, as such.

MR MULONGO: In accordance with the Constitution and the rules of this House, the committee responsible for Defence and Internal Affairs undertook an inquiry into the National Information Security System, which is commonly referred to as the National Identity Card Project and begs to report as below.

We are not going to read verbatim and, therefore, we will move very fast through the report capturing the salient issues, particularly key observations, conclusions and recommendations. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could you use the microphone more effectively?

MR MULONGO: Thank you Mr Speaker. As you may recall honourable colleagues the idea of the national data bank started well back in 2004 when Cabinet approved the setting up of a national bio-data bank in the Ministry of Internal Affairs and consequently the President did appoint the Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Internal Affairs to coordinate an inter-ministerial effort in the execution of this project.

The information system was, and is supposed to address particularly, timely registration and monitoring of citizenship, birth, marriages, deaths, aliens, refugees and so on; provision of social services; emigration; employment related activities like pension contributions, benefits, insurance and so on; law enforcement; electoral matters; taxation; and national population affairs.

Pursuant to this, the President, prior to the 2011 general elections, directed that the Ministry of Internal Affairs works with the Electoral Commission to ensure that the process of voter registration is undertaken using the resources available for the NSIS programme. 

Consequently, in February 2010, the government resolved to procure the NSIS equipment through single sourcing, a procurement method bypassing the PPDA, citing the crucial national interests that are pertained to such a project. It was on the basis of this that the Ministry of Internal Affairs signed a contract worth €64.231 million with a company called Muhlbauer ID Services GMB of Josef Muhlbauer from Roding in Germany. 

The contract was signed on 19 March 2010 for the supply of technology and other related services for the National Information Security System. The major goal of the NSIS was to set up a comprehensive population data bank for efficient and effective application and easy access by approved users, and it had mainly three phases. 

Phase one was supposed to update the national voters’ register including personalisation and issuance of the first national IDs; the second phase targeted nationwide mass enrolment; while the third phase was supposed to involve the modernisation and integration of population registration with other sector  matters. 

The committee was given five key areas to investigate:

a.	To ascertain the mode of procurement of this equipment;
b.	To examine the parties involved and their roles;
c.	To review the contractual dimension of the procurement;
d.	Appraise the progress of the NSIS based on the contractual timelines; and 
e.	Finally, make propositions as to how the NSIS was supposed to be regularised. 

As commonly adopted by this esteemed House, we adopted the methodology we considered extremely important to provide the relevant information to make the House informed to make decisions based on facts and evidence. 

To this end, the committee acquainted itself with a number of documentation regarding this project and also conducted site visits as well as meeting a number of witnesses who included but not limited to: The Minister of Internal Affairs, the ICT, the Electoral Commission, Auditor-General, Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, PPDA, the honourable Ali Kirunda-Kivejinja, the technical team that travelled to Germany to assess the suitability of the firm, the Members of Parliament, formerly members of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs that travelled to Germany, the ESO, the Uganda Bureau of Statistics, the Bank of Uganda, the former Minister of Finance and the former Attorney-General. We also ultimately met His Excellency the President. 

As any other undertaking of this nature, we also suffered certain limitations particularly regarding the huge scope of the work which would not allow us to go on and on as we would have wanted. However, the committee obtained the information it considers sufficient to facilitate the analysis, draw conclusions and generate reasonable recommendations. 

The report is organised in three main parts: Part one includes the background information and terms of reference. Part two anchors the inquest; it delves into key findings. The third is on the general and the cross-cutting issues and finally the fourth, is on the overall conclusions and recommendations. It is worth noting that in each of these phases, the committee chose to comprise key findings with conclusions before going into the necessary recommendations after every key witness that we managed to meet. 

As to the terms of reference, one, the committee was supposed to establish the mode of procurement of the NSIS equipment, the legal and policy frameworks employed and the actors involved as stated before in the terms of reference. I stated before that the NSIS equipment was procured based on a single-source procurement method while side-stepping the PPDA having classified the procurement as a security transaction. It will be noted that on 2 April 2008, His Excellency the President advised the Minister of Internal Affairs to, after consulting with PPDA, consider single-sourcing and to phase the project to cover elections and later issuance of the national IDs.  

The committee observed that the Ministry of Internal Affairs, referring to such communication from the President to use single-sourcing to mean that it was mandatorily supposed to go by the single-sourcing, which they did without clearance from the PPDA. Although the ministry presented letters from the President, which we have annexed to this report as a justification for selecting the Muhlbauer as the sole company of choice without any competitive bidding, the committee didn’t find evidence of a Presidential directive for single sourcing in any of the two letters, specifically directing them to proceed as such. In any case, the guidance of the letters didn’t amount to restricting to single-sourcing, let alone circumventing the PPDA regulatory framework, which effectively provided for classified procurement, but which was eluded. 

It was the conviction of the committee that the same letters were only advisory and the President explicitly advised the Third Deputy Prime Minister and then Minister of Internal Affairs in his letter dated 13th February 2010 to consult with the PPDA with a view of getting an objection to single sourcing in line with the provisions of the law. As it emerged, the PPDA explicitly objected to single sourcing as contained in the correspondences attached to the report. 

The committee reviewed submissions by several witnesses who made reference to a meeting that took place in State House on 13 March 2010 of which no record was availed to the committee, which is said to have sanctioned this procurement. 

The committee made conclusions to this transaction as follows: 

i.	There was no adequate due diligence carried out as directed by the President as the focus was mainly on the Muhlbauer ID Services Company in Germany.

ii.	There was no comparative study conducted to ascertain the fairness of the prices quoted by Muhlbauer.

iii.	PPDA didn’t clear the single sourcing of the contractor as claimed. 

iv.	The procedure laid down in Section 42 of the PPDA Act for conducting classified procurement was never followed and deliberately avoided. 

v.	There was no pre-shipment inspection of the equipment in Germany neither was there any technical audit to confirm the content and condition of the equipment upon arrival in this country. 

vi.	The certificate of origin was only presented to the committee, dated at the time of meeting with the Muhlbauer officials. 

Consequently, the committee recommends as follows: 

a.	The procurement for the classified supply of both goods and services should always, without exception, adhere to the PPDA regulatory framework regardless of the urgency. 

b.	In future, adequate, informative and exhaustive due diligence should always be carried out by the procuring entities, prior to binding Government to acquisitions of such magnitude and importance to the country. 

c.	The approval of contracts should be based on technical and financial competitiveness as provided for under the PPDA Act.

The second term of reference was to examine the parties involved in the procurement process and their various roles. Mr Speaker, I would like to make it brief on each of the key parties that played a crucial role in this contractual execution.

Rt Hon. Ali Kirunda-Kivejinja, the then Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Internal Affairs  was the overall coordinator of the project to whom most of the correspondences were sent and by whom the project activities were directed. We observed that by the letter dated 2 April 2008, His Excellency the President required him to provide political leadership in revamping the efforts to build a national population data bank. 

The same letter appointed him as Leader of the stakeholders, which included the Ministry responsible for ICT, that of Finance, that of Local Government, the Attorney-General, Office of the President, Security, the Electoral Commission, the Bureau of Statistics and other bodies that were called from time to time to participate in the process. 

The committee observed that although the minister believed that there was sufficient justification for the project to be classified as of a security nature, he deliberately avoided and ignored laid down procedures under the law. He, therefore, failed to provide correct political guidance to the ministry, which failed to follow established procedures for classified procurement under the PPDA.

Despite the technical and professional guidance provided by PPDA, the minister ignored this advice and went ahead to single source the German company to which he dared to take full responsibility as warned by the PPDA.

Permit me to move to the conclusions on page 14, which we state as follows:

•	That contrary to the President’s directive to have exhaustive due diligence, this was restricted to Muhlbauer headquarters at Roding, leaving out its performance in Congo Brazzaville and elsewhere.

•	That there were no comparative prices obtained.

•	That hon. Kivenjinja’s actions were reminiscent of determination for single sourcing as the only option available to PPDA Executive Director, short of which it was regarded as undermining the project.

•	That the meeting at State House, Entebbe at which it is said the single-source method of procurement was cleared only provided guidance for classification to the project, but did not have legal capacity to override the PPDA.

We, therefore, recommend that the former minister, hon. Ali Kirunda-Kivejinja, as the overall political head of the procurement of the project, should take full responsibility; political, financial and administrative for the anomalies and losses occasioned and observed in the conduct of the procurement of the NSIS project.

The PPDA point of entry into the project was by invitation to the procurement activity by the Third Deputy Prime Minister. On page 15, we observe that the Authority in its response dated 12 March 2010 advised the entity, that is the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, that this procurement should have been subjected to an open and competitive procurement process in order to ensure transparency and value for money.

PPDA further advised that the fear of causing delay in the electoral process of 2011 general elections could have been mitigated by the use of a shorter bidding period, which the Authority was willing to grant on request by the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

(f) That the Accounting officer issued a response to the Authority in his letter dated 15 March 2010, which is annexed as Annex 5 informing the Authority that the procurement, “was not a business for PPDA but could be handled under the classified procurement provided for under the Act.”

Four days from the issue of the above letter on 19 March 2010, the accounting officer, that is the Ministry of Internal Affairs, went ahead and awarded the contract to Muhlbauer ID Services against the advice of the PPDA and the contract is also attached as annex 11.

The PPDA Act in section 42 permits for defence and security agencies to carry out classified procurements and indeed lays out a procedure, which in this case was not followed.

The committee observes as follows:

(a) That the PS, Ministry of Internal Affairs construed the President’s advice to “consult the PPDA” to mean seeking clearance for single-source procurement. This is also evident in the communications to the PPDA in which, following the State House meeting of 13 March 2010, he dismissed the PPDA from classified procurement process.

The committee concludes as follows: 

That the accounting officer, Ministry of Internal Affairs, deliberately overlooked the provisions of the PPDA Act in irregularly awarding the contract to Muhlbauer and subsequently signing the agreement, contrary to the express advice from the PPDA. 

The PS, as the top most technical officer, erred when he argued that having politically agreed on the classified procurement at the State House meeting, it “was not a business for PPDA” anymore, whereas the same classified procurement is well addressed under the PPDA. 

The PPDA did not, at any stage, clear or provide any waiver for the direct procurement method in respect of this project. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that:

a) 	The accounting officer should, in line with Section 26 of the Act, take full responsibility for the anomalies in the conduct of the procurement process.

b) 	That the accounting officer should suffer the administrative and financial consequences thereof.

c) 	The procuring institutions of Government must respect the PPDA and the advice therefrom in procurement of services and supplies to avoid undermining established order and to ensure transparency and competitive procurement.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, allow me to also touch briefly on the role of the Ministry of ICT. Their point of entry is well stated on page 17. Two points here is that they were not involved in the procurement of the project. However, the Minister of State for ICT then, hon. J.C. Alintuma Nsambu constituted the team and actually led the team that travelled to Germany for due diligence.

On page 18, despite the important role this ministry was mandated to play in the project, it was not represented in the meeting held on 13 March 2010.

The ministry was not allocated and has not been allocated any funding especially for the second phase where, under NITA-U, it is responsible for its implementation.

I will move to the conclusions on page 19 in which the role of the ICT is expressed. 

a) 	No funds have ever been provided to the ministry to facilitate NITA-U to handle the project yet NITA-U is supposed to house and manage the central data bank but it has not been facilitated to play its role.

b) 	That NITA-U Secretariat, envisaged under the NSIS project framework, is not yet functional.

Recommendations

a) 	That the Ministry of Internal Affairs, in conjunction with other stakeholders, should undertake to regularise and operationalise the Secretariat of the NSIS to facilitate smooth implementation of the project.

b) 	That the ministry responsible for Finance should provide funds for the operationalisation of the NSIS project, which has stalled at the moment.

c) 	That the Minister of ICT should be allocated funds especially for this second phase where under NITA-U, it will be responsible for its implementation.

Electoral Commission 

Electoral Commission did not also directly get involved in the procurement. However, they were involved in the due diligence. Refer to the copies annexed as such.

On page 20, the committee observes that the lack of financial arrangements between Electoral Commission and Ministry of Internal Affairs put voter updates at a risk because this is a mandate and activity for which the Electoral Commission should budget for. It is not clear how this equipment under the Ministry of Internal Affairs could be used free of charge yet it requires maintenance, once this equipment is used by Electoral Commission and returned to the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

Conclusions

On the role played by the Electoral Commission in the NSIS project, the committee concludes that:

1.	The MoU between the Electoral Commission and Ministry of Internal Affairs emphasised the transfer of Shs 30 billion from the Commission to Internal Affairs for disbursement to Bank of Uganda for venture transfer to Muhlbauer. This money was initially budgeted for electoral purposes and Shs 30 billion had to be transferred to Bank of Uganda for purposes of the Internal Affairs Ministry to undertake the procurement of the equipment.

2.	That due diligence undertaken by the EC, despite the instruction by the EC Chairman to include the visit to Congo Brazaville, was only limited to Muhlbauer headquarters. They never went anywhere else.

Recommendations

a) 	Any use of NSIS equipment by the Electoral Commission should be defined based on sustainable arrangements to avoid ad hoc ones that exist now.

b) 	That the use of the NSIS equipment should be supported by a clearly drawn up legal understanding that shall include making good the loss or damage arising out of the use of such equipment.

c) 	That the Ministry of Internal Affairs in conjunction with the Electoral Commission and other stakeholders should undertake to expeditiously and fully implement the remaining phases of the project to provide Ugandans with an updated, clean, accurate and reliable voters’ register.

d) 	That the Ministry of Internal Affairs should undertake to comprehensively insure the NSIS equipment and other associated property against losses and other dangers that could occur to the expensive equipment currently stored with UPPC at Entebbe.

The role of the technical team that went to Germany 

We looked through the report given by this committee and made certain observations. One on page 22, some Members of the Eighth Parliament on the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, together with a technical team from the Ministry of Internal Affairs also visited Germany with the purpose of assessing the capacity of Muhlbauer to deliver. They reported that they were satisfied with the capacity of the company. 

The team from Parliament comprised of hon. Kasamba Mathias, hon. Hussein Kyanjo and hon. Kamba Saleh. 

Hon. Alintuma Nsambu as well was singly talked to in terms of his role. 
a)	He was appointed by the Third Deputy Prime Minister to lead the team. 

b)	He attended the meeting at State House and he was also present when the PPDA heads agreed that the project be procured under single sourcing. 

c)	He worked with Ugandan engineers attached to Muhlbauer company campus for one year at the cost of the company for training such staff. 

d)	His visit was funded by the Ministry of ICT. This was a contested matter. Initially we were told by ICT that he went there on other accounts but it was confirmed that the ICT ministry bore the costs. 

Observations

a)	The issues raised by hon. Alintuma Nsambu to the effect that hon. Michael Mawanda had competing business interest in the NSIS project should not go unchecked to obtain the truth. 

b)	 While appearing before the committee, the current minister of state for ICT, hon. Nyombi Thembo, asserted that there was no record in support of facilitating the former minister, but as I said, this was confirmed to the contrary. 

Recommendations

a)	Investigations should be carried out to establish the business interests of hon. Michael Mawanda Maranga in Contec as well as in the NSIS project. 

b)	Investigations should be carried out to the logical conclusion on the disparity of information related to the funding of hon. Alintuma Nsambu’s trip to Germany despite the information we received of course to the contrary from the PS that they finally financed him.

Mr Godfrey Nabongo, is the manager for communications and public relations at the Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS), and he was the secretary to the procurement of this process.

The committee reports further that he made reports of the visits to Germany, but also we would like the House to note that his second trip to Germany was funded by Muhlbauer. 

Observations

Mr Nabongo played an active role in the procurement of the project. He was not only the secretary to the process but also a signatory to the agreement.  

The role of UBOS

Mr Nabongo was playing this important role on behalf of the Executive Director who was not properly informed of the necessary details of the project.

The Executive Director told the committee that he did not sanction Mr Nabongo to sign the agreement on behalf of either the Bureau or Ministry of Finance.

Recommendations

a)	All concerned Government agencies should coordinate and where possible share usage of facilities to minimise costs and avoid wasteful expenditure as the case is in the NSIS equipment and population census equipment.

As you may realise in the details which I did not have time to state, UBOS was supposed to use NSIS’s equipment in its population census exercise but they chose to take their own path.

b)	The degree of success of the NSIS project is dependent upon effective representation of the delegates to their superiors.

c)	For smooth and efficient implementation of the project, there is need for all the stakeholders to maintain close communication and participation.

Office of the Attorney-General

a)	It may be recalled that the Constitution, under Article 119(3) and (4), spells out the role of the Attorney-General. 

b)	The issue of clearance by the PPDA was brought up by the Office of the Attorney-General with the Ministry Of Internal Affairs which requested it to clear the signing of the agreement. 

c)	The then Attorney-General, hon. Khiddu Makubuya, attended the 13 March 2010 meeting at State House in which procurement of this project was discussed. 

d)	The representative of the Solicitor-General argued that the State House meeting was sufficient for the waiver and that since the PPDA team agreed to it, no further clearance was required. 

e)	The office of the Attorney-General, however, confirmed to the committee that classified procurement was handled in line with section 42 of the PPDA Act.

Observations

a)	The representatives of the Solicitor-General argued that the meeting at State House, under chairmanship of the President, cleared for the single sourcing. This argument was corroborated by the President. This notwithstanding the committee observed that there was a deliberate disregard of the procurement laws of Uganda since such a meeting is not provided for in the laws related to procurement. (Applause)

b)	The role of the AG is mainly on the legality of the agreement and not on the due diligence of the company that Government is entering into contract with. If the office receives a contract that the user department is satisfied with, then it will proceed to analyse the legalities and not the company including the contracts committee on the user.

c)	The representative of the Solicitor-General had actually objected to the use of direct procurement and duly advised the Permanent Secretary and accounting officer Ministry of Internal Affairs to use open bidding to ensure value for money. 

d)	The contract in issue was duly cleared by the Attorney-General under his hand and we have annexed the instrument that the Attorney-General used to clear disregarding the PPDA that had objected to this.

Recommendations 

a)	The AG should get committed to the constitutional mandate to advise Government correctly and objectively. 

b)	While he is referring to agreements for perusal and clearance by the AG, Government should consider allocating reasonable time for the AG to carry out this function as spelt out in the Constitution because we realise they have a lot of work and they do not have adequate staff. 

c)	The government should consider reviewing the remuneration of its civil servants particularly the situation in the AG’s office because we noted that the attraction and retention of staff is extremely minimal, high turnover in the Ministry of Justice.

d)	The Executive should desist from influence peddling the technical officers to side-step well laid down procedures most notably the PPDA Act and the regulations thereto while binding the country to such important procurements.

External Security Organisation (ESO)

The Third Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister of Internal Affairs at the National Security Council meeting held on 12 March 2010 verbally attacked ESO to produce a due diligence report on Muhlbauer within a week. 

The report was handed over to the Third Deputy Prime Minister and the committee observed as follows:

a)	Instructions and directives to ESO were verbal, which can be susceptible to misinterpretation. 

b)	The timeframe for one week given to ESO was considered too short for a good and dependable due diligence report.

Recommendations

a)	For Government to benefit adequately from the due diligence investigations, it should accord sufficient time to its agencies such as ESO. 

b)	Instructions or directives to agencies such as ESO need to be in writing and accorded sufficient timeframe. There should also be enough resources to undertake such tasks.

Meeting with the Team from the Muhlbauer ID Services

The Muhlbauer team said they got to know about the project through the Germany Ambassador to Uganda. They did not participate in any bidding since there was no tender advertised. They, however, informed the committee that they had previously participated in the bidding process for the biometric system of the Electoral Commission but the process was not concluded. 

The company was selected on the basis of its experience and the time required for doing the work as few companies in the world according to them could do this kind of magnitude of work.

The company stated that they had fulfilled all their contractual obligations including training of 4,000 Ugandans who carried out the enrolment, cleaned up the national register of 13.5 million people and had supplied over six million virgin cards ready for imprinting the details.

The team proposed a way forward which was as follows:

a)	To produce the national ID cards, it was necessary to refurbish and construct a national data and personalisation centre.

b) 	That the Ministry of Internal Affairs undertakes to finalise phase II regarding mass enrolment.

c) 	That the Ministry of Internal Affairs undertakes to appoint or hires competent staff to carry out the business. 

d) 	That the Government of Uganda should provide adequate funding.

e) 	Muhlbauer is supposed to respond, within three months, upon availability of the building and funds as well as staff to set up the personalisation equipment. That is the one which captures the images and particulars of individuals; and 

f) 	That Muhlbauer is to support Government in the mass enrolment exercise. 

The committee agreed, in principle, with the proposed way forward to form part of the roadmap.

Meeting with the Deputy Governor Bank of Uganda

This is extremely important, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. 

a) 	The Bank of Uganda stated that in March 2010, the Governor was requested by the Minister of Finance to make payments on behalf of the Government of Uganda to Muhlbauer, a total of €64 million, in accordance with the specified schedule which was attached to the agreement. 

b) 	The minister requested that the Bank of Uganda immediately pays €23 million on submission of an advance payment guarantee from a commercial bank acceptable to Bank of Uganda. 

c) 	The payments made by Bank of Uganda were fully reimbursed by Government.

d) 	The Bank of Uganda Act, in section 33, permits Bank of Uganda to extend temporary advances to Government up to a maximum of 18 percent —

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, a short interruption. I can see the South African delegation have left the Chamber but we still have the honourable member in the bar. We could use this opportunity to allow him withdraw and then we can proceed.

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was on page 30 and I was stating that the Bank of Uganda Act, in section 33, permits Bank of Uganda to extend temporary advances up to a maximum of 18 percent of Government recurrent revenue and to charge market interest rates on these advances. 

e) 	The maximum balance at any one time on the credit advanced to Government in respect of this project was Shs 64.7 billion between April and June 2010. The outstanding balance was fully cleared in February 2010.

f) 	The Bank of Uganda charged an interest rate of eight percent on outstanding advances to Government. 

g) 	The Bank of Uganda played no role in the procurement process except for settling the obligations.

h) 	Bank of Uganda was informed by the Minister of Finance, in her letter dated 29 March 2010, that the PS Ministry of Internal Affairs would inform Bank of Uganda whenever payments were due, and that Bank of Uganda made all payments as instructed by the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The Ministry of Internal Affairs did not instruct Bank of Uganda to pay the shortfall of €7.8 million referred to by the Auditor-General. That was captured from the report of the Auditor-General.

i) 	On 10 February 2012, the Director of Citizenship and Immigration Control at the Ministry of Internal Affairs instructed Bank of Uganda to make final payments and then close the loan account, which was consequently closed.

Observations

Bank of Uganda processed payments to Muhlbauer in accordance with instructions made to it by the Minister of Internal Affairs. The bank fulfilled its obligations accordingly.

Meeting with hon. Syda Bbumba, former Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

a) 	The committee was informed that the former Minister of Finance was responsible for mobilising resources to fund the project, which role was limited to sourcing funds and ensuring payments to the contractor. 

b) 	The former minister demonstrated that she followed the law.

c) 	She attended only two meetings with the President.

d) 	The Ministry of Finance funded the acquisition of the ICT equipment and training.

e) 	The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA) rejected the single sourcing of a provider but Ministry of Internal Affairs insisted on grouping this project as “classified procurement”.

f) 	The Ministry of Finance did not have a direct role in either the procurement or negotiation except going by what had been decided by the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

Observations

•	The Ministry of Finance played an essential but limited role in the procurement of the service provider for the project. 

•	The Ministry of Finance served to facilitate the implementing ministries to secure funding for the project through Bank of Uganda and subsequently, a supplementary budget which was duly approved by Parliament.

Conclusion

The former Minister of Finance undertook her obligations within the law and acted on clearance of the Attorney-General to provide for funding for the project to the extent that the funds were available. 

The committee recommends that she is cleared of wrongdoing.

Meeting with hon. Khiddu Makubuya, Former Attorney-General

Hon. Khiddu Makubuya provided the committee with written responses in which he outlined a number of issues:

a) 	He states how he got involved in the NSIS project through Cabinet work. 

b) 	The technical officers at his office participated in the negotiations.

c) 	Neither the person nor the office of the Attorney-General (AG) signed an agreement with the German company.

d) 	It was not the understanding of the AG’s chambers that the exercise of the mandate of the office of the AG was subject to approval of the PPDA.

The committee would like to observe as follows:

i) 	The hon. Makubuya, whilst arguing correctly that such contracts must adhere to the laws of Uganda, goes on to argue that clearance by the Attorney-General simply indicates the contract’s constitutionality and legality. What he does not state is whether by failing to meet the PPDA’s requirements, it still meets the legalities referred to.

ii) 	Furthermore, hon. Makubuya argues that it was not his understanding that the mandate of the Office of the Attorney-General was subject to approval by PPDA. The fact is that the office of the Attorney-General is expected to take into consideration the PPDA in clearing contracts of this nature for signature. This is because hon. Khiddu Makubuya was aware of the communications between the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the PPDA, as well as his participation in the State House meeting which endorsed the direct procurement. The contention was, therefore, not a new subject to him. The committee observed that hon. Khiddu Makubuya, and the Attorney-General’s Office as such, agreed that the PPDA was not followed and that no such clearance was obtained from the PPDA, which is most important.

Recommendations

a) 	The former Attorney-General, hon. Makubuya, should take full responsibility for the irregular clearance of the NSIS procurement and agreement which was in total disregard of the PPDA. 

b) 	The Executive should desist from erroneously encouraging technical officers to side-step well-laid down legal requirements, such as the waiver from PPDA in this case.

Meeting with His Excellency the President

The committee was informed as follows:

•	His Excellency ran through the history of this country regarding electioneering and pointed out the problems and challenges the country faces regarding electioneering. 

•	He stated that the technology software earlier bought by the Electoral Commission in 2006 introduced photographs but could not solve the problem of central memory to determine the identity of voters. 

•	He stated that the Muhlbauer was introduced to him by the German ambassador and hon. Alintuma Nsambu as the manufacturer of the software that could solve Uganda’s identification problems. A demonstration was actually carried out at State House.

•	He said that there was no time to follow up the tendering procurement process owing to the desire to use the software starting with the January elections in 2011.

•	After the meeting at State House, there was an agreement that the project be handled as classified procurement. 

The President suggested the following as a way forward:

a) 	Consider alternative staff, particularly existing staff in local governments such as community development officers at sub-county level, for mass enrolment as Government seeks funds for specific data entry staff to be recruited and trained to carry out the exercise.

b) 	The budgetary re-examination and subsequent reallocation of some lines to support the execution of the project to be undertaken.

Terms of reference No.3: Review of the Contractual Dimension of the Procurement

This term of reference is important, Mr Speaker and honourable members. The committee established that:

a) 	The project was started without conducting any feasibility study and did not follow the PPDA Act and regulations. There was no project plan to articulate the objectives of the project and the various phases through which it would be implemented.

b) 	By 31 December 2011, a sum of Shs 150 billion had been paid to the contractor for contractual obligations and yet till this date, no funds had been allocated to the Ministry of Internal Affairs for operationalisation of the project. There were no funds for the renovation or construction of buildings, furniture, office equipment, personnel, communication equipment, training and transport. The sum required for this project was Shs 72 billion.

c) 	The audit which was carried out by the Auditor-General revealed that the project was started without identification of the source of funding and that funding was borrowed from Bank of Uganda at an interest rate of 8 per cent per annum. The committee also noted that by 30 June 2011, the interest which had accrued on the borrowings amounted to Shs 3.2 billion. This interest is a cost which could have been avoided if the funding had been properly identified through the budget.

d) 	The contract agreement with Muhlbauer was worth €64.2 million. After payment of the €23 million, the outstanding balance of €41.2 million was payable in quarterly instalments over a period of 24 months from the date of signing the contract, that is 19 March 2010. Interestingly, the agreement between the supplier and the ministry provided that if the payment was not received by the maturity date, that is in that quarter, a charge of 1.5 per cent interest per month of the total invoice would be added to the balance. 

e) 	By March 2012, Bank of Uganda had occasioned an outstanding quarterly payment of €7.8 million to which this charge of 1.5 per cent was applicable. 

f) 	The contract was priced in Euros, and at the time of signing the contract the Euro was at a rate of Shs 2,814. By the time of signing this report, the exchange rate had risen to Shs 3,300. This implies that there is an increase in the amount outstanding to the tune of Shs 7.7 billion. This exchange risk could have been minimised by hedging since the ministry was aware that the future quarterly payments were supposed to be made in foreign currency. 

g) 	The project experienced significant delays on key deliverables such as the establishment of the National Data Bank and security enrolment. Only 400 cards out of the expected 3.5 million have been personalised, of which only 218 national IDs have been issued. With such delays, the project is not likely to meet its intended purpose on time. 

Recommendations 

a) 	Government should undertake to have insurance cover for the various NSIS equipment. 

b) 	The Ministry of Finance should provide the Shs 127 billion (Shs 40 billion for repayment and Shs 87 billion for operations), required in this financial year 2012/2013, to retire the contractual obligation and to operationalise the project.

c) 	The Ministry of Finance in conjunction with the Ministry of Internal Affairs should provide, in the reviewed budget, for losses accruing from fluctuating foreign exchange. This has not been provided for.

d) 	The Electoral Commission should make good the loss of missing or damaged equipment which they used in the general elections of 2011.

e) 	The Electoral Commission together with the Ministry of Internal Affairs should pursue vigorously, to a logical conclusion, the reported cases at Police.

General Observations

Before I conclude, we have made observations on the President’s letter in which we conclude that his letter was advisory. When you look at the wording, categorically and specifically they were to the extent that the Ministry of Internal Affairs considers single sourcing but in full consultation with PPDA.

Comparative pricing was not done as directed by the President. Due diligence to Congo Brazaville and other areas to ensure that Muhlbauer was well-tested and experienced in its performance elsewhere was not undertaken except the trip to Germany. 

The PPDA clearly objected to this procurement because according to them, a magnitude of this nature needed to be subjected to competitive bidding; and secondly, even if they wanted it under classified, they should have followed the PPDA law, which they did not.

The technical team which travelled to Germany did not include any official from the Ministry of Internal Affairs yet it was the parent ministry coordinating the project.

The due diligence by External Security Organisation (ESO) - as stated before, it was observed that it was given insufficient time and the ministry did not seem to give regard to the information supplied by the ESO. They stated, for example, that some of the directors in this company had questionable integrity but this was not taken into account by the Ministry of Internal Affairs fully. It is only the PS who stated that they used part of it in designing the agreement.

The committee wonders why this signing was so rushed. It observed that this project was procured in haste. There was no adequate time allowed for ascertaining the company’s ability to deliver the required service, obtaining reliable evidence of due diligence of the company and ensuring value for money in the project as had been directed by the President.  From 13 February 2010, the contractor was identified on 19 March 2010 and a contract executed in the period of only five weeks; that is between 13 February 2010 and March, 2010. 

This haste exposed the project to untold vulnerabilities; and the government risks loss of significant sums of money, given that the project was implemented without plans, budgets and a clear source of funding.

Status of the Project

a)	The project equipment worth €64 million is kept at the UPPC premises at Entebbe. It awaits to be commissioned. 
b)	 The Muhlbauer company has fulfilled its obligations under this contract. 

c)	The government is yet to attain the following as per the agreement with Muhlbauer:

i) 	Building or setting up the National Data and Personalisation Centre.
ii) 	Mass enrolment of nationals.
iii) 	Refurbishment and construction of the Data Centre.
iv) 	Final contractual payments, close to Shs 40 billion.

It will be noted that a sum of Shs 146.4 billion is necessary both for retiring the obligations and operationalising the project fully.

Conclusion

In conclusion, the committee did its investigations to obtain the information deemed necessary to support its conclusions and recommendations. 

To the committee, this project was conceived in good faith, with good intentions. There is evidence that it is actually a good project only that there are hindrances which need to be cleared, resources to be procured, infrastructure to be put in place to ensure that the project is executed.

The committee identified critical shortfalls particularly in the procurement of the project. There was outright breach of the procurement laws, dishonesty on the part of some senior officials, both political and technical, whose roles are highly questionable. Those found responsible for occasioning loss regarding the project procurement and implementation should take full responsibility and the committee prays that Parliament resolves to have clear and deserving penalties against such officers by the relevant authorities for mismanaging a project of a magnitude of about Shs 200 billion.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much. I know I have exceedingly gone beyond the 15 minutes but I hope we will improve the skills of the art of presentation of similar reports. Thank you very much. I beg to move. (Applause)

Mr Speaker as per the procedure, permit me to lay on the Table some important documents which the committee used or relied upon in its work.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are they attached to the report? 

MR MULONGO: They are attached to the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If they are attached to the report, then lay the report itself. It captures all that.

MR MULONGO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the enquiry into the procurement of equipment for the National Security Information System (NSIS), otherwise known as the National ID Project, with the attachments thereto. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the report of the committee and the 17 attachments to it as forming part of that report. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for a very clear - I cannot say concise - but very clear and elaborate presentation of this report and very eloquent too. Thank you. 

Honourable members, we had agreed on some procedure on how we are going to handle the debate on this matter. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance. When we initially agreed that we would give each one three or so minutes, I thought it was a very small and easy report to understand. However, after the presentation, I can appreciate how much time the committee has put into this report; it is detailed. So, I would like to seek your guidance if you would consider it prudent that we begin the debate tomorrow to allow us to study this report. [Members: “Aye”].

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was not a question; as far as I remember, the honourable member rose on a point of guidance. So, you are saying “aye” to the guidance. (Laughter) Honourable member, can you say it in a form to which they can respond “aye”?

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Having listened to the report of the committee and appreciated how detailed it is, I would like to move that we start the debate on this report tomorrow. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue is clear. The presentation has been made today, and I still stick to the time of three minutes that we have agreed on; I will not change that one. The honourable member is saying that we could go, look at it and reflect on the presentation from the chair and also look at the report and come back tomorrow to begin the debate properly. I put the question to that. Should I put the question? [Members: “Yes”] Ok; I put the question to the motion that the debate on this matter be deferred to tomorrow. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, I seek guidance from you, and this is to do with the issue of the budget process. We started on 1st April and we have dully looked at the National Budget Framework Paper, made our recommendations and we have received the budget as Parliament. 

The legal framework of the budget is very clear; all vote holders - ministries, departments and all other agencies - should have brought their policy statements by 30th June to Parliament. The parliamentary sectoral committees can then begin their work of reviewing the budget policy statements. It is also in the Budget Act that by 31st August, we should have passed the Appropriation Act to enable Government have resources in time for the activities proposed in the Budget. 

Mr Speaker, today is 3rd July and I checked in my pigeon hole, there are only six policy statements, that is for Ministry of Water and Environment, Ministry of Public Service, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs, Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife, and Ministry of Energy and Minerals. Those are the only policy statements so far. 

The budget process is so specific and time bound and it requires the Executive to have forwarded these policy statements by 30th June. Therefore, I seek your guidance. By now, the committees should be preparing to start reviewing these policy statements so that by 31st August, we are in time, in accordance with the legal framework, and that is the Budget Act. So, when do we start this process when we only have just six policy statements? The law says by 30th June they should all be in.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Akol. Honourable members, you will agree with the observation that we have not had a system of the official receipt of policy statements by this House. There is no record. They come and somehow enter into the committees. So, we do not have a timeframe when they should come to the House. Has it been happening that way?

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, the legal framework governing the budget process is very clear; by 30th June, all ministries, departments and spending agencies who have votes should have presented their policy statements. That is what the law says.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, what I am saying is, how are they presented to the House? There is a gap there, and I would like to clear that gap today. This is because policy statements come to the pigeon holes and then somehow committees start on them. We do not have a specific date on which Parliament formally receives these reports. 

Therefore, I order as follows: all policy statements by the Government will be laid on the Table of Parliament and those which have been put in the pigeon holes should be laid by the ministers responsible tomorrow. (Applause)  On Thursday, we will have the list of all the ministries and budget holders who should be laying papers listed on the Order Paper, and we will be calling them one by one to see who has not yet brought their policy statement. We will go through the ritual of a list. If a ministry does not have a policy statement, we shall need an explanation why it is not there. It is accordingly directed. 

MR AJEDRA: Mr Speaker, I want to echo what my colleague has said.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have already ruled on that. Is there any other business that does not relate to the Speaker’s ruling on this matter?

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. By the time we concluded the first Session of Parliament, the Minister of Finance was supposed to come with two reports. One was to do with the Youth Venture Fund and another to do with the USE disbursement fund. Up to now, these reports have not come to the House. So, I seek guidance from you; when shall we have these reports presented to the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It would not be proper to seek the date from the Speaker if they were not reports but ministerial statements. I received a copy of a letter written by the Speaker addressed to the Minister of Finance on that subject. It is urgent and I want to ask the Leader of Government Business in the House at the moment that we want these statements in the House next week. Let it be next week. We do not want to set a date that is difficult to implement. Let us be reasonable; Tuesday next week, we should have these reports in Parliament. 

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, on the same note, we raised a question in this House in relation to the health status of the Government referral hospitals in this country and you directed that the minister makes a statement. It has been recurrent on the Order Paper and because of the way the situation is in the country, we need this statement. So, I seek your indulgence that you direct that the minister comes up with the statement at the earliest time possible, so that we can address the pathetic situation in the country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: All those statements that are pending should be acted on quickly. That applies to statements and parliamentary questions that have been submitted through this House to the ministers. The members are losing confidence in parliamentary questions because they are never responded to in time. That is why we are having this big load of national importance issues even when matters could be dealt with by questions. We want to emphasise and implement the rules on parliamentary questions so that they should be responded to in writing and statements made here.

So all pending questions and statements from the Government should be dealt with in the course of the next two weeks and we close that chapter, so that by the time we go to start the debate on the State of the Nation address, these matters should be finished. Is that clear? The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock, and I mean 2 o’clock. (Laughter)

(The House rose at 4.50 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 4 July 2012 at 2.00 p.m.) 

