

Tuesday, 24 July 2018

Parliament met at 3.16 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to thank you for the work you have being doing over the last few days. 

We shall be adjusting the Order Paper to bring up item No. 11 so that we can deal with the committees today. We shall bring it up immediately after item No.3. The Minister of Public Service will make his statement and then we come to the constitution of the committees. I would like to invite all the whips to be here in the next one hour so that we can handle that issue.
 
Secondly, last week I was invited to the International Criminal Court (ICC) in The Hague to celebrate their 20th anniversary. There is still a big struggle in the world to end impunity and the work of the ICC is still going on. I would like to acknowledge the work of the Trust Fund for Victims under that court, which has been used, to some extent, to rehabilitate and support our people in northern Uganda. Let us also continue supporting them at all levels.
 
Thirdly, at the local level, I visited Ngora this weekend. Among the issues raised by the population - some have been writing to the relevant ministers – was the Agule-Alelesi-Ngora Bridge. I know that this issue was raised here and we are waiting for a response from the minister. It is a matter of very grave concern for those people. I hope the minister can come quickly to handle that issue. 

The people of Teso are also very concerned with the failure to open Soroti University despite the fact that this House passed a budget of Shs 13 billion in the financial year 2017/2018. Staff members have been recruited but the National Council for Higher Education has not issued the necessary licence for it to operate. We want the Minister of Education and Sports to come and explain to us why Soroti University has not yet become operational especially after we appropriated the money.
 
On a happy note, I would like to congratulate the Government, through the Prime Minister, for the construction of the Gulu-Acholibur-Kitgum-Musingo Road. I was in Kitgum on Saturday and I used the road; it is good. I had gone to celebrate the life of Irene Gleeson who did a lot of work during the war. 

I would like to thank the Government and to say that this road will ease access to the markets. People will be able to move their goods and services. We congratulate the Government and the people of that part of the country for receiving that good road. (Applause) Please make use of it to make money.
 
On a sad note, honourable members, our Director for Legal Affairs, Mr Pius Biribonwoha, has lost his father, the late Mr Aloysius Rwamwema Biribonwoha, who died today. I would like to invite Members to stand up for a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Some Members had a few issues of national concern to raise.

3.22
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have an issue of serious national concern to raise. 

I come from an agricultural area where we majorly depend on crop and animal husbandry. The tragedy that has befallen my area and indeed the whole country is the terribly falling price of maize. As you are aware, or may have heard, there is a big outcry in the country. Right now in my area, a kilogramme of maize goes for just Shs 200. From an acre of maize, one expects about 1.5 tonnes, which is about Shs 200,000 if you sell at the price, and yet you have to invest about Shs 400,000 to cater for the whole acre. This means that my farmers and the people I represent are being pushed into a serious corner of poverty. 

I had a meeting with the big business people in my community and they informed me that the markets that used to consume our maize are closed. They no longer take maize to South Sudan, Congo, Rwanda and Tanzania. They say that you can now take it to Somalia and in small amounts to Kenya, but these are not as big as the former markets. 

My concern is that the ministry responsible should explain to Ugandans why they target markets and close them at the time of harvest. You are aware that the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) gives out seeds including maize. You give people seeds, they put in money and time but when they are hoping to get money and take children to school, you close the markets.
 
The same thing has befallen cattle keepers. For the last one and a half years, we have not been selling cows openly. They institute quarantines even when there is no disease on the ground. People have to sell their cattle at night cheaply. A cow that would go for Shs 1,000,000 is bought at Shs 500,000 or Shs 400,000. Closing a day market and opening it at night for a few to benefit is crippling my people in poverty.
 
Madam Speaker, I know this could be a cry of other people –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue is national. Hon. Keefa Kiwanuka and hon. Sebaggala were going to raise the same issue.
 
MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I wish to give my friend is that this has not happened because the markets are closed. Do you remember the one per cent withholding tax, which was levied on agricultural produce? It is also affecting –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that right now, it needs someone –

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members! Please conclude.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: I thought a point of order had been raised against me. Madam Speaker, I wish to tell the public that right now in Mubende, someone needs to sell 50 kilogrammes of maize to buy one kilogramme of meat or four kilogrammes of maize to buy at least half a kilogramme of salt. The situation is bad and it is high time the Government came up with a stabilisation fund as it used to do in the past. I thank you.

MR KAMUSIIME: Madam Speaker, it is also prudent at this time for us to think about our silos and regional stores. At such a time, Government would come up and buy from farmers at a good price and then later, in times of need, they can redistribute. Right now, the country is flooding with maize but in the next few months, we are going to have a problem of hunger in this country. 

Madam Speaker, I feel pained. When we are not working well, the people are on our shoulders, and I can tell you that many children are going to run out of school because their parents cannot support them. I beg that Government comes out and explains to us why we have this problem and why our maize is not going to the markets. Government should do whatever it takes to ensure that our farmers take advantage of what they are doing to earn a good living and also get out of poverty. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, I raised a similar issue on the Floor of Parliament. The next day, hon. Twinamasiko of Bugangaizi East County raised a similar issue. Are we proceeding correctly without getting a proper statement from Government on a way forward? We have a lot of pressure from our people. Shall we keep coming here to lament one by one, or we should give Government an opportunity to explain to us the situation and we agree on a way forward?

THE SPEAKER: This is a very serious issue. It goes to the core of livelihood of the citizens of this country, who are farmers. Wasn’t the minister directed to bring a statement? I am told that the minister was not in the House. However, this is a very important issue; we would like to have a statement tomorrow. The issue was raised last week and we are raising it again. Today I have four Members who want to raise the same issue.

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg that you allow the ministry to come up with a paper on this. We are going to prepare a paper to present to the House.

THE SPEAKER: Will the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives present the paper?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Are you presenting it tomorrow?

MR WERIKHE: It will not be possible. We request that we come with it on Thursday. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. 

3.29
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I think we all have to declare our personal interests - We are maize growers and therefore, this issue affects all of us. 

I just want to inform you, Madam Speaker and the august House, that the President was informed about this. We drew his attention to this matter which is affecting the masses. He gave a general statement. He talked about what used to happen when Government used to deduct money from the crop and keep it in the price stabilisation fund. If in the next season prices fell beyond acceptable levels, then Government would come in.

However, Cabinet has not discussed this matter. We were planning to bring it up on Monday. It is a matter of change of policy. We are operating in a liberalised economy; in the last season, maize went up to Shs 1000 and yet this season, it is at Shs 200. Therefore, it is a general policy which we will need to shift and Cabinet has to first sit and agree. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to beg that you allow us to expeditiously handle this matter collectively in Cabinet and the minister can come and present what Cabinet has decided. To say that the minister is going to respond on Thursday before Cabinet has taken a decision will be misleading this august House. I humbly request that you give us up to Monday, so that we come with the statement on Tuesday. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter involves a number of ministries. Maybe, the trade ministry alone may not be able to answer entirely for the other sectors as well. Do you mind if we handle it on Tuesday? Will it be on the Cabinet order paper on Monday? This is urgent.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I will make sure that Cabinet discusses this matter on Monday.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Cabinet should discuss this matter on Monday and come to us on Tuesday, so that we can advise the country on how to move through this crisis.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Madam. The clarification I am seeking is based on your communication. You talked about a bridge in Ngora. In Kanungu, there is a bridge which I have always talked about here, which connects Kanungu to Rukungiri. It is not where the main road passes, but around that area there are many primary schools. Since that bridge broke down, we have lost three pupils as they crossed the bridge using big logs. Big logs were placed across the bridge but they have not helped us much.

I have been talking about that bridge here – it is in Nyamirama Subcounty - but there is nothing that has been done about it. There is no response from Government and I do not know why. The Prime Minister promised us here that they will respond, but I do not see anything on the ground. I wish they could also respond very fast to our plight. We do not want to lose more children on that bridge.

THE SPEAKER: Did you say that it is in Nyamirama Subcounty?

MS KARUNGI: Yes, it is in Nyamirama Subcounty. It connects Nyamirama to Bwambara Subcounty. 

THE SPEAKER: Is that the famous bridge that broke many years ago?

MS KARUNGI: No; the other one was the main bridge. This one is not the main bridge, but we also use it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Works and Transport is not here, but we will require a response concerning that bridge. It is true that the honourable member has raised that issue a number of times. The Minister of Works and Transport needs to come and brief us about that bridge on Wednesday next week.

3.36
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Quite a number of areas in this country suffer from hunger every year. We brought World Food Programme (WFP) from Rome to Uganda, with the late Ateker Ejalu. The whole purpose of bringing WFP into this country was because we produce a lot of maize. The Swedish Cooperative Society built silos for us. While other governments are buying maize from Uganda and taking it out of the country, why can’t the Government of Uganda buy maize and keep it in silos for a rainy day?

THE SPEAKER: They sold the silos.

MR WAMANGA WAMAI: They sold the silos. Now, there is plenty of maize; a kilo of maize is going at Shs 200 to Shs 300. Government should take advantage and buy all the maize and store in the silos. Ugandans should not be suffering from hunger at all. This is an agricultural country. Why don’t we store the maize and keep it for those people when they will be suffering because of hunger?

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, hon. Wamai is raising very important issues. I also know that a number of other colleagues have issues and ideas to contribute. However, you have just guided that we wait for Tuesday. When Government brings the statement, we shall discuss it and come up with a way forward. 

I wonder whether we are proceeding well to continue entertaining issues when the ministers are not here, like the Minister of Agriculture. They are in the State House receiving the Prime Minister of India – (Interjection)– I rose on a point of procedure; you are out of order to raise a point of order. (Laughter) Mine is a procedural point.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we want a full debate and answers. Let us wait until Tuesday. Agriculture is so important; we shall give it enough time, so that the Members can raise the necessary issues. Thank you very much. 

In the public gallery, we have students and teachers of Kaliro College Secondary School. We are happy to see you. They are represented by hon. Kenneth Lubogo and hon. Margaret Mbeiza. You are welcome. (Applause)

On this side, we have pupils and teachers of Joy and Jolly Primary School in Mukono Municipality. They are represented by hon. Nambooze and hon. Peace Kusasira. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.37
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the banning of airtime scratch cards by the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC). 

In a meeting held on 19 March 2018, UCC came up with a directive that airtime scratch cards should be banned. They directed that telecom companies should stop selling airtime in form of scratch cards. They did this without giving any reason and without any prior sensitisation or consultation with the public. 

Indeed, telecom companies have complied. I have had the opportunity to move deep in the villages around the country in over 20 districts. I have discovered that Ugandans who live in rural settings are suffering. They cannot access Easy Load services or mobile money, which are the avenues that were proposed by UCC and which the telecom companies now require Ugandans to use as alternative methods of buying airtime. 

Madam Speaker, this has crippled people’s businesses. Communication is becoming very hard since people cannot access airtime. The majority of our population is illiterate. Loading airtime on a phone using mobile money or Easy Load requires reading and yet not every Ugandan can read. Ugandans cannot now access their leaders or relatives; this policy has greatly inconvenienced them. 

I would, therefore, like to urge this august House to come up with a resolution demanding that UCC comes up with a clear road map through which this directive will be implemented. Ugandans are living in darkness as far as this issue is concerned. We cannot just look on as Ugandans are suffering and yet us, their leaders, are here. This august House must come up with a solution to this issue. 

The mobile money that they are referring Ugandans to is not even regulated under any law. The airtime scratch cards should be maintained and made readily available to the public. Uganda Communications Commission cannot even hide under environmental concerns. We have seen buveera or polythene bags all over the market and so I do not think that the airtime scratch cards can be a bigger threat to the environment. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will ask the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance to come and explain to the country the ban on airtime scratch cards so that the population can know. Can we ask him to bring that statement on Tuesday. 

3.42
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County West, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, which relates to the trade relations between Uganda and China. 

Just last week on Thursday, I received a call from a friend who had travelled to China with a diplomatic note from the Government of Uganda but had been locked out of a hotel in China. The established information was that the hotels had been directed by the Chinese police not to allow citizens of Uganda, Kenya and Nigeria on account of some people from those countries having committed offences in China.  Therefore, this particular individual had to plead with the Chinese Ugandan associations to accommodate her because she could not be accommodated in the hotel, even when she had an official passport. 

My appeal to Government is to quickly work on this issue because as we know, as an economy we depend largely on trade between China and us. It is a matter that needs to be addressed. 

I previously approached the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and asked them whether we have any reciprocal enforcement arrangements between Uganda and China. One can obtain a judgement against a Chinese national in Uganda but it cannot be enforced in China. Some Chinese businessmen come to Uganda, engage in agreements, receive money from Ugandans, go back to China and Ugandans have no redress there. One, this is because of the deliberate language barrier; and two, because of the vast nature of the Chinese society - the country and the population is big and Ugandans end up in the cold. 

Therefore, my appeal to Government is to quickly work on this and stabilise these relations whose escalation may cause more damage to our trade relations. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter raised by hon. Sseggona has reminded me about what happened in the Ninth Parliament. One of our Members, who is also a businesswoman, at some point travelled to China but she also suffered the same way; they did not allow her in particular hotels. It is really a serious issue. 

Therefore, I would like to ask the Minister of Foreign Affairs to come and explain to us how he is going to handle that. Recently, we had big Chinese leaders here and we celebrated our relationship and friendship with them. However, now if after the leaders leave, this is what happens to our people, there should be some explanation. Therefore, the Minister of Foreign Affairs should come and speak to the House on that issue next week.  

3.45
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

On 1 July 2018, three people sustained major injuries after an accident at Walusubi near Lugazi Central Division along Kampala–Jinja Road. It involved a Tororo Cement truck and a Nile Breweries lorry. They had to cut out the victims from the wreckage because they had been severely injured.

Again on 9 July 2018, a trailer that was speeding, heading to Kampala, rammed into a guest house at Kikawula and property was destroyed. It was at almost the same spot where the previous accident of 1 July had occurred. 

On 21 July 2018, that is three days ago, a police patrol car that was speeding rammed into a trailer and a police officer died on the spot. Again, this accident happened at almost the same spot as the previous ones.

Yesterday, on 23 July 2018, three people died on the spot in an accident when a truck rammed into a private car that was coming from Kampala. Two Canadian nationals, who had just been picked from the airport, and a five-year-old boy sustained severe injuries. This happened at Kitega near Lugazi, almost at the same spot. 

Madam Speaker, you will recall that last year, we lost hon. Cyrus Amodoi, the Toroma Member of Parliament in Lugazi Municipality due to over speeding. In that same year, 16 people died on spot when a taxi had a head-on collision with a trailer at Sagazi, Buryanteete, in Lugazi Municipality, almost at the same spot. 

My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that you direct the Minister of Works and Transport to put road humps between Mabira Forest and Kitega to control the speeding vehicles that are killing more Ugandans than the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF). I pray that this is done in the meantime as we wait for the road redesigning that the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) promised us last year. 

Secondly, I pray that like on Masaka Road, we get the police Fika Salaama operation on Jinja Road. I so pray.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I actually do not know the policy on humps and rumble strips. When I was driving on that Musingo Road, part of the road had some strips but other roads in Uganda do not have. Therefore, works minister, please come and explain to us what you are going to do about the outstanding requests to deal with accidents between Kitega and Mabira, and especially the need for humps or rumble strips.

3.34
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter that concerns the people of Serere District. 

For a long time, the people of Serere and Teso in general were cattle keepers until they lost some of their cows. When that happened, the Government tried to restock Teso. We have got some cows but also individually, we have restocked our cattle. The Government decided to help us by providing some coolers for milk processing. However, because of the way it was handled, it is unfortunate that there have been some challenges especially in getting the milk delivered to those cooling places, in addition to other challenges such as high tariffs. 

It is not only about the milk cooling plants. Under CAIIP II, Serere District was a beneficiary of a number of grinding mills that were constructed. During construction, they were supposed to have provided electricity and generators. In Kasilo, where we have three, they only extended power lines but did not deliver the generators. Therefore, the farmers’ associations that were supposed to run the maize and rice milling machines are now facing challenges of high power tariffs. 

There are now some officials, including an army brigadier from NAADS, who came to Kasilo and ordered the milling machines to be dismantled and transferred to an unknown destination. They did not go through the district, the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) or even the concerned people. They did not even go to the subcounty headquarters in Bugondo Subcounty; they instead went straight to where the grinding mills were in Kasilo Town Council and wanted to dismantle them. People rose and almost lynched them. 

I do not know what has happened because we do not what to take the law into our hands, like one time hon. Ecweru had to when we had an industry that was making ox-ploughs called Soroti Agricultural Implements and Machinery Manufacturing Company (SAIMMCO). People went there to dismantle it but hon. Ecweru organized the Arrow Boys to go and arrest the people who had gone to dismantle that plant.

Last week, together with hon. Okabe and hon. Helen Adoa, we received information that a certain driver from the ministry had gone with a team to dismantle the coolers and the generators and carry them from Serere. Again, given the vigilance of the people of Serere and Teso in general, they arrested and beat up the driver and he was lucky because he was delivered to the District Police Commander (DPC). However, up to today, the vehicle and the machinery are still lying at Serere District headquarters.

Madam Speaker, I would like to know from the Government whether they have now changed their policy and they want to take back the machines that they had given to us - the SAIMMCO plant, the grinding mills, milk coolers and the generators. The people of Serere demand to know this; otherwise, we are not ready to just let them go easily like that.

This problem is not only limited to Serere District; other parts of Teso have also been affected. We have been trying to recover and we have taken it upon ourselves to engage in agriculture. Therefore, we want to know this. However, I think these are individual actions because the District Internal Security Officer (DISO) told me that he had similar problems with the same army brigadier in Luuka District. This brigadier works under NAADS; I think he is called Brig. Waiswa. I met him one time and I told him - I see hon. Rwamirama nodding; I think he knows the army officer. 

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I do not want this practice to extend to other places. Government must come in and bring those people to book. We shall sort out the issues of high power tariffs; we shall also demand that the generators be delivered, so that our farmers and the local people can benefit from this. I know it is not a Government thing but there are individuals who are very corrupt and getting involved in these bad practices; we need to be helped. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether that falls under the agriculture sector. Hon. Rwamirama, you used to be in the Ministry of Agriculture, maybe you can tell us.

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (VETERAN AFFAIRS) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank my colleague, hon. Okupa, for bringing this matter to the attention of the House. 
There are three issues involved in his statement. The first is under capacity. I would like to thank him because when I was a Minister of State for Agriculture, I got support from the honourable colleague and he benefited most - I think you have three in your constituency.

On the issue of under capacity, we have been encouraging people to go for animals that yield more milk. In some places, people have introduced high-yielding breeds. We provided hydro-liquid nitrogen tanks in Serere and availed semen so that people can convert the local cows to high quality animals. However, yes, that challenge is still there. In some districts like Soroti, they have changed and they have milk. Therefore, the issue of capacity needs to be handled by improving the breed of the animals. 

Madam Speaker, I commissioned those plants and I will bear witness that all those plants had generators. However, I hear that one brigadier was also trying to steal a generator. Therefore, where there is no generator, it means it was stolen because we made sure we supplied cooling plants with generators. These were very good generators from the European Union and we had not had any breakdown of those generators.

Madam Speaker, I also became a beneficiary of these facilities; they were very good quality machines - European standards. Therefore, I need to follow up on the name of this guy who is dismantling property of the cooperatives of the Serere people and we shall deal with him. Certainly, Government is not taking away property because we handed it over; it is property of the cooperatives.

On the issue of the tariffs, I think Parliament needs to work together with the Government to find a lasting solution to the tariffs. We had negotiated that farmers get an industrial rate - (Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama has just responded to very important issues raised by hon. Okupa, which we all appreciate because we know he is going to take action. However, is it in order for him to refer to an individual well known to him as a “guy”? 

For purposes of the record of this House and for people who will be reading, is it in order for the honourable minister to keep saying, “We are going to deal with this guy” yet the name of that individual was clearly mentioned? What he needed to do was to repeat the name. When the minister says “this guy” we do not know which guy he is going to deal with. Is the minister in order to just stop at that? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Elijah Okupa did not give us a name. He said he is a brigadier – Is he Waiswa? Is he from Busoga?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I had said “brigadier” but then I remembered the name; he is Brig. Waiswa.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, now you know the name. 

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I would like to assure the House that we are going to identify Brig. Waiswa and we will take appropriate action. 

On the issue of tariffs, Government is making every effort to reduce the tariffs. I think the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development should come here and tell us about this. We had recommended that the coolers given to farmers should be given priority and the power is charged at an industrial rate so that the farmers can afford the power.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to the next item.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to seek clarification on the issue of tariffs. Last year, the President said there was intention on the part of Government to nationalise electricity services – (Interjection) - Not Umeme because it is not our company. I also think there was a resolution passed by the ad hoc committee of Parliament, where I sat, that investigated this sector.

Following our resolution and the President’s statement that they were going to nationalise electricity services, may I seek clarification from the minister on the steps that have been taken and whether there have been exemptions. This is important because since the President made that statement, there has been an increase in tariffs at least twice every year. We actually exempted them from taxes. Thank you.  

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I was actually talking about tariffs and not the nationalisation of the electricity supply. Anyhow, on the tariffs, I would like to be on record that we had negotiated with Umeme and the energy ministry. Where we have coffee processing plants, milk cooling plants and maize haulers, in the spirit of value addition and improvement of our –(Interruption)          

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order. The Government of Uganda has absolute control and is the regulator, through the Electricity Regulatory Authority.  That means it must authorise any increment in tariffs. However, by the minister telling this august House that they are negotiating with Umeme as if to beg the person they are regulating, is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I believe last week the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development came back to the House on this issue. I think our rules do not allow us to come back on the same issue in the same session. We have had two statements on that; let us leave it.

Honourable members, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Murchison Bay Naomi Froese Church of God Nursery and Primary School in Makindye, Kampala. They are represented by hon. Ibrahim Kasozi and hon. Naggayi Nabilah Sempala. You are welcome children. (Applause) 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE HOSTING OF THE GLOBAL PEACE LEADERSHIP CONFERENCE (GPLC) 2018 IN KAMPALA

4.03
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli-Mukasa): Madam Speaker, I am very happy to announce to the House that Uganda is indeed going to be privileged to host the Global Peace Leadership Conference 2018 in Munyonyo, Kampala, from 1 to 2 of August this year.

The President of Uganda approved the request to host the Global Peace Leadership Conference 2018. He also served as the honorary chairman in a meeting he chaired on 1 July 2017. This meeting was attended and supported by His Excellency Abeid Amani Karume, the former President of Zanzibar; Mr David Caprara, the International Vice-President of the Global Peace Foundation, USA; Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, our Deputy Speaker; and Peace Service Ambassador, Milton Kambula. Cabinet approved the budget for hosting the Global Peace Leadership Conference in March 2018. We are expecting over 1,000 guests from all over the world to attend this conference.

The conference was officially launched on 12 April 2018 by His Excellency the President at State House, Entebbe. That launch was attended by the former President of Zanzibar, His Excellency Dr Abeid Amani Karume, and the Prime Minister, the Second Deputy Prime Minister, Cabinet ministers and some Members of Parliament. 

The Global Peace Leadership Conference 2018 mobile application and website were launched and it was a live event on television.

Madam Speaker, the Global Peace Leadership Conference is an annual event and is the brainchild of the Global Peace Foundation, which is an international non-sectarian, non-partisan and non-profit organisation that promotes an innovative value-based approach to peacebuilding and national transformation. The foundation operates in the United States of America, Japan, India, Korea, Brazil, Ireland, Indonesia, Philippines, Malaysia, Uruguay, Paraguay, Nepal, Iraq, Mongolia, Nigeria, Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda. It engages and organises a global network of public-private social sector partners who develop community, national and regional peacebuilding models as the foundation for ethical and cohesive societies. 

The conference was hosted in Kenya in 2010, the USA in 2012, Malaysia in 2013, Paraguay in 2014 and Philippines in 2017. This year, it is going to be hosted here and it will be hosted in South Korea in 2019, focusing on the unification of the Korean peninsula and tackling economic imbalances in the world.

This will be a two-day residential conference under the theme, “Moral and Innovative Leadership: New Models for Sustainable Peace and Development”. It will be hosted at Speke Resort Munyonyo with the following meetings and concurrent sessions:

i) 	Regional heads of state will have a strategic roundtable meeting after the opening plenary session to agree on practical ways to work together in peace and security.
ii) 	The inter-religious and intercultural partnership meeting.
iii) 	Global women session.
iv) 	Global youth exchange programme.
v) 	Sports-for-peace programme.
vi) 	Transform education session.
vii) 	The Parliamentary roundtable.
viii) 	Tour the Pearl of Africa programme, which is optional.

This conference is a very good opportunity for the country because as we talk, there is need to stop the increasing conflicts and levels of instability in the world. There is also need to adopt new education models that will enable students to graduate with jobs, ethical culture, creativity, entrepreneurship and 21st century competencies. This will also position Uganda as a regional and international peace messenger upon which the foundation to become a Permanent Member of the United Nations Security Council can be launched. This is also to honour H.E the President with the Global Peace Award 2018 for leading peace efforts in the world.

Our role has been to organise as a country the GPLC Kampala 2018, and this has been done using the normal procedure of the National Organising Committee (NOC). We expect at the end of the conference to see –

i) 	Increased social cohesion, unity in diversity, peace and security in the Great Lakes Region, which is consistent with Uganda's overall foreign policy; 

ii) 	Improved inter-religious partnerships to jointly promote regional peace and development models;

iii) 	Moral and innovative leadership launched and adopted by the public service, inter-religious, Civil Society Organisations (CSOs) and cultural institutions to champion transformation in the Great Lakes Region;

iv) 	Reduced identity based conflicts, violence, instabilities in families and corruption in public service;

v) 	Recognition of Uganda after hosting the Global Peace Conference 2018, notably because of its regional efforts on peace and security, the resettlement of refugees, the successful track-record in the fight against HIV/AIDS, and the country's conducive economic climate;

vi) 	Recognition of Uganda as a strategic location in the heart of Africa with ease of connectivity to the rest of the world after a successful Global Peace Leadership Conference held in Kampala;

vii) 	To expose Uganda as one of the world's best destinations for tourism. It will also cement our image globally as a peaceful nation.

We expect over 1,000 participants and so far 970 participants have confirmed attendance; 728 are Ugandans while 242 are foreign. So far, six incumbent heads of state and former heads of state like H.E Olusegun Obasanjo, former President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, and H.E Dr Amani Abeid Karume, former President of Zanzibar, have confirmed attendance and a few others.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I would like once again to inform this Parliament that the Government of Uganda in partnership with the Global Peace Foundation, USA will host this high-level international conference at Speke Resort Munyonyo on l and 2 August 2018. I would like to invite Members of Parliament to attend and participate in the conference, especially the parliamentary roundtable. The modalities for attendance will be worked out with the Speaker.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that Parliament adjourns its sittings on 1 and 2 August 2018 to enable the Members of Parliament to attend the conference. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. As the time draws near, we shall remind the Members. I will address the other issues later and inform the House.

CONSTITUTION OF SECTORAL COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 184 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am glad that we are finally going to designate our Members to the committees. I would like to remind you that we need to balance the membership and the composition. In the last session, there were committees that if we had been strict, would not have been allowed to speak on the Floor because they did not have sufficient numbers and then there were those that were grossly oversubscribed. 

I appealed to the whips before that we try and ensure that we share out the opportunities and the committees. I would like to remind the Opposition that you cannot exceed three members on each committee, the independents cannot exceed four and the Government side should not exceed 20. Remember, no committee will have more than 30 Members. Let us ensure that we are represented everywhere. Clerk, where do we start from?

4.15
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to designate the following NRM Members of Parliament to the following sectoral committees - I will mention the chairpersons and vice-chairpersons respectively as per rule 184 (2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I have tried to balance, Madam Speaker, and to take your concerns on particular committees. 

I would like to begin with the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. I have 16 Members although I am entitled to 20.

Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries

1. 	Hon. Janet Okori-Moe
2. 	Hon. Lawrence Akugizibwe 
3. 	Hon. Jalia Bintu
4. 	Hon. Robert Migadde
5. 	Hon. Everlyn Chemutai 
6. 	Hon. Catherine Lamwaka 
7. 	Hon. Vicent Woboya
8. 	Hon. Albert Lokoru 
9.	Hon. Carolyn Nanyondo 
10. 	Hon. Joseph Koluo 
11. 	Hon. Aisha Sekindi 
12. 	Hon. Terence Achia 
13. 	Hon. Joseph Kakooza 
14. 	Hon. Peace Kusasira
15. 	Hon. Cosmas Elotu 
16. 	Hon. Kezekia Mbogo   

The committee chairperson is hon. Janet Okori-Moe and the vice-chairperson is hon. Lawrence Akugizibwe. I beg to designate.

4.18
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, on our part, we have also tried to balance. We have:
Hon. Santa Alum Ogwang
Hon. Veronica Nanyondo Namaganda
Hon. Francis Gonahasa
Hon. Harold Tonny Muhindo
Prof Morris Ogenga-Latigo

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite hon. Akamba to assist me with the independents.

4.19
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Madam Speaker, I designate the following:
Hon. Kenneth Eitunganane
Hon. Lilly Adong
Hon. Godfrey Watenga 
Hon. Julius Mukasa Opondo

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those are 25 Members. The number is within the limit of 30 members. I put the question that those Members proposed be approved for the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs

4.20
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, I beg to designate the following Members:
Hon. Doreen Amule
Hon. Moses Nagwomu
Hon. Fred Mwesigye
Hon. Richard Oseku Oriebo
Hon. Hillary Lokwang
Hon. Ibanda Rwemulikya
Hon. Margaret Lamwaka
Hon. Judith Babirye
Hon. Dononzio Mugabe
Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo
Hon. Herbert Kabafunzaki
Hon. Sarah Najjuma
Hon. Muyanja Mbabaali
Hon. Robina Hope Mukisa

THE SPEAKER: You missed out hon. Everlyn Chemutai.

MS NANKABIRWA: Yes, Madam Speaker. It is because she was mentioned in the committee in charge of agriculture. The chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs is hon. Doreen Amule and she is deputised by hon. Moses Nagwomu. I beg to designate.

4.21
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, for the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, we have the following:
Hon. Mubarak Munyagwa 
Hon. Gilbert Olanya
Hon. Hassan Kaps Fungaroo
Hon. Muhammad Muwanga Kivumbi

I beg to designate.

4.22
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Madam Speaker, to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, I would like to designate the following Members:
Hon. Francis Zaake
Hon. Kato Lubwama
Hon. Lucy Achiro 

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those are 22 Members. I put the question that those Members who have been proposed be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on East African Community Affairs

4.23
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, to the Committee on East African Community Affairs, I designate the following Members:
Hon. George Ouma
Hon. Agnes Ameede
Hon. Sarah Kityo Babirye
Hon. Noeline Basemera Kisembo
Hon. James Baba
Hon. Caroline Kamusiime
Hon. Christopher Kalemba
Hon. Agnes Kunihira
Hon. Gordon Bafaki
Hon. Grace Namukhula
Hon. Safia Nalule 
Hon. Catheline Ndamira
Hon. Henry Kibalya
Hon. Felix Okot Ogong

The committee chairperson is hon. George Ouma and the vice-chairperson is hon. Agnes Ameede. I beg to designate.

4.24
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): On our part, Madam Speaker, again we have balanced thoroughly. We beg to designate-
Hon. Angelline Osegge
Hon. Nabilah Naggayi 

I beg to designate.

4.24
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba):  Madam Speaker, I beg to designate the following Members to the Committee on East African Community Affairs:
Hon. Veronica Babirye Kadogo
Hon. Jane Nabulindo
Hon. Gerald Karuhanga
Hon. Hood Katuramu

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those are 20 Members in total. The number is within the limit of 30. I put the question that those Members who have been nominated be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Education and Sports

4.25
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, for the Committee on Education and Sports, I have the following Members to designate:
Hon. Jacob Opolot
Hon. John Twesigye Ntamuhiira
Hon. Stephen Kisa
Hon. Isaac Etuka
Hon. Michael Ayepa
Hon. Robert Musoke
Hon. Maria Goretti Ajilo
Hon. Molly Lanyero
Hon. Geoffrey Macho
Hon. Margaret Baba-Diri
Hon. Idah Nabayiga
Hon. Julius Acon 
Hon. Sheila Kabeija 
Hon. Nathan Itungo Twesigye
Hon. Ismael Orot
Hon. Janepher Egunyu
Hon. Hellen Adoa

Hon. Jacob Opolot is the chairperson and hon. John Ntamuhiira Twesigye is the vice-chairperson. I beg to designate.

4.26
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, on our part we have the following:
1. 	Hon. Emmanuel Ongiertho 
2. 	Hon. Allan Ssewanyana
3. 	Hon. Joseph Ssewungu
4. 	Hon. Joy Atim Ongom

I beg to designate.

4.27
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Madam Speaker, to the Committee on Education and Sports, I beg to designate the following Members:
1. 	Hon. Christopher Kipterit
2. 	Hon. Jacob Opolot Richard
3. 	Hon. Moses Kasibante
4. 	Hon. Lydia Chekwel
5. 	Hon. Margaret Rwabushaija. 

I beg to designate 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those are the 25 Members designated to the Committee on Education and Sports. I put the question that the Members who have been nominated be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development

4.28
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I have 17 Members to designate to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development:    
1. 	Hon. Henry Musasizi 
2. 	Hon. Jane Avur Pacuto 
3. 	Hon. Charles Ilukor
4. 	Hon. Amos Lugoloobi 
5. 	Hon. Elly Asiku 
6. 	Hon. Anthony Okello 
7. 	Hon. Isaac Mulindwa 
8. 	Hon. Walyomu Muwanika 
9. 	Hon. Genensio Tumuramye 
10. 	Hon. Mr Remigio Achia 
11. 	Hon. Jovah Kamateeka 
12. 	Hon. Katoto Hatwib 
13. 	Hon. Mariam Naigaga 
14. 	Hon. Patrick Isiagi Opolot 
15. 	Hon. Lawrence Bategeka 
16. 	Hon. Jack Odur Lutanywa 

The chairperson is hon. Henry Musasizi and the vice-chairperson is hon. Jane Avur. I beg to designate.

4.29
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP,  Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we have the following Members:
1. Hon. Judith Franca Akello 
2. Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi
3. Hon. Anthony Akol 
4. Hon. Ssemakula Luttamaguzi. 

I beg to designate.

4.30
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Madam Speaker, I beg to designate the following Members to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development:
1. 	Hon. John Bagoole Ngobi
2. 	Hon. Julie Mukoda Zabwe
3. 	Hon. Francis Mukula
4. 	Hon. James Kakooza. 

I beg to designate. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those are 28 Members designated to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. They are below the maximum of 30 Members designated to serve in sectoral committees. I put the question that the Members who have been nominated to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Foreign Affairs

4.30
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Foreign Affairs, I have 15 Members:
1. 	Hon. Hood Katuramu 
2. 	Hon. Violet Akurut 
3. 	Hon. Fred Angella 
4. 	Hon. Kajungu Mutambi 
5. 	Hon. David Abala 
6. 	Hon. Gordon Arinda 
7. 	Hon. Bildad Adome 
8. 	Hon. John Baptist Nambeshe 
9. 	Hon. Ssuubi Kyinyamatama 
10. 	Hon. Christine Achen 
11. 	Hon. Connie Nakayenze 
12. 	Hon. Loy Katali 
13. 	Hon. Moses Balyeku 
14. 	Hon. Peter Mugema 
15. 	Hon. Bonny Okello.

Madam Speaker, the chairperson of the committee is hon. Hood Katuramu and the vice chairperson is hon. Violet Akurut. I beg to designate. 

4.31
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, to the Committee on Foreign Affairs, we designate the following three Members:

1. 	Hon. Atkins Katusabe 
2. 	Hon. Jack Wamai-Wamanga 
3. 	Hon. Lyandro Komakech.

I beg to designate. 

4.32
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to designate the following Members to the Committee on Foreign Affairs:
1. 	Hon. Onesimus Twinamasiko
2. 	Hon. Latif Sebaggala 
3. 	Hon. Fred Mudukoi
4. 	Hon. Ocen Peter. 

I beg to designate 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those are 22 Members designated to the Committee on Foreign Affairs. The number is below the limit of 30 members. I put the question that all those who have been nominated to the Committee on Foreign Affairs be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development 

4.33
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to designate the following Members to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development - they are 15 Members: 
1. 	Hon. Alex Ndeezi 
2. 	Hon. Beatrice Anywar
3. 	Hon. Patrick Okabe 
4. 	Hon. Mwine Mpaka Rwamirama 
5. 	Hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara
6. 	Hon. Hellen Asamo 
7. 	Hon. John Kamara 
8. 	Hon. Grace Kesande 
9. 	Hon. Mourine Osoru 
10. 	Hon. Sylvia Rwabwogo 
11. 	Hon. Kitatta Aboud 
12. 	Hon. Jacqueline Aol Rama 
13. 	Hon. Norah Bigirwa Nyendwoha
14. 	Hon. Kenneth Lubogo 
15. 	Hon. Gaffa Mbwatekamwa

The chairperson of the committee is hon. Alex Ndeezi and the vice chairperson is hon. Beatrice Anywar. I beg to designate. 

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, you usually give us chance to apply to where we feel we can fit. I applied to be designated to the Committee on Health because I am very comfortable there and I did not have an alternative. I do not know if the Government Chief Whip is punishing me by designating me to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and yet I applied to be designated to the Committee on Health. 

Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right to designate a Member to a committee that they did not apply for? Even so, if you designate a Member on a committee that he or she is not interested in, they will never perform.

MR HAMSON OBUA: Madam Speaker, I know that a Member is designated to a particular committee by their whip as stated in rule 183 and all committees are equal. The Member cannot say that being designated to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development is a punishment. Therefore, is it in order for hon. Mbwatekamwa to indicate to this House that by being designated by the whip of the party he belongs to to the Committee of Gender, Labour and Social Development, it is a punishment?

Secondly, is it also in order for the Member to bring the internal arrangement within the party he belongs to on the Floor of Parliament? 

THE SPEAKER: The Member is out of order. I now invite the Leader of the Opposition to designate Members to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development.

4.36
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, the remedy lies in opposing. On our part, on the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, we nominate hon. Lucy Akello. I beg to designate.

4.37
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, we nominate: 
1. 	Hon. Joshua Carter Anywarach
2. 	Hon. Stella Kiiza 
3. 	Hon. Sarah Wekomba
4. 	Hon. Beatrice Anywar. 

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: She is the same person - which and which? Yes, she is the Vice Chairperson. Those are 19 Members.

MR SSEGGONA: Do not worry about numbers. We shall soon bring members from Bugiri. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Members who have been proposed on the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OKUPA: For purposes of correcting the record, I know you have already ruled. Hon. Hamson Obua rose on a procedural matter and quoted the rules. I know he is very good at rules and I think it was the slip of the tongue. The rule that talks about constitution of committees is 184 and not 183.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is true that we shall be having other Members. Therefore, where there are shortages, they will come from all over Uganda as you expect. 

Committee on Health

4.40
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On the Committee of Health, I have 15 Members. 

1. 	Hon. Bukenya Iga Michael
2. 	Hon. Baguma Spellanza
3. 	Hon. Ssebikaali Yoweri Joel
4. 	Hon. Stella Atyang 
5. 	Hon. Innocent Kamusiime 
6. 	Hon. Rose Ayaka Atima
7. 	Hon. Judith Alyek 
8. 	Hon. Pauline Kemirembe 
9. 	Hon. Daniel Muheirwe
10. 	Hon. Milly Mugeni 
11. 	Hon. Edward Ssembatya 
12. 	Hon. Sylvia Nayebale 
13. 	Hon. Jastine Ayebazibwe 
14. 	Hon. Bebona Babungi
15. 	Hon. Sam Lyomoki 
16. 	Hon. Beatrice Rwakimari 

The Chairperson is hon. Michael Bukenya Iga and hon. Baguma Spellanza becomes the vice-chairperson. I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Government Chief Whip. 

4.41
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Health, we nominate:

1. 	Hon. Betty Aol Ocan 
2. 	Hon. Sizomu Gershom Rabbi Wambedde 
3. 	Hon. Robinah Ssentongo 

I beg to designate.

4.41
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Health, we designate:

1. 	Hon. Fred Baseke 
2. 	Hon. Herbert Kinobere 
3. 	Hon. Lydia Mirembe 

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those are 22. I put the question that those who have been nominated be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Information and Communication Technology

4.42
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On the Committee on Information and Communication Technology, I have 16 Members to designate:

1. 	Hon. Annet Nyakecho 
2. 	Hon. Paul Amoru 
3. 	Hon. Moses Kahima 
4. 	Hon. Alex Ruhunda 
5. 	Hon. James Acidri 
6. 	Hon. Apollo Masika 
7. 	Hon. Eric Musana 
8. 	Hon. Oscar Omony 
9. 	Hon. Pius Wakabi 
10. 	Hon. Lillian Nakate Segujja
11. 	Hon. Patrick Nsamba Oshabe 
12. 	Hon. Sarah Nakawunde 
13. 	Hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire 
14. 	Hon. Taban Amin
15. 	Hon. Seguya Lubyayi JB
16. 	Hon. Cuthbert Abigaba 

Hon. Nyakecho is the chairperson, deputised by hon. Amoru Paul. I beg to designate.

4.43
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on ICT, we nominate:

1. 	Hon. Denis Oguzu Lee 
2. 	Hon. Fred Tumuheirwe Turyamuhweza
3. 	Hon. Maxwell Akora Ebong

I beg to designate.

4.43
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the Committee on ICT, we nominate:
1. 	Hon. Benard Atiku 
2. 	Hon. Waira Kyewalabye Majegere
3. 	Hon. Mukitale Birahwa

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those are 22. I put the question that all those who have been proposed be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs

4.44
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I have 16 Members on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs:
1. 	Hon. Jacob Oboth 
2. 	Hon. Sam Bitangaro 
3. 	Hon. Robinah Rwakoojo Gureme 
4. 	Hon. Jackson Kafuuzi 
5. 	Hon. Aston Kajara 
6. 	Hon. Brenda Asinde Suubi 
7. 	Hon. Gaster Mugoya Kyawa 
8. 	Hon. Hamson Obua Denis 
9. 	Hon. Veronica Isala Eragu 
10. 	Hon. Prossy Akampulira Mbabazi 
11. 	Hon. Rose Akello Lilly
12. 	Hon. Abbas Agaba Mugisha
13. 	Hon. Joseph Kasozi Muyomba 
14. 	Hon. Dorothy Azairwe 
15. 	Hon. Clement Ongalo Obote 
16. 	Hon. Robinah Nabbanja 

Hon. Jacob Oboth is the Chairperson, deputised by hon. Bitangaro Sam. I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Government Chief Whip. Honourable members, I invite the Leader of the Opposition.

4.45
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, on our part, we nominate to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, the following Members:
1. 	Hon. Abdu Katuntu
2. 	Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda
3. 	Hon. Medard Sseggona Lubega
4. 	Hon. Matthias Mpuuga
5. 	Hon. Paul Mwiru

I beg to designate.

4.46
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, we nominate the following:
1. 	Hon. Paul Akamba 
2. 	Hon. Edward Otto Makmot
3. 	Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba
4. 	Hon. Adeke Anna Ebaju
5. 	Hon. Muhammad Nsereko

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, those are 26 Members. I put the question that those who have been proposed be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Natural Resources

4.47
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I have 17 Members on the Committee on Natural Resources:

1. 	Hon. Keefa Kiwanuka
2. 	Hon. Lawrence Songa
3. 	Hon. Syda Bbumba
4. 	Hon. Samson Lokeris
5. 	Hon. Fredrick Angura
6. 	Hon. Mudimi Wamakuyu
7. 	Hon. Denis Sabiiti
8. 	Hon. Thomas Tayebwa
9. 	Hon. Ruth Katushabe
10. 	Hon. Maria Ann Nankabirwa
11. 	Hon. Ofwono Apollo
12. 	Hon. Charles Ngabirano
13. 	Hon. Margaret Komuhangi
14. 	Hon. Anifa Kawooya
15. 	Hon. Solomon Silwany
16. 	Hon. Judith Nabakooba
17. 	Hon. Tonny Ayoo

Hon. Keefa Kiwanuka is designated as chairperson and hon. Lawrence Songa as his vice. I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, the Government Chief Whip. Let us have the Leader of the Opposition.

4.48
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, as part of the Committee on Natural Resources, we nominate the following Members:
1. 	Hon. Herbert Ariko
2. 	Hon. Roland Mugume
3. 	Hon. Jimmy Akena
4. 	Hon. Florence Namayanja

I beg to designate. I can see some level of excitement the other side. 

4.49
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Natural Resources, I nominate the following:

1. 	Hon. Ronald Reagan Okumu
2. 	Hon. Robert Ntende
3. 	Hon. Andrew Baryayanga
4. 	Hon. Silas Aogon
5. 	Hon. Oliver Koyekyenga 

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those are 26 Members. I now put the question that all those who have been proposed be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Physical Infrastructure

4.50
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I have 18 Members on the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. I received more than 50 applications. 

1. 	Hon. Robert Kafeero Ssekitoleko
2. 	Hon. George Kumama
3. 	Hon. Abraham Byandala
4. 	Hon. Margaret Mbeiza
5. 	Hon. Rehema Watongola
6. 	Hon. Moses Angundru
7. 	Hon. David Guma 
8. 	Hon. Janepher Mbabazi 
9. 	Hon. Robert Kasule
10. 	Hon. James Waluswaka
11. 	Hon. Angel Mark Dulu
12. 	Hon. Paul Asaba
13. 	Hon. Amos Mandela
14. 	Hon. Okoth Othieno
15. 	Hon. Rose Mutonyi 
16. 	Hon. Alex Burundo
19. 	Hon. Boaz Ninsiima
20. 	Hon. Paul Musoke

The chairperson is hon. Robert Kafeero Ssekitoleko and the vice is hon. George Kumama. I beg to designate. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Government Chief Whip.

4.51
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): On the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, Rt Hon. Speaker, I nominate the following:

1. 	Hon. William Nzoghu
2. 	Hon. Elijah Okupa
3. 	Hon. Jonathan Odur
4. 	Hon. Emmanuel Ssempala
5. 	Hon. Francis Mwijukye

I beg to designate.

4.52
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I nominate the following to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure:

1. 	Hon. Samuel Okwir
2. 	Hon. Mary Anne Tumwine 
3. 	Hon. Julius Ochen
4. 	Hon. Michael Mawanda 
5. 	Hon. Kenneth Soyekwo

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, those are 28 Members. I now put the question that those who have been proposed be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.

Committee on Presidential Affairs

4.52
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I have 14 Members proposed for Committee on Presidential Affairs:

1. 	Hon. Jesca Ababiku
2. 	Hon. Esther Anyakun
3. 	Hon. Rosemary Tumusiime 
4. 		Hon. Tom Alero
5. 	Hon. Simeo Nsubuga
6. 	Hon. Joseph Ssekabiito
7. 	Hon. Noah Mutebi 
8. 	Hon. Patrick Kasumba
9. 	Hon. Ashraf Olega
10. 	Hon. Rukiya Chekamondo
11. 	Hon. Peter Ogwang
12. 	Hon. Jacquiline Amongin
13. 	Hon. Michael Tusiime
14. 	Hon. Stephen Kangwagye

The chairperson of the committee is hon. Jesca Ababiku and the vice is hon. Esther Anyakun.

4.54
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Presidential Affairs, we nominate:
1. 	Hon. Michael Kabaziguruka
2. 	Hon. Ibrahim Kasozi
3. 	Hon. Jackson Mbaju

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.54
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Presidential Affairs, I nominate:

1. 	Hon. Anita Among
2. 	Hon. Robert Kyagulanyi 
3. 	Hon. Wilson Nokrach
4. 	Hon. Ishma Mafabi

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those are 21 Members. I put the question that all those who have been proposed be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Public Service and Local Government

4.55
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I have 15 Members on the Committee on Public Service and Local Government:
1. 	Hon. Godfrey Onzima
2. 	Hon. Elizabeth Karungi
3. 	Hon. Sam Byibesho
4. 	Hon. Raphael Magyezi
5. 	Hon. Jovrine Kaliisa
6. 	Hon. Agnes Wejuli 
7. 	Hon. Paul Chelimo
8. 	Hon. Christine Achen
9. 	Hon. Richard Gafabusa
10. 	Hon. Stephen Mayende
11. 	Hon. Silvia Akello
12. 	Hon. Johnson Muyanja
13. 	Hon. Anthony Ssemmuli
14. 	Hon. Betty Engola
15. 	Hon. Susan Amero

I have to cross-check on hon. Christine Achen. The chairperson of the committee is hon. Godfrey Onzima and he is deputised by hon. Elizabeth Karungi. I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Government Chief Whip.

4.56
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, we nominate:
1. 	Hon. Peter Okot
2. 	Hon. Betty Nambooze
3. 	Hon. Simon Oyet
4. 	Hon. Betty Muzanira 

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. Can we hear from the independents?

4.57
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Madam Speaker, the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, we nominate the following:
1. Hon. Zaituni Driwaru
2. Hon. Alioni Odria. 
I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, will that make 21? I put the question that those Members proposed for the Committee on Public Service and Local Government be approved. Yes, honourable Government Chief Whip.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, like I was recollecting as I was reading the names, the name of hon. Christine Ayo Achen sounded twice in my mind. When I crossed-checked, she appears on the Committee on Foreign Affairs. I would like to withdraw her name from this committee and she remains on the Committee on Foreign Affairs before you put the question.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that those who have been proposed be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Science and Technology

4.59
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I have 15 Members proposed to be Members of the Committee on Science and Technology:
1. 	Hon. Fred Bwino Kyakulaga – Chairperson 
2. 	Hon. David Mutebi Ronnie – Vice Chairperson
3. 	Hon. Cissy Namujju
4. 	Hon. Peter Sematimba
5. 	Hon. Hellen Kahunde
6. 	Hon. James Niringiyimana
7. 	Hon. Wamala Namboozo
8. 	Hon. Lowila C.D Oketayot
9. 	Hon. Wilberforce Yaguma
10. 	Hon. Buturo Nsaba
11. 	Hon. John Bosco Ikojo
12. 	Hon. Zerubabel Nyiira Mujumbi
13. 	Hon. Mary Paula Turyahikayo
14. 	Hon. Alex Byarugaba  
15. 	Hon. Margret Aleper Aachilla

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Government Chief Whip. Can I have the Leader of the Opposition?

5.00
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation, we nominate the following: 
1. Hon. Charles Abacanon Angiro Gutumoi 
2. Hon. Deogratius Kiyingi Gonzanga. 
We beg to designate. 

5.00
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation, we nominate: 

1. 	Hon. Rosemary Nauwat, 
2. 	Hon. Jacklet Atuhaire
3. 	Hon. Okin Ojara. 

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Three?

MR AKAMBA: Three, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those are 20 on the Committee on Science and Technology. I put the question that those who have been proposed be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry 

5.01
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have 16 Members for the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry:

1. 	Hon. Robert Kasule Sebunya - Chairperson
2. 	Hon. Lawrence Mangusho – Vice Chairperson
3. 	Hon. Geoffrey Dhamuzungu
4. 	Hon. Timuzigu Kamugisha
5. 	Hon. Pamela Kamugo
6. 	Hon. Nelson Lufafa
7. 	Hon. John Baptist Lokii
8. 	Hon. Faith Alupo
9. 	Hon. Rose Kabagyenyi
10. 	Hon. Tophace Kaahwa 
11. 	Hon. Stella Nameo Nyomera
12. 	Hon. Henry Kamya Makumbi
13. 	Hon. Monica Amoding 
14. 	Hon. Justine Khainza
15. 	Hon. Kalule Ssengo and 
16. 	Hon. Alli Ismail Ogama

I beg to designate.

5.02
MR MEDARD SEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, we nominate the following:
1. 	Hon. Cecilia Atim Ogwal 
2. 	Hon. Mary Babirye Kabanda 
3. 	Hon. Sam Odonga-Otto 
4. 	Hon. Robert Franco Centenary. 

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Independents -

5.03
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, I nominate- 
1. 	Hon. Gideon Onyango 
2. 	Hon. David Lukyamuzi Kalwanga 
3. 	Hon. Andrew Kiiza Kaluya. 
I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those are 23. I put the question that the Members proposed be approved to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: That concludes - However, there is a name I did not hear - hon. Kibalya. I do not think I heard him anywhere. Is he there? Okay, is he on the Committee on East Africa? Okay. 

Is there any Member who is unaccounted for? No, Alupo is there.

Honourable members, I would like to thank the Government Chief Whip, Leader of Opposition and the coordinator of the Independents. We have been in a very difficult situation but we can start work now. I would like to request the UPDF to bring in their nominees.

Honourable members, there is something we noted during the two sessions. The Members who were chairpersons and also Members of other committees had difficulties in attending. Recently, we checked and the attendance was not very good. However, obviously they were not present because they were chairing other meetings.

Therefore, the Committee on Rules and Privileges may have to decide whether the second membership of the chairpersons can be suspended while they are chairing so that they can concentrate on chairing. Otherwise, you have to chair yet you have to attend there.

Therefore, we may have to do - Are you on the Committee on Rules and Privileges? On this one; let me finish. I would like to say that we may have to examine whether the second committee of the chairpersons and vice chairperson can be suspended while they are chairing so that they can concentrate on chairing and not attend the other committees because sometimes it is very difficult for them. Therefore, Committee on Rules and Privileges will have to look at that.

Honourable members, there must be a transition. I will call upon the outgoing chairpersons and the whips to arrange a handover. Where there have been changes the handover should be arranged so that the files and offices are handed over because they are institutional. No one should pluck out the- you know sometimes people pluck off the label but these are all Speaker’s offices and not for Members. The ones of the Members are the ones without label. 

Therefore the whips will arrange for that transition so that work can commence. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I noticed that committees tend to sit at the same time and it becomes hard for one to attend both. I have seen people running around, they sit in one committee for 20 minutes or they do not sit at all. Others sign and then disappear to the other, which is not proper.

Is it possible to agree on days or we find a way of guiding us on a proper procedure so that we are able to attend both committees? For example, I sit on the Committee on Human Rights and the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I find myself sitting in the two committees at the same time and it becomes difficult.

THE SPEAKER: Our tradition is that when the sessional committees are sitting, the standing committees should not sit, except that there are some which have got so much work. 

We shall have to agree and give directions here on which committees will sit during which week so that people can concentrate. 

5.08
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, I take this opportunity to thank the chief whips from both sides for the work well done, I know that it has not been an easy task for them.

In the composition of the leadership of the committees, both the chairpersons and vice chairpersons, some are chairing for the first time and others the second time.

Given your comment on the challenges some committees face during the State of the Nation Address, through your Office and the Commission, it is very important to organise an induction for the chairpersons and vice chairpersons of the committees to enable them understand and know how to handle committee business.

We had a challenge, which was not good in one of the committees I belonged to in the last session. Now that they have been designated for the good of this Parliament and institution and for proper reports to be produced unlike in the last session, this should be taken such that Members are able to understand their roles.

I guess now that you have directed, that the formal handover which, would entail having the pending businesses such that the new team can be able to take over - I find this very important.

It may not be a one week or three days induction but continuous such that they are able to perform very well in these committees. I would like to wish them well in this session. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: There are Members who do not have standing committees. Let us deal with those briefly and then go back to your comments. The Government Chief Whip wanted to designate some members to the Committee on Equal Opportunities. 

5.11
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (MS Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Under Rule 157(2) I would like to designate some Members on the standing committees. I have members who did not belong to any committee and they are:

1. 	Hon. Faith Alupo  - Committee on Appointments.
2. 	Hon. Herbert Kabafunzaki - Committee on National Economy. 

However, I also made some changes as I was trying to balance. I beg to propose that the chairperson of the committee of Equal Opportunities becomes hon. Hellen Asamo who has been the Vice Chairperson. (Applause) The Vice Chairperson for the Committee on Equal Opportunities is hon. Robina Rwakoojo - we need a lawyer on that committee, with immediate effect.

The last proposal is a change in the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Diseases where I am proposing hon. Florence Namboozo to be Vice Chairperson. I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that the Chairpersons, Vice Chairpersons and the Members as proposed on the standing committees be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

5.13
MR FELIX OKOT (NRM, Dokolo County South, Dokolo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like some guidance from you because last time, you made a very important statement that for us to help the work of the committees and the leadership structure of our committees, you proposed that we need to amend our rules so that Chairpersons and Vice Chairpersons of committees are elected by the members not appointed by a member. 

We were very excited and thought that this would take effect and members even within the party can elect their members. In the Movement, you have 20 members in a committee. Those cannot fail to elect a member of the same party.

We need to discuss this matter and amend our rules arising from what hon. Okupa said that we need to induct members to chair committees, train them to handle committee work. We have had a number of challenges with some members who are just nominated and appointed, which has been impacting on the work of the committees.

I would like to appeal to you to cause something so that we empower this Parliament and do our work independently with a lot of quality. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope that members can bring a motion we debate it and I will formally make the proposal to the Committee on Rules and Privileges. 

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Indeed the Committee on Rules and Privileges brought before the House proposals to amend the rules that regard the nomination and designation of members to committees.

However, it required the amendment of the parent Act, which is the Administration of Parliament Act. We picked the provision in the Administration of Parliament Act and that is what we have in our rules now. The members will always be nominated for election by the chief whips. 

THE SPEAKER: Bring a formal motion for debate and then we have a Bill and we remove it.

5.16
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, to my brother, hon. Felix Okot Ogong, when the Leader of the Opposition is standing, you should give him some time.

Madam Speaker, I would like to beg your indulgence and that of the honourable colleagues. Earlier when we were designating, I had the name of hon. Simon Oyet designated to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. On consultation with both him and the substantive Opposition Whip, I am advised that he had requested to be on the Committee on Natural Resources. 

Following from your record, this is a committee that is not over subscribed. If you will permit, Madam Speaker, I would like to remove him from the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, where we had presented five names, to the Committee on Natural Resources, where we had four names. I beg, with your permission, to re-designate him. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, we should remind ourselves as to why we got percentages for representation on committees. These percentages follow the representation in the august House: the majority, the Independents and the Opposition. 

I know that we are expecting more Members to come to this House. For example, I am entitled to designate 20 Members but I have designated 15 or 16 Members because I know that more Members are coming. The honourable colleague from the Opposition wants to use this to fill the slots, which are meant for the Government side and this making us uncomfortable. 

We have designated Members knowing that we have space to make changes. It is not that we do not have Members to put on these committees. Your entitlement is a maximum of three Members, according to the percentage of representation in this House. The Independents representation is a maximum of four Members while the Government side has 20 Members. I have kept some space to cater for any eventualities but when I see my colleague wanting to take my space, I get disappointed. 

I wish to request that the Opposition gets their entitlement as well as the Independents. You never know they may want to change tomorrow. If you want to change tomorrow and your space is taken, it would be difficult. I request that we stick to our portions. Much as we have not oversubscribed, a time may come when I am faced with pressure from my colleagues wishing to cross from a committee to another only to find no space.
 
Madam Speaker, the second clarification I am seeking is, you gave the other whip and I guidance on establishing the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. Your wish and directive was that we change all the Members. However, I have heard one of the Members from the Opposition being retained on the committee, hon. Robert Centenary, yet your wish and guidance was to reconstitute this committee. I do not know whether that is okay with you because I also have pressure from some Members who wanted to retain their positions.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, without going into the details, we had meetings over this issue and we reached an agreement. Therefore, the honourable member will be moved to another committee.

Concerning the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, it is really undersubscribed. Are you now taking the one person elsewhere? Help me and do not deplete it because it is the most undersubscribed committee after the Committee on East African Community Affairs. I have made my ruling, do not deplete the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. 

Hon. Mbwatekamwa was saying that he does not like the other committee but we said all the committees are the same. Let us serve there.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, our case is quite different because we consulted with the leadership, unlike hon. Mbwatekamwa who just jumped out without consulting his leadership. 

Also, when you look at our list, what about a situation where we do not have the five but only four Members? Can’t we add a person? We should be able to. Therefore, the argument that the Government Chief Whip is trying to raise does not help. 

Madam Speaker, you also raised the issue of attendance. Sometimes attendance to these committees depends on one’s profession and interest. If a Member, by virtue of his or her experience, profession and interest, feels that he does not fit under a particular committee, we may not have that Member attending the committee meetings. After all, the rules allow us to be ex-officio Members. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, and the Government Chief Whip, it is on that note that we are appealing to you to be considerate on these matters. Today it is me, tomorrow it may be you so we need to work together. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I have made my ruling on that issue; I do not want to go into details. Let us leave things as they are; we had an agreement on that issue. 

REPORTS BY THE CHAIRPERSONS OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEES ON THE LIST OF ACCOUNTING OFFICERS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the Chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Governments). Please use a few minutes.

5.24
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENTS) (Mr Reagan Okumu): Madam Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Governments) on the list of Local Government accounting officers for the Financial Year 2018/2019.

Madam Speaker, a list of accounting officers was presented to this House on 11 July 2018. The House referred the list of accounting officers of districts and municipalities to the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Governments) for scrutiny.
 
The committee has scrutinised the list and now reports. The honourable members have the list of 168 accounting officers that was tabled. The committee scrutinised the list and made reference to legal provisions governing the appointment of accounting officers and also considered our earlier reports to this House on observations and recommendations, as adopted by Parliament in the committee reports on the Auditor-General’s reports for the Financial Years 2014/2015 and 2015/2016. 

While we interacted with the accounting officers during this period, we have also been able to cover more than half of the current audit report. We have also interacted with accounting officers mentioned in the Auditor-General’s report. 

Our draft reports on these areas are ready and the final report for FY 2016/2017 will soon be presented to this House.

Madam Speaker, we invited the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Local Government and the PS/ST to Parliament over this matter and we had a detailed discussion for over eight hours. We finally got their views and discussed with them the general rules for appointment and revocation of appointment for persons appointed as accounting officers. We seemed to have agreed in that meeting, together with the two permanent secretaries, on the recommendations that I will be presenting here.

The mandate of Parliament in the consideration of accounting officers

Madam Speaker, the legal regime governing the appointment of accounting officers is in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Public Finance Management Act, No. 2 of 2015, which provides as follows: Article 164 of the Constitution states, “The Permanent Secretary or the accounting officer in charge of a ministry or department shall be accountable to Parliament for the funds in that ministry or department.” 

It is in the same vein that the Constitution empowers Parliament to monitor all expenditure of public funds.

Madam Speaker, the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 defines an accounting officer as a person designated or appointed in writing as accounting officer by the Secretary to the Treasury, to be responsible for a Vote. 

With regard to local governments, Article 196 of the Constitution empowers Parliament to make laws on accountability in local governments and to, among others, prescribe for financial control and accountability measures for compliance by all local governments; and impose regular audit requirements and procedures for local governments.

Accountability processes commence with the formulation of policy statements and appointment of accounting officers. Parliament is, by law, required to take part in accountability processes and accordingly, Parliament's involvement in the appointment procedure of accounting officers is in line with those processes of good governance.

Madam Speaker, it is the duty of Parliament, in accordance with section l2(2) of the PFMA, 2015 to ensure that public resources are held and utilised in a transparent, accountable, efficient, effective and sustainable manner, in accordance with the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and the Budget Framework Paper.

The same Act, in section 13, prescribes for the preparation and presentation of budgets and requires the President to cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament the proposed annual budget of Government for a financial year. The annual budget presented by the minister shall be presented with a list of accounting officers, appointed or designated under section 11 (2)(g), as well as a policy statement containing a statement of the actions taken by the Vote to the Auditor-General of the preceding financial year.

The lists presented by the minister, as prepared by the Secretary to the Treasury, were not prepared in accordance with the requirements of section 11(2) of the Act as they contained some names of persons who have, according to the previous Auditor-General's reports, not accounted for public resources of their Votes.

Madam Speaker, the lists forwarded to the committee have names of persons appointed in contravention of section 11(2)(g) of the Act as they were previously implicated for not accounting for public resources in their Votes.

Madam Speaker, the lists presented now ought to have been presented with the Budget and a statement of the actions taken by the Vote to implement the recommendations of Parliament in respect to the report of the Auditor-General of the preceding years, in accordance with section 13 of the Act.

Parliament ought to have scrutinised the same lists then in order to ascertain whether the named persons are eligible for appointment as accounting officers for not having been implicated in the Auditor-General's reports for failure to account for public resources in their Votes, in accordance with section 1l(2)(g).

Madam Speaker, a list of names of accounting officers was tabled in March 2018, with the comments of the Secretary to the Treasury on some officers on the list being not eligible for appointment as accounting officers. Those comments covered more than half of the accounting officers of local governments. The Secretary to the Treasury has however returned the same names, appointing the same officers, without offering any explanation as to how the implicated officers have qualified for appointment.

Madam Speaker, the appointments have not been made with the full involvement of Parliament although the Secretary to the Treasury had previously, in presenting a 1ist of accounting officers with comments on some officers, availed Parliament an opportunity to make its position known to the appointing authority. Unfortunately, this was not done.

Given that the financial year has commenced and Government must operate through the execution of the Budget that Parliament has already passed, it is prudent that the functioning of Government is not hindered by the absence of accounting officers to execute the Budget.

The appointed persons have already assumed office, Madam Speaker. All these people have got appointment letters and have reported to their stations without having been approved by Parliament. They got the appointments letters from the PS/ST and they have effectively taken over.

The officers should have been approved by Parliament and allowed to execute their accounting duties. The officers who were appointed in contravention of section 11 of the PFMA, 2015 are illegally appointed as the appointees are disqualified. It is the considered view of the committee that such appointments be revoked for failure to meet the standards set by Parliament.

Accounting officers deemed by the committee to have been appointed outside the legal requirements have been identified as follows:
a)  Accounting officers who failed to provide accountability and we ask that their appointments be revoked.

1. 	Vote 587: Onzu Ismail Musa, Chief Administrative Officer, Zombo District Local Government. In the FY 20l5/2016, while serving as accounting officer, Zombo District Local Government, Mr Onzu Ismail Musa was found liable for authorising payment of Shs 39,993,480 for questionable works in relation to installation of culverts at Nyandima bridge and was recommended for interdiction to pave way for investigations. 

The officer is also under investigation in the following cases: 

Embezzlement while accounting officer for Zombo District, vide case file GEF 894/16 of CID headquarters.
Causing financial loss while accounting officer in Katakwi District vide CRB 53/16. For this matter, the committee recommends that this appointment be revoked.  

2. 	Vote 561: Kizito Mukasa, Chief Administrative Officer, Kaliro District Local Government

While serving as the accounting officer, Apac District Local Government in Financial Year 2014/2015, he was held responsible for falsification of accountabilities to the tune of Shs 85,520,700. Madam Speaker, you know the issue of Apac, which I will be bringing later, has been a very serious issue that touches on the system of money transfers. 

While he was accounting officer in Agago District, Kizito Mukasa, in Financial Year 2015/2016, was found to have failed to account for Shs 268,185,180 as payment for work done in respect of two companies that were awarded contracts for silting, drilling, pump testing, water quality analysis and installation of deep bore holes.

Further, the officer is under investigation for false accounting and abuse of office, vide File GEF 1026/16 of CID Headquarters.

3. 	Vote: 572: Dorothy Magoola Ajwang, Chief Administrative Officer, Oyam District Local Government

In the Financial Year 2014/2015, she was held liable for payment of non-district staff up to the tune of Shs 71,972,777.

The Officer is under investigation for the following cases:
Embezzlement and causing financial loss, vide CRB 26/2016 of CID files.
Disobedience of lawful orders, vide GEF 32/2016. 

This is the same officer who assured the committee, Madam Speaker, while we were in Gulu, that the hospital was completed. We asked her to repeat her statement on oath and she repeated that the hospital was completed. When we went to the site, we found that there was nothing and that the company doubles on tracking this hospital is called Omutata Women’s Group, which is based in Pallisa.  

We tried to crosscheck with the Registrar of Companies but we did not find this company in existence. However, over Shs 800 million was spent just on that hospital. 

Therefore, we recommend that this officer be dis-appointed, not as CAO, because we do not have the powers to appoint CAOs but as an accounting officer.  

4. 	Vote 543: Aloysius Aloka, Chief Administrative Officer, Nakapiripirit District Local Government

In Financial Year 2014/2015, he mismanaged funds for the rehabilitation of Namalu-Lorenga Road and was required by Parliament to recover this money. 

In Financial Year 2015/2016, he failed to prioritise the recovery of Shs 34,009,668 which he paid out to various employees without the necessary verification. He was asked to recover this money but he has not. 

The officer is under investigation for the following cases:
Influence peddling in award of contract, vide GEF 809/2017
Un-accounted for funds, vide CRB 39/2016

The committee recommends that this accounting officer be denied in this financial year the opportunity to be appointed.

5. 	Vote: 522: Larwor Jimmy Walmoe, Chief Administrative Officer, Katakwi District Local Government

In Financial Year 2015/20l6, he was found to have diverted funds meant for rural transport infrastructure amounting to Shs 102,424,099 intended for low cost ceiling of Katakwi-Toroma Road. Parliament recommended for his interdiction to pave way for investigation and required him to make good the loss.

6. 	Vote 505: Laboro Francis, Chief Administrative Officer, Bundibugyo District Local Government

While serving as the accounting officer for Nakapiripirit District Local Government in the Financial Year 2014/2015, he was found liable for failing to account for Shs 132,352,000 meant for hire of equipment for the rehabilitation of Namalu-Lorenga Road.

While serving in Nakapiripirit District as the accounting officer in Financial Year 2015/2016, he failed to account for Shs 34,009,668 which was allegedly overpaid to different employees as allowances.

7. 	Vote 566: Otai Charles, Chief Administrative Officer, Manafwa District Local Government

In the Financial Year 2014/20l5, while serving as the accounting officer for Kaabong District, he failed to account for Shs 15,000,000 allegedly paid for the purchase of land for the prisons authorities.

In the Financial Year 2015/2016, while serving as the accounting officer in Kaabong District Local Government again, he allegedly paid Shs 97,439,000 for no work done in respect of alleged water works. In the same financial year, he caused wastage of resources amounting to Shs 9,744,000 by failing to utilize 232 bags of cement, which was caked in the district stores.

Madam Speaker, as I read this, you know that wherever an accounting officer in local government is accused in one district and Parliament gives a recommendation for interdiction, what Local Government does is to just transfer them to another district. In other words, they transfer problems. 

8. 	Vote 544: Asiimwe Abenaitwe Robert, Chief Administrative Officer, Nakasongola District Local Government

In the Financial Year 2015/2016, while serving as the accounting Officer for Ibanda District Local Government, he failed to provide accountability when he made commitments of Shs 83,834,418 beyond the available funds. When Parliament gave a recommendation on this one, they just transferred him. 

Accounting officers who were deemed outrightly incompetent or failed to prevail over heads of departments

We thought that we should also bring this to this House, for purposes of record, so that they could be cautioned. 
 
Vote 762: Balaba Swaibu, Town Clerk Moroto Municipality.

The committee was concerned that some accounting officers were evidently incompetent and not in-charge of their votes, for example, the accounting officer of Moroto Municipality, Mr Balaba Swaibu, showed incompetence in answering queries concerning his vote as he kept referring every question raised, irrespective of the line of responsibility, to the finance officer. 

This was confirmed when he requested the committee to postpone a meeting because of the absence of the finance officer, in a matter that was related to the engineering department as opposed to the finance department.

Madam Speaker, we found it queer that when we met this officer in Soroti, for over 30 minutes, he had something to say. Then, later on, when we asked him to say what he wanted to say, he asked for time to postpone the meeting because he could not answer any question without Pauline. We asked him who Pauline was and he said, “Moroto cannot move without Pauline.” I asked him, “Who is Pauline?” He said, “You know, Mr Chairman, Moroto cannot move without Pauline.” I asked again, “Who is Pauline?” he said, “She is my finance officer.”

I asked why he did not come with her. He said, “She had a function in Kampala so she went for that function.” Therefore, we opted to give him his wish because he could not account himself he wanted a helper. Therefore, we said, we shall invite you to Arua. 

When we invited him to Arua, we asked him whether he was now comfortable to speak, now that Pauline was around and he said it was alright to move on.

Therefore, we found that queer. Many of you Members should know what is required of an accounting officer in an appointment letter. If you cannot answer anything unless Pauline is there - because Moroto cannot move without Pauline; I do not see the responsibility of such an accounting officer.

Vote 585: Patrick Olila, Chief Administrative Officer, Lamwo, District. We are recommending this category two for some sanctions. We have not found them directly liable but we found them incompetent in so many ways that may not directly have been prescribed in the laws we are referring to.

In Financial Year 2015/2016, Parliament found him to have mismanaged a contract awarded to North Cross and Abayo Foundation for the supply of equipment to council and recommended for his interdiction to pave way for investigations. The officer is under investigation for abuse of office and causing financial loss: vide 906/ 20l7.

Vote 564: Epaju Pius, Chief Administrative Officer, Amolatar District Local Government

In the Financial Year 2014/2015, while serving as the accounting officer for Amolatar District, he failed to account for Shs 19,291,000 which was allegedly advanced to the district staff. He is also in the same lot; when you ask him, he cannot answer any question.

Vote 501: Bwayo Gabriel, Chief Administrative Officer, Adjumani District 

In the Financial Year 2014/2015, while serving as the accounting officer for Nwoya District, he failed to account for Shs 37,975,969 advanced to district council officers to carry out council activities.

Vote 599: Kisembe Grace, Chief Administrative Officer, Lwengo District Local Government

In the Financial Year 2015/2016, while serving as the accounting officer, Otuke District Local Government, he was held personally liable for mismanaging fuel when he failed to account for fuel deposits amounting to Shs 2l,604,2OO.

Madam Speaker, the committee ends its report with special recommendations:

The committee proposes a special commendation for accounting officers who have managed to identify irregular transfers of funds from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, to the Ministry of Local Government. The committee received reports from Apac District and Kiruhura District on this matter.

On Kiruhura District, Parliament pronounced itself while considering the Auditor-General's Report for Financial Year 2014/2015, which was passed in December 2016.

Madam Speaker, this was a very interesting scenario; that while the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, was transferring funds to Kiruhura District to the tune of Shs 4 billion, on five items ordered number 1-5, they transferred Shs 4 billion. Then another similar amount came with the same items but with altered order. Instead, of numbers 1-5 now it was from 5 downwards. The same amount hit the accounts of Kiruhura. 

We came across this document and handed the matter to police. However, when we asked the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, they said that was done in error because the chief administrative officer was now being asked to return the other one - there is some connivance between the Ministry of Local Government and some accounting officers from the districts.

For the case of Apac District, money meant for salaries and gratuity was sent to the district without the authentication of the accounting officer, and some of the intended beneficiaries did not receive their salaries as the funds ended up in other individuals’ accounts. 

The previous Chief Administrative Officer (CAO), Mr Seraphine Alia in May 2016, unearthed this anomaly with Shs 1,191,325,707 in salaries and gratuity being passed without his approval and in July 2016 an amount of Shs 225 million for gratuity was paid in the same manner. 

He reported the anomalies to the Ministry of Local Government but nothing was done. The current Chief Administrative Officer, Ms Stella Abyeto also discovered that without her authentication, Shs 130 million was wired to individual accounts and she reported the matter to police.

Madam Speaker, just to quote the letter written by Olila the then CAO when he wrote to the Permanent Secretary (PS) Ministry of Local Government- I am rising this issue for Members of Parliament to note that we thought that the system was now water tight that when money is sent from the Ministry of Finance, it hits direct on the district accounts. In the scenario of Apac, Shs 10 million was sent for salaries, but what hits the account was about Shs 4 million and the other went to personal accounts in Apac. When they checked, it was proved that money was sent and the warrant is there, but it got lost in between. I do not know what happened, but that is what we discovered in Apac.

This was a letter to the PS Ministry of Local Government dated 16 August 2016. Part (b) of the letter say: “bypassing of approval centre. When paying May 2016 salary, I noted with concern that the approval process role performed by the accounting officer was bypassed and salaries plus gratuity to the tune of Shs 1,191,325,707 were nevertheless paid. Secondly, in the payment of July 2016, gratuity, amounting to Shs 225 million was also paid, bypassing the approval procedure.” 

In other words, the accounting officer did not know what was taking place. They were dealing with the finance officer in the district and Ministry of finance officials. Madam Speaker, when they shifted this accounting officer of Apac, the current accounting officer discovered that Shs 130 million was again being wired and was bypassing her. She decided to investigate and case file GEF05/2018 was opened in Apac. The people who received this money were the following:

Okai Bob
Jokene Jovan
Ebong Moses
Awiyu Emmanuel
Ebang Loy
Gafson Yeko Ogwar; he is a powerful finance officer, who has retired, but continues to receive. 

Madam Speaker, this is what is happening to our money -  the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, is now capable of releasing funds for district accounts and it gets into personal accounts. We think the Apac case should be taken seriously. Government should investigate this because it could be happening everywhere. 

Madam Speaker, what we have discovered in the Auditor-General’s report, is that there is an outcry of non-salary payments and non-gratuity payment. When you check with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, these monies are being released but not being received by intended persons. The officials of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, connive with people in the districts; sometimes the human resource officers, the chief administrative officers or finance officer to say: “please write claims”. 

Districts are always bringing claims which are duplicated. We, think that this matter should widely be investigated because what happened in Kiruhura and Apac districts could be happening all over the place. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please windup? 

MR OKUMU: Yes, I am concluding, Madam Speaker. The committee, therefore, in view of all these, is concerned that some officers from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development connive with officials from Local Government to defraud Government.       
 
The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development investigates these matters with a view to putting a seal to such leakages. That the Ministry of Local Government rewards the officers who have been vigilant and instrumental in unearthing these anomalies with a view to curb such haemorrhage of Government funds. 

We recommend that the Ministry of Local Government should promote the two chief administrative officers of Apac to keep their morale; the current and previous chief administrative officer because they have unearthed what the Auditor-General has not been able to unearth. Now, they brought to the open what should be done.

In conclusion, the committee recommends that the appointments of the two named accounting officers be reconsidered in light of the reservations that the committee has made. The accounting officers who were deemed incompetent and those that could not prevail over the heads of departments be appropriately handled by the appointing authorities and the two mentioned accounting officers who tried to streamline the financial irregularities in Apac District be rewarded with a promotion.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, honourable chair. Honourable members, we sent out four accountability committees on this issue and we will defer the debate and wait for the reports of the others so that we handle them at the same time.

6.00
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have to regret that for the last four weeks, I have been indisposed and therefore, when this House made that directive, I was not present in the House. It is today that I resumed work. 

However, in my absence, my committee together with the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) decided to have a joint meeting such that they resolve this matter and make a joint report. They have since had three meetings co-chaired by members of my committee and members of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government). We have not yet concluded to be able to come with a report. 

However, this morning, we had a meeting with the Secretary to the Treasury, the Auditor-General’s Office and the internal Auditor-General’s officers to resolve this challenge.
I need to state this, Madam Speaker. This process is arising out of a new law; the Public Finance Management Act. As Parliament, we have not been getting involved in the detail in this process of appointing the accounting officers except for the names to be brought here as the financial year begins. We are also trying to interrogate how we can effectively get involved in this process and have proper accounting officers who will be responsible for the public resources. 

The joint committees therefore, have referred this document to the technical people - our parliamentary staff to help us resolve those technical issues. We are meeting again on the 1st together with the team from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

Thereafter, within one week, we should be able to have a joint report; Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) and Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises). It is better we handle it uniformly other than each committee having its own recommendation yet we are all talking about accounting officers. 

Therefore, I beg the indulgence of the Rt Hon. Speaker to give us two weeks and we bring a joint report. We can then debate together with what the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Governments) will have provided. So I beg.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, as hon. Abdu Katuntu has said, these are new areas and so, we need to define our parameters. Let us give them that time to conclude the process and we come back and debate and agree on our level of engagement and interaction.

Honourable members, I invite you to come to the House tomorrow at 10 o’clock. Please be seated by 9.45 a.m. because our guest will arrive at about 10 o’clock. Thank you very much. House adjourned to 10 o’clock tomorrow morning. Thank you.

(The House rose at 6.03 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 25 July 2018 at 10.00 a.m.) 
