Wednesday, 18 July 2012

Parliament met at 2.22 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the chair.)

The House was called to Order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good afternoon, honourable members. You are welcome to this sitting. By way of reminder, I wish to inform honourable members that one of the national icons of the Independence of Uganda, the late hon. Andrew Adimola, will be brought to Parliament tomorrow where his body will lay in state for public viewing. Parliament will thereafter hold a special sitting to honour him in the afternoon. The body will arrive in Parliament tomorrow at 9.30 a.m. and Members who wish to view the body and sign the condolence book are accordingly informed. 

I have been further informed that the funeral service will take place on Friday, 20 July 2012 at 10.00 a.m. at St Paul’s Cathedral in Gulu in an area commonly known as For-God. Burial will take place on the same day at his ancestral home in Lacor village beginning at 12.00 p.m. 

Honourable members, let me take this opportunity on behalf of Parliament to be one of the first persons to congratulate the Third Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business upon his elevation by His Excellency the President, as Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces, to the rank of General. (Applause) Congratulations again, hon. Gen. Moses Ali and I wish you all the best in your endeavours. 

By way of information, hon. Gen. Moses Ali has had a rich and meritorious career in the armed forces. He has been trained in Uganda and other parts of the world including Kimberly Staff College in the United Kingdom. Please join me in congratulating Gen. Moses Ali. (Applause) We were hoping that he would come in his full gear this afternoon. (Applause)

Honourable members, on a sad note, Parliament has learnt with deep sorrow the news of the death of Mr James Odong, a journalist and long serving member of the Uganda Parliamentary Press Association, who has covered Parliament for the last 15 years.

He served Parliament as reporter for the New Vision newspaper, editor Rupiny newspaper and in the most recent past, as a reporter for the Voice of Lango. He passed on at Nsambya Hospital on Monday, 16 July 2012 at 10.30 p.m. after a short illness. A requiem mass will be held for him at All Saints Church, Nakasero on Thursday at 11.00 a.m. He will be buried at his ancestral home in Pagwok village in Namukora sub-county, Kitgum District on Saturday, 21 July 2012 at noon.

On behalf of the Parliamentary Commission, I convey our most sincere condolences to the family, the entire press fraternity and the Parliament Press Association, which he steered for many years. May his soul rest in eternal peace. I ask honourable Members that we rise for a moment of silence. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

Honourable members, today we intend to commence the debate on a motion, which will be presented this afternoon on the State of the Nation Address. And as you are aware, this motion serves only one purpose, to give the honourable members the opportunity to have an in-depth discussion on what the President stated in his analysis of what happened in the past, what is happening now and his projections of how best to deal with the future that was contained in his State of the Nation Address. Members have the opportunity to engage in discussion on this substance. 

I had a meeting with the whips and leaders of the political parties in the House, on the way we are going to conduct this debate, so that we give it a more thematic and deep discussion other than the general debate, and actually, we debate generally most of the time. So, we wanted to see if we could structure the debate in such a way that an in-depth analysis is given to it. 

So, I made a proposal to the whips, which they accepted; that we give block time to the sides. Instead of the Speaker exercising the guillotine method of saying two minutes and in two minutes the clock times you out, we give the sides, NRM, FDC, UPC, DP - because this is now about discussing the President’s State of the Nation Address, and every party would be entitled to give an opinion on the matter in an organised way. 

So, it would be up to the particular party to organise itself internally, select who would do the introduction; who would do the main discussion; who would do the contributions; who will cover which subject and for how long. It is up to the sides to regulate the amount of time they allocate to each one of them. This I thought would be something that we could try. If it works very well, it could guide us in discussions that do not require very formal decisions, but is an opportunity to give Members opportunity to discuss something in a deep manner.

The research department of this Parliament is ready and prepared. If Members want particular areas researched, they are at your service. So, you can request for research papers and particular analysis on something so that when you come to speak, you are indeed speaking to the nation called Uganda. That would be very good. That is the proposal that has been debated. 

So, today, we will start with this motion, at the time when it will be called and we will give the Leader of the Opposition the opportunity to address the nation. I am sure he is looking forward to that and we will also be listening in. 

I propose one alteration on the Order Paper because as I said, the State of the Nation Address debate should have started this week in earnest. So, I am bringing it forward. We will allow the presentations of chairpersons on the status of business in the committees and immediately thereafter, I will allow this motion to be moved so that we get into it. The Leader of the Opposition will speak and then we will get to the rest of the business. Is that okay Members? That is how we will proceed. 

There is short motion on item No.6 and there is a petition as well, which is a short matter. We will only relocate the minister’s statement and bring it forward. We will deal with the petition; the motion for a resolution and then we deal with the motion on the State of the Nation Address. Immediately thereafter we will deal with the report of the Committee on HIV/AIDS. If that is okay, we will proceed like that. Thank you.

MS ANITE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Yesterday you made a wise ruling on the issue of the youth venture capital. Last week, I raised this issue as an issue of national importance because there is a lot of anxiety and tension among the young people that we represent in relation to the monies that they are supposed to access. They have got all the necessary requirements but the banks have told them that the money is not there.

Mr Speaker, you did refer this matter further, but you didn’t give us clear guidance on when the ministers should come back to the House –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I said Tuesday next week.

MR ANITE: Okay, thank you.

MR OKOT-OGONG: Mr Speaker, this morning, I consulted with you to allow us make a statement regarding the fracas that occurred in Otuke District. You accepted to give us opportunity today to do the presentation, but I am not seeing this item on the Order Paper.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you will recall that there were issues that had not been properly resolved on how this matter should be handled. You will also recall that we had a meeting up to the time when we were coming to the House. So, by the time the Order Paper was published, this item could not be accommodated, but I will make an appropriate alteration to allow you make the statement. Can we start with the business – guidance? Yes, hon. Fungaroo.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking guidance on an issue of a similar nature upon which you guided last week, that issue of border disputes between Yumbe and Moyo, and Yumbe and Koboko - that the responsible minister brings a statement to the House. But I don’t see it on the Order Paper. I seek your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was it supposed to be today? I don’t recall it very well. Yes, Minister of Local Government, do you owe this House a statement today? I don’t recall it was supposed to come in today though I know that there is a statement to be made on this issue; no date was given.

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Speaker, yes, it is supposed to come today, because last week on Wednesday you guided that one week be given to the minister, which is today. Maybe you need to check with the Hansard, Sir. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I check with the Hansard now -(Laughter)– or I rule on the matter?

2.32
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, there is a standing technical team at the Ministry of Lands and that of Local Government, which is handling this matter. As soon as they have made a report, I and my colleague, the Minister of Lands, will make a statement to this House.

MS NAJJEMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I know that you have already made a ruling on this matter, but I would like to request that considering the HIV/AIDS situation in the country, I would like to suggest that – item No.7 has been appearing on the Order Paper since last week – I present it before we go to the next item as it follows. I can only do that with your permission, Mr Speaker. I think it is proper that we deal with something that is more urgent than others. Thank you.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, in light of what my colleague, hon. Rosemary Najjemba has said, and also in light of the amendment that you have caused on the Order Paper to accommodate the debate in reply to the State of the Nation Address – in my opinion, considering the importance of such an address, won’t it be prudent for us to treat it as the only item on the Order Paper, in which we would have a hand and take a decision immediately. What I mean here is that isn’t it possible to handle it as a single item today? If not, is it possible for us to defer it to Tuesday, next week. I am saying this because it is a very important issue that needs an in-depth debate rather than mixing it up with so many other items on the Order Paper. If we have to consider it today, we do it now and dispose of it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, my idea is that today we start the debate by receiving the motion and the response from the Leader of the Opposition and we stop at that. The actual debate commences on a day when we will be ready and after the sides have consulted on how to proceed. That is the proposal. But I am also conscious of the fact that the chairperson of this committee will be leaving sometime tonight yet this report has also been on the Order Paper for a long time now. We are just trying to strike a balance. 

If the presentation of the motion for the State of the Nation Address and the secondment and reply from the Leader of the Opposition take the time I am going to assign to them, then it will be easy for us to handle the Report from the HIV/AIDS Committee today without fail. I can promise you, Madam, on that. So, can we get back to the Order Paper?

PRESENTATIONS BY CHAIRPERSONS ON THE STATUS OF BUSINESS IN COMMITTEES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairpersons, you have only two minutes each to outline that – Please, can I ask hon. Felix Okot Ogong to make a short statement of congratulation on behalf of the House, on the elevation of Gen. Moses Ali; in one minute.

2.37
MR OKOT OGONG (NRM Dokolo, Dokolo County): Mr Speaker, yesterday, I learnt that the Rt Hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister, Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali had been elevated to the highest rank in the Army; the rank of General. (Applause) That is the last rank in the Army. Congratulations, Sir –(Interjections in our system here, the rank of a Field Mashal does not apply - and he is sharing that rank with His Excellency the President. That means he is seated with us here as our Deputy Prime Minister, but at the same time as a General in the Army.

Mr Speaker, this gives us hope that our country is beginning to professionalise the Army –(Laughter)– by awarding the people that deserve the promotions. I also believe that hon. Gen. Moses Ali deserves this elevation to the rank of General.
Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I believe that the General will not use his rank in the House –(Laughter)– to cause fear among Members. Anyway, I know that he is a much disciplined General, and will not use that rank to terrorise Members of Parliament.

Otherwise, as Members of Parliament, we are very happy for his elevation. Congratulations. But also, on behalf of the Greater North Parliamentary Forum of which you are a member, I want to congratulate you. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much. The only disappointment from the Chair is that the General has not appeared in the House in full Army gear in his official capacity as an Army General. 

2.39
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to thank hon. Okot Ogong for responding to the Speaker’s initiative to move a congratulatory message to Gen. Ali. Gen. Ali is our Deputy Leader of Government Business and also Deputy Prime Minister. For many years, he has served this country with total commitment and dedication. He is one of the few lucky people who are commended and recognised when still living and I know this extra measure of confidence that the leadership of the NRM and the country has placed in him will enable him to do even much more than what he has been able to do in the past. 


I, as Government Chief Whip, can count on his guidance and support in ensuring that we promote vibrant parliamentary business that we interact with all our leaders here in Parliament to serve this country to greater heights and prosperity. Congratulations, General.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I did not intend this to be a matter that was going to be extended. I had only requested hon. Felix Okot Ogong! but I now see us moving into another thing. Can we do a formal recognition on a day to be agreed upon so that we can speak at least for about an hour or 30 minutes on this subject?  As communicated earlier, I know you are from the West Nile, but this matter is not about the West Nile. 

2.41
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On my behalf and on behalf of the Opposition, particularly as Shadow Minister of Defence and Security, I would like to congratulate Gen. Moses Ali for his promotion. Congratulations. Our policy in the Army for now is improvement of welfare of the soldiers. Now that you are a General, I hope you will work closely with my office to make sure that –(Laughter)- the soldiers are catered for properly. Thank you. We shall be grateful to work with you. 

COL. KATIRIMA : Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Fungaroo for giving me an opportunity to give him and the House some information. When one is promoted to the rank of General, it is in recognition of one’s abilities to command control and administer not only the land, but also the air, the water and all matters that touch on the welfare of society. So, with that background, I am sure the issue of welfare that hon. Fungaroo is raising is a matter which falls under that wide scope of generalship. 

2.45
MAJ. GEN. JIM MUHWEZI (NRM, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also congratulate my senior, Gen. Moses Ali, upon the promotion to that high rank in the Army. I only wanted to add that we also congratulate other people who were promoted with him including our ambassador to Burundi, Maj Gen. Matayo Kyaligionza, and all the other people who have been serving in political capacity, but who belong to the Army, and we thank the Commander-in-Chief for recognising their contribution and we look forward to other promotions. (Laughter) Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The reason the General was singled out is because he sits right here and is one of us, and it was easy to table this matter quickly. At an appropriate time, we will deal with this matter in a more comprehensive way. So, on that day, the General will be able to take his formal bows to the House in recognition of the House’s appreciation and congratulations.

Honourable members, we have spent the time I should have used for the committee reports. I think let us keep that now and all chairpersons will take two minutes each to just give an overview of what they have. The chairpersons of the committees on budget, commissions, statutory authorities and state enterprises, equal opportunities, government assurance, local government accounts, national economy, rules, privileges and discipline, science and technology, public accounts, human rights, HIV/AIDS, you have two minutes each. 

2.46
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Remegio Achia): Mr Speaker and honourable members, in the budget committee, we have one major pending business, and that is a report from the Republic of South Africa and other countries, when you sent us to study how we can operationalise Article 157 of our Constitution, which deals with the Contingencies Fund. The report is ready and we hope to present this report. It is very important for this Parliament to receive this report before the discussion on the Public Finance Bill which has some clauses to do with the operationalisation of the Contingencies Fund. 

Secondly, we anticipate, of course, at the end of August, the Appropriation Bill and we encourage the different sectoral committees to do in-depth analysis of their policy statements so that we are in time according to our Budget Act, to have a report on 30th August this year for passing. Mr Speaker, that is the business before the Budget Committee and we hope this year  we shall not receive any supplementaries. Thank you very much. 

2.48
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Patrick Amuriat): Mr Speaker, I thank you. The committee on COSASE has before it a petition from the Uganda Railways Tenants Association – URATA – on the allocation of land in Nsambya to the Uganda Land Commission. We are in advanced stages of completing this report. Actually, we just need one meeting that we have scheduled tomorrow before the report is concluded. We will be ready, Mr Speaker, to report to this House next week. 

Secondly, we are considering the accounts of the Uganda Investment Authority and also a value-for-money audit related to a project that was undertaken by the authority in Namanve. We are in advanced stages of meeting the Uganda Investment Authority and we could easily have a report on the authority’s account in two weeks. 

Mr Speaker, the committee has also moved on with its work in consideration of the financial accounts of the Uganda Development Bank, including the backlog, and we need three or four meetings to conclude with these accounts and accord a report to this House. 

Finally, we are considering matters related to allocation of land in the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation. So far, we have just held only one meeting and hopefully, we will require up to five meetings before we can report to this House. 

As I sit down sir, we received a petition directed to us from your chair with regard to the plight of the pensioners of the former Uganda Railways Corporation. It is my feeling and the feeling of the committee that this be redirected to another committee since it deals with direct policy issues. Mr Speaker, I so beg, thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The petition stands withdrawn from that committee and will be re-allocated to an appropriate committee.

2.57
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES (Ms Hanifa Kawooya): Thank you Rt. Hon. Speaker, I would have presented my report from the back seat, but the back seat is not giving Members the equal opportunities in terms of space. We have the following before the committee on Equal Opportunities: A report on Ugandan women trafficking and sexual slavery in Malaysis. We are ready for the presentation.

Before I continue, allow me to correct the impression that was created on the Floor of this House and reflected in our Hansard. It is not true that the Committee on Equal Opportunities grabbed the mandate of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development.

The truth is, under your wise guidance, Mr Speaker, you asked the committees of Equal Opportunities, Gender, and Foreign Affairs, to harmonise. In the process, the reports for Equal Opportunities and Foreign Affairs were ready, but that of Gender was not ready, and I think that is what brought the difference. Where there was no report there is nothing that the Committee on Equal Opportunities would grab. I wanted to put the record right.

The other business before the committee is the report on issues of equity and equal opportunities after we benchmarked with the Rwandan Parliament. The report is ready according to our rules, to be laid on the Table and if possible, to be debated.

Another report which is before the House is that on equity and equal opportunities in Local Government and this concerns issues of the district and other things. The report is ready and once we are allotted a slot, then we can present our report.

We also have a report on the issue of equity and equal opportunities in the institution of this Parliament; where sittings and travel abroad are being looked into. I thank you Rt Hon. Speaker.

3.00
THE CHAIRMAN, LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Jack Sabiiti): The committee has the following business pending before it:

1.	A report of the committee on the Auditor-General’s report for the financial year 2008/2009 on upper local governments, that is 56 districts. The draft report is ready for consideration by the committee.

2.	A report of the committee on the Auditor-General’s report for financial year 2009/2010 on upper local governments, that is 56 local governments. The draft report is ready for consideration by the committee. 

3.	A report on a special audit of Kawempe division. The draft report is ready for consideration by the committee.

4.	Lastly, consideration of the Auditor-General’s report on value-for-money audit NAADS component in various districts which is about to start. I beg to report, Mr Speaker.

3.01
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Steven Birahwa): Thank you so much, Rt. Hon. Speaker. The Committee on National Economy is ready to present the state of the economy report as per the end of the financial year 2011/2012. But being the beginning of the next financial year, the committee will also request that at a later stage, they make a report on the performance of loans, the debt sustainability and the national debt portfolio. 

Aware that the Minister of Finance while reading the budget did lay on Table the report on performance of loans as requested, and we presume that each Member still has his copy, and if there is a problem, then we can get you extra copies because you need to look at what the minister stated as performance.

The Committee on National Economy is also ready with three loan reports; the first is the Mulago Maternal Neo-natal Specialised Hospital. That loan request report is ready. Thanks to the Parliamentarians Maternal Health Advocacy team for that work.

The other report which is ready is the FDR 74 million IDA for support to the electricity sector development; this includes the power transmission line from Kawanda to Masaka which has a step-down component to the community.

The third report is the Rural Electrification project, which is about energy development and access expansion in seven towns of Uganda from OPEC funds.

The other pending field visits - which the Spanish requested for, with regard to the radar - by the committee to the Ministry of Works, CAA and Meteorology, but we found out that they had not harmonised. We requested Ministry of Works working with CAA, Meteorology, Water and Environment, and Security, to harmonise because the radar cannot be for only single use. We require an integrated specification to take care of all these interests. So, the Spanish request of Euros 15 million is pending harmonisation by the line ministries.

Finally, the committee is having a technical education request by Ministry of Education, which is pending a field trip and a report from Parliament.

The committee will continue interfacing with key sectors like Tourism, Railways, and Energy in an effort to guide the performance of the economy.

3.06
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi): Thank you Rt. Hon. Speaker, I beg to report that there is no pending business before the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. I beg to report.

3.06
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (Mr Robert Kafeero): Rt Hon. Speaker, the Committee on Science and Technology made a number of field visits both within the country and outside the country, and a number of draft reports  are ready for consideration by the committee. They include: A report on the science and technology situation in public universities; a report on the science and technology situation in Uganda technical colleges; a very fascinating report on a survey by the Parliamentary Office on Science and Technology  of the United Kingdom in partnership with the committee; a benchmarking visit report to the Houses of Parliament of the UK by the committee members; another report of a visit to Maputo, Mozambique by the members of the committee; a report of a visit to the African Space Research Programme, which is an aircraft manufacturing  project. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, at an appropriate time, through your office, we shall seek for space on the Order Paper to present these reports to the entire House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you Chair. 

3.08
THE CHAIRMAN, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much Rt Hon. Speaker. The Public Accounts Committee has covered a very big mileage and with your permission, allow me to explain what we have so far covered and the draft reports that are ready, which call for further cleaning to get ready for presentation.

First, on our report to be is the Government of Uganda Compensation to Dura Company; all witnesses that were so required to come and give an explanation of the roles that they played in this controversial compensation have been interfaced with including His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, whom we have met twice on the same matter. 

The only person that we have not been able to physically see, but for correspondences between my office and that of the Director General, Interpol and his counterpart in Nairobi, is the former MD, Mr Rajesh Lawal. Whether we get him physically or not, at least we have made enough efforts to trace for him and the draft report of this particular compensation is in place, and it will be in place shortly after two or three days of cleaning up by the committee for presentation to this House. 

The second set of presentations that this committee will make is again in the line with compensation by Government of Uganda to a number of entities. These entities include: Basil Engineering Company, which attracted a lot of money in terms of compensations on the Bugiri - Jinja Highway.  

We will also have in the same report, information on compensation paid for Expo Trade, which lost a contract of constructing the industrial park in Namanve. The draft report on these two compensations is also ready.

Then we also have ready another report involving another controversial compensation made by Government of Uganda to an ecosystem company under NFA. 

There is another controversial compensation of US$ 16 million paid to the Government of Burundi in form of servicing a loan which was entered into when NRA was still fighting in the bush. We have interfaced with a number of witnesses, but the work is not yet complete because we have also made contacts with whistleblowers and the MP who raised a controversial issue in the Parliament of Burundi.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, just give us the pending work.  

MR WADRI: I am coming; I will give it to you, Rt Hon. Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are now giving the report. 

MR WADRI: No, I am not. I am just highlighting.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We would like to know what work is pending.

MR WADRI: Rt Hon. Speaker, I would like the whole House to be on board. However, with your guidance, let me say the following. We have looked at the books of accounts of all ministries except Health and Education, which are due to appear for the second and third time respectively next week. 

We have looked at the self-accounting institutions and these include the regional hospitals that we have finished, and today being the 18th July, we have the following that we are to complete: Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education and Sports, Uganda Land Commission, Treasury Department, Gulu Regional Referral Hospital, Ministry of Works, Transport and Communication and Uganda National Roads Authority. 

We have also programmed to cover the Missions for the last three financial years. So, that is the programme we are so far left with. But as I said, by the end of next month, we shall be ready to submit some of the reports to Parliament. I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Chair. 

3.13
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Jovah Kamateeka): Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable members, the Human Rights Committee held its first meeting on Thursday, 12th and in addition to familiarisation of the mandate, we identified the institutions and agencies that we shall be interacting with. We do have a draft work plan which will be finalised in an induction workshop scheduled for 2nd to 4th of August.

We shall begin our work by looking at the reports of the Human Rights Commission to hold Government accountable for implementation of the recommendations therein. And we will be carrying out human rights audits of the Bills that are before Parliament. 

In the meantime, the Committee of Human Rights strongly condemns the failure by the Police to protect the people of Uganda as they cast their vote in the Bukoto East by-elections. We shall be engaging the IGP and the Minister of Internal Affairs on such issues in line with our mandate provided for by Rule 174(d) of our Rules of Procedure. 

The honourable Minister of Internal Affairs should inform this House as to who those kiboko wielding men were and why they were not apprehended by the Police despite the Police’s heavy presence in the area. The Minister should give us assurance 
-
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Chair, is that the pending work before the committee? 

MS KAMATEEKA: Rt Hon. Speaker, thank you for your guidance, however, all business of the committee is pending and will be handled accordingly. I thank you. 

3.15
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS AND RELATED MATTERS (Ms Rosemary Najjemba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Committee on HIV/AIDS and related Matters under rule 172 of our new Rules of Procedure is required to report to Parliament at least twice a year. One report entitled: “The challenges of HIV/AIDS pandemic in a few selected districts in Uganda” is ready for consideration and adoption and you have already ruled that we shall have it presented today. 

The second report is still in draft form; it is about indoor residual spraying in Northern Uganda. As you all know, malaria and HIV/AIDS are very close and so the HIV/AIDS committee also went to Northern Uganda to find out what is going on with the indoor residual spraying.

We hope to have two other reports from our oversight activities in a number of districts. We shall also have Members of Parliament dialogue on the HIV situation in the country and this will be under the theme, “The role of Parliament in the fight against HIV/AIDS”. We hope to have that this year. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The Ad hoc Committee on Oil will be speaking to the House next week. Honourable chairpersons, I have heard you saying reports are ready. They are only ready if they have been submitted to the Clerk’s office. If they are ready with you, they are not ready as far as Parliament is concerned. 

We can only know that you are ready if you have submitted a copy of your report to the Clerk, who informs this House that the report is ready. Please do the needful so that we know exactly which reports are ready so that they can be scheduled for presentation to the House. Do not keep them to yourselves.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, I don’t know whether I heard you properly, but I wanted your guidance as to the presentation of the report of the Ad hoc Committee on Oil. Was it the status or the report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, we have given you two extensions of time now and we were hoping that you would be ready so that we get this matter behind us. What is the matter now?


MR WERIKHE: Yesterday I reported that in as far as issues of the committee regarding the oil probe within the country are concerned, we have covered 90 percent. However, we cannot report to the House when we have not actually gone out of the country because the petition alludes to the areas where the alleged officials had accounts in external banks.

So, there is no way we can present our report without actually going to those banks, and arrangements have been made and we are travelling to these various countries next month in order to come with information to inform the writing of our final report. That is what I reported yesterday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER ON THE STATUS OF HEALTH SERVICES DELIVERY IN UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had moved that one backwards and rescheduled it.

PETITION AGAINST IRREGULAR ALLOCATION OF COUNCIL LAND BY UGANDA LAND COMMISSION IN MBALE MUNICIPALITY

3.20
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise under Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda to present this petition. 

To: The Parliament of the Republic of Uganda,

The humble petition of the Mayor and the councillors of Mbale Municipal Local Government Council against irregular allocation of Council’s land by the Uganda Land Commission, presented by me, Jack Wamanga-Wamai, Member of Parliament for Mbale Municipality:

Showeth and states that the Uganda Land Commission has been carrying out allocation of land, which belongs to Mbale Municipal Local Government Council that was gazetted for public use by the Council. The land, which has been allocated by Uganda Land Commission to private individuals includes Mbale Municipal Cemetery, Town Clerk’s residence, Bugwere Road Market, Uhuru Park, former Pallisa Road Market, Children’s Park, and Lorry Park currently serving as a recreation site for the Central Market Vendors, among others.

The Uganda Land Commission has so far issued titles to private individuals on land that has been used by Mbale Municipal Council as Lorry Park since 1960. Mbale Municipal Council had started re-locating vendors from Mbale Central Market to Lorry Park to pave way for the construction of a modern market by the Government of Uganda, but this was frustrated due to allocations made by Uganda Land Commission.

The consistent irregular allocation of land by Uganda Land Commission is likely to jeopardise the activities of the Council in planning for the development of the municipality. In allocating Council’s land, the Uganda Land Commission does take into account the procedure for allocating land and the procedure for amending a detailed plan of the municipality. 

As a result of the irregular actions by Uganda Land Commission, Mbale Municipal Council stands to lose land for schools, markets, among others, and some of this land includes an open space on Nkambwe lane, Indian Quarters, Busoga Lane and the dumping site, which is under NEMA for decomposing materials, has also been grabbed.

Wherefore by this petition, the petitioners pray that the Parliament investigates the circumstances surrounding the allocation of land in Mbale Municipal Local Government Council by Uganda Land Commission.

One of the contentious issues in Mbale now -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The prayer.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: And the petitioners, as are duty bound, will ever pray and hereto, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures to this petition, which is dated 17 July 2012. I beg to present, Mr Speaker.

MR SEKANDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hoonourable members. The information I want to give on the issue of land in Uganda is that in 1994-1995, we had a Constituent Assembly and in this Assembly, statutory leases to municipalities were abolished. So, the question of talking about empty spaces in Mbale Municipality does not arise. The empty spaces in municipalities are controlled by the district land boards not the municipalities themselves. 

So, the only controlling authorities we have in Uganda arising from the Constitution we made in 1994-1995 are the Uganda Land Commission. Its mandate is to hold land in which Government is interested. We also have the District Land Board for the public land wherever it may be and then the other one is the mailo owners and freehold. Those are the only authorities that can claim land so the -(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The petition has been brought under Rule 29 of our Rules and our Rules of Procedure do provide that if a petition is brought before Parliament, it can only be rejected if a Member moves a motion –(Interjection)– I am talking about Rule 29. That it can only be rejected on the ground that it is not properly worded or for any other reason by way of a motion. Would it be procedurally okay for a Member to move for a rejection of a petition without moving a proper motion under our Rules of Procedure? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Vice-President rose to give some information. I am going to make my ruling about where the petition will go. The Vice-President has not in any way attempted to say that the petition should be rejected.

MR SSEKANDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My standing here was to sensitise people about the Land Law in Uganda. This law says that the statutory leases that used to belong to municipalities by 1994/95 were abolished and, therefore, the control of these statutory leases that were abolished then is under the district land board. I was giving you an example that Uganda Land Commission is largely concerned with land in which Government is interested, for instance this building, the hospitals and so forth. Otherwise, the one you are talking about is under the control of Mbale District Land Board. This is for information purposes,  I am not rejecting your petition. I am just trying to help so that people do not traverse this because that is the law.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The petition is received. Hon. Wamai, have you laid the copy and the signatures on the Table? 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, I presented them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let the records capture the petition as presented by hon. Wamai. I refer it to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and they should be able to report on it quickly since it is a short matter which does not have to wait for 45 days.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION MOVED IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 179 (1)(b) OF THE CONSTITUTION PROVIDING FOR THE CREATION OF NEW DISTRICTS

3.29
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move a motion under Article 179(1)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda for a resolution of this Parliament to create the following districts effective 1 July 2012:

1.	Kagadi District, currently part of Kibaale District consisting of Buyaga East and Buyaga West counties with its headquarters at Kagadi Town Council.

2.	Kakumiro District, currently part of Kibaale District consisting of Bugangaizi East and Bugangaizi West counties with its headquarters at Kakumiro Town Council.

Effective July 1 2013:

1.	Omoro District, currently part of Gulu District consisting of Omoro County with its headquarters at Omoro County headquarters.

2.	Namisindwa District, currently part of Manafwa District.

3.	Consisting of Namisindwa County with its headquarters at Namisindwa.

4.	Pakwach District, currently part of Nebbi District consisting of Jonam County with its headquarters at Pakwach Town Council.

5.	Butebo District, currently part of Pallisa District consisting of Butebo County with its headquarters at Butebo Trading Centre.

6.	Rukiga District, currently part of Kabale District consisting of Rukiga County with its headquarters at Rukiga County headquarters.

7.	Rubanda District, currently part of Kabale District consisting of Rubanda County with its headquarters at Rubanda County headquarters.

8.	Kyotera District, currently part of Rakai District, with its headquarters at Kasaali County headquarters. It will consist of Kyotera County and the sub-counties of Kyebe, Kakuuto and Kasasa in Kakuuto County. The two sub-counties of Kibanda and Kisamba formerly in Kakuuto County to be part of Kooki County constituting Rakai District.

Effective July 1 2014:

1.	Kyadondo District, currently part of Wakiso District consisting of Kyadondo County with its headquarters at Kasangati.

2.	Nabilatuk District, currently part of Nakapiripirit District consisting of Pian County with its headquarters at Nabilatuk Trading Centre.

3.	Bugweri District, currently part of Iganga district consisting of Bugweri County with its headquarters at Busesa.

4.	Kasanda District, currently part of Mubende District consisting of Kasanda County with its headquarters at Kasanda.

5.	Bunyangabu District, currently part of Kabarole District with its headquarters at Kibiito Town Council.

6.	Kwania District, currently part of Apac District consisting of Kwania County with its headquarters at Aduku Town Centre.

7.	Kapelebyong District, currently part of Amuria District consisting of Kapelebyong County with its headquarters at Kapelebyong Trading Centre.

Effective July 1 2015:

1.	Obongi District, currently part of Moyo District consisting of Obongi County with its headquarters at Obongi Trading Centre.

2.	Kazo district, currently part of Kiruhura District consisting of Kazo County with its headquarters at Kazo County headquarters.

3.	Kazo District, currently part of Kiruhura District consisting of Kazo County with its headquarters at Kazo County headquarters.

4.	Rwampara District, currently part of Mbarara District consisting of Rwampara County with its headquarters at Rwampara County headquarters.

5.	Kitagwenda District, currently part of Kamwenge District consisting of Kitagwenda County with its headquarters at Kitagwenda County headquarters.

6.	Kikuube District, currently part of Hoima District consisting of Buhaguzi County with its headquarters at Kikuube Town Board.

7.	Madi-Okollo District, currently part of Arua District consisting of Madi-Okollo County with its headquarters at Inde Trading Centre.

8.	Kihiihi District, currently part of Kanungu District consisting of Kihiihi West County with its headquarters at Kihiihi Town Council.

Mr Speaker, I propose that after due consultations, we propose to create two new districts to be curved out of Kasese District. I will carry out consultations with the district leaders and interest groups on the name, boundaries and headquarters of the new district in Kasese. The headquarters of each new district which is not yet a town council, shall become a town council in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government Act. The motion is accompanied by a comprehensive certificate of financial implications duly issued by the Ministry of Finance, confirming that funds to finance the proposed districts in a phased manner will be available. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the past, this motion used to be debated and dealt with immediately, but over time, this has changed in that we do not deal with these matters directly; we refer them to the committee. That has become the new practice, which practice I do not intend to alter at this moment even if it is clear that I could have. So, the motion stands referred to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. I give them one week and the House will be ready to receive this motion for debate and passing on the 26th of this month. The committee responsible should take appropriate action to come back to the House on the 26th July and that is next week. It is accordingly ordered.

DEBATE IN REPLY TO THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT, ON THURSDAY, 7 JUNE 2012

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY, 7 JUNE 2012

3.37
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Mr Speaker, I rise to move a motion that thanks to His Excellency the President, be recorded for the clear and precise exposition contained in the State of the Nation -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Achia, I think there was a request for a personal statement by hon. Felix Okot. We could allow him to do it at this time then we go to this long process. Hon. Okot Felix. Okay, mover of the motion proceed with the motion.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Speaker, I rise to move a motion that thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President, to this Parliament on Tuesday, 7 June 2012.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, one may ask, what is the purpose of the State of the Nation Address? Why the State of the Nation Address? What purpose does it serve in the affairs of the state called Uganda? And what is expected of Parliament that receives it? And in this regard, what message did His Excellency the President, deliver to us on the state of the health of the nation called Uganda on 7 June 2012?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have 25 minutes.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: In answering the above question, I would like to pray that this august House joins me in honest applause and thank His Excellency the President, on a task well executed with precision. 

With respect to the first question, I would like to draw Members to the constitutional duty and responsibility of His Excellency the President, as stated in articles 98(1), 99(3) and 101(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda of 1995. 

Article 98(1) states that there shall be a President of Uganda, who shall be the Head of State, Head of Government and Commander-in-Chief of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces and the Fountain of Honour.

Article 99(1) states that the Executive authority of Uganda is vested in the President and shall be exercised in accordance with the Constitution and the laws of Uganda. 

Furthermore, Article 99(3) says that it shall be the duty of the President to abide by, uphold and safeguard this Constitution and the laws of Uganda and promote the welfare of the citizens and protect the territorial integrity of Uganda. 

So, honourable members, in reporting on this state of the nation and the health of Uganda as commanded by the Constitution under Article 101(1), the President is bound to account to the people of Uganda through their elected representatives on the following issues:

1.	His exercise of the powers and duties conferred on him by the Constitution;
2.	The health of the state of the nation of Uganda
3.	The social, economic and political welfare of the citizens of Uganda, territorial integrity, the rule of law, as well as giving a precise accountability of the overall health of Uganda as a nation state and the way forward in the coming financial years.

In this regard, I would like now to commend this year’s message of the State of the Nation Address as delivered by His Excellency the President, on 7 June 2012 at the Conference Centre, Serena Hotel. This year’s State of the Nation Address is broadly divided into five major parts:

One, and the biggest part of it, was on the state of the economy.  Two, was on the role and place of the private sector in Uganda’s economy. The third was on the importance of the energy and the road infrastructure in in our economy. The fourth, was on the political and governance issues on the domestic front. The fifth was on the role of the Legislature. This Parliament is making appropriate laws for the efficient management of this country.

On issue No.1, there is no doubt that the President had to dwell in depth on the state of health of our economy, considering the fact that Uganda went through a rough year when inflation reached double digit levels over and above 30 percent. I think over 20 pages of the State of the Nation Address was on this issue of the economy. 

Inflationary and exchange rate pressures undermined the performance of our economy in the first half of the financial year 2011/2012 and it eventually led to one of the lowest economic growth rates our country has recorded since 1994. 
 
Whereas His Excellency the President -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Our rules are very clear that a Member will not read a statement without authority of the Speaker, but shall make reference to a note while debating in the House. I am wondering whether hon. Achia is reading a new State of the Nation Address or he sought your permission to read whatever he is reading; Members do not have copies.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable member of this House is allowed to refer to notes that he or she has prepared. The honourable member is simply making a constant reference to his notes. (Laughter)

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I will do just that; refer constantly to my notes. 

So, whereas His Excellency the President, attributed this to the general global economic downturn, the Euro debt crisis, the reduction in export and the drought in the country that lowered food production, it is also important to note that part of the problem we realised in the first financial year arose from the large losses incurred by the Central Bank in its operations as a result of undue financial pressures and large drawdowns placed on the Bank of Uganda by the Executive. This financial year, this is left out.

On the other hand, I would like to thank the President for explaining in detail, the other underlying factors and drivers that have been responsible for the recovery of our economy since 1986. From page 2 to page 9, he outlines the issue of security, consistent adherence to microeconomic stability, policy management, the ever expanding regional market which has helped to drive the demand of the agricultural products from this country, and consistent international support from our partners as spelt out on page 2 of his speech. In this regard, I would like it to be recorded that thanks be passed on to the President for this clear and detailed understanding of our economy on the measure, the binding constraints and the performance of our economy, which is critical in determining the right policies that must be followed in the coming years. If you have not understood the problem, it is very difficult to prescribe the right policy on the way forward for our economy. 

As our economy moves forward, we would like to implore the President and his Executive to handle the oil industry in a transparent manner by putting in place a good regulatory environment. Whereas the discovery of oil presents a good solution to the country’s financial stress, it must also be noted that it can as well pose civil and economic strife that might disrupt other aspects of the national economy if not well managed.

Mr Speaker, I would want to implore the President to come clean on the unnecessary supplementaries that are always presented to this House mainly as a result of poor planning by ministries, departments and agencies. Furthermore, it is my prayer that the use of suppression in the implementation of the country’s approved budget should end as this basically impairs the expected outputs and outcomes planned in the said financial year.

Right from page 2 to about page 19, His Excellency the President dwelt at length on the role and performance of Uganda’s private sector. He talked about bars, saloons and many other private sector endeavours in this country. 

In 1989, the NRM Government adopted a policy of private sector-led economic development. The private sector, we were told, is expected to be the main driver of economic growth with Government at the back seat. Under this policy, the Government of Uganda undertook sector-wide reforms such as the liberalisation of the economy, privatisation of state-owned enterprises and parastatals and even the implementation of severe structural adjustment reforms and civil service reforms - the same as retrenchment. 

For the first time, I would like this Parliament to thank His Excellency the President for clearly stating that a private sector-led strategy has limitations in today’s Ugandan economy. Whereas our economy has been growing since the 1990s, it is now clear that the structure of our economy has changed much and has remained fragile in the sense of external economic shocks, apart from the entry of the telecommunication services, the deepening of the financial banking industry, the entry of mobile telephony and the growth of foreign direct investments. 

One then may ask, if the private sector is not sufficient to drive this economy to the 21st century, what are the potential drivers that could take our economy forward and that could bring the socio-economic transformation that we need in this country? What should Uganda do differently? Is it agriculture, is it industry or is it the private sector? What should Government do differently?

On pages 5 and 6 of his speech, the President has detailed the current status of economic growth namely, agriculture growing at 6.5 percent declined to 1.4 percent in 2012; the service sector grew at 17.2 percent; the entry of the real estate industry, the light industries and so on. I would like to agree with the President when he says on page 6 that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you like to make lesser reference to your notes.

MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The way it has transpired, the honourable member is actually not addressing members. Members have lost interest and he is talking to himself. We would have followed if the members had been given copies of the document so that all of us would be on board. In this context, Mr Speaker, I propose that unless he brings the copies of the documents, we suspend his presentation. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Remigio Achia, please speak on your motion and make lesser reference to your notes.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Thank you, Mr Speaker-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me also take this chance to inform the House that in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Ibanda Town School in Ibanda District represented by hon. Margaret Kiboijana and hon. Byabagambi. They have come to observe the proceedings. Join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have this afternoon, guild presidents of Mbarara and Kyambogo universities. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. Join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers of Buwenge Parents Day and Boarding School represented by hon. Agnes Nabirye and hon. Mbagadhi Fredrick. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Thank you. 

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Speaker, I think the suggestions of the honourable members are right. I think it should be the practice that when we move motions like this, copies be made available to members. I had made this ready and when I tried to consult our people, they said that that was just a simple statement that I would make and it would not be necessary. However, the document is typed and I think I will make it available for members since we are going to have a debate next week. So, I will just conclude and make a copy available for everyone. Thank you.

I was saying that the President came out and said that our economy now as it stands today cannot move forward without a partnership between the private sector and Government. Initially, we had a policy that said that our economy would be 100 percent private sector led, but now Government has come out clearly and the President has said in the State of the Nation Address that our economy needs deliberate nurturing by the state. In this regard, I would implore the President and Government to quickly bring the Public Private Partnership Bill to this House. Ugandans would then have criteria of how they will be able to participate in Uganda’s economy in terms of partnering with Government in investments like in infrastructure, energy, roads, education.

The President also in his State of the Nation Address dwelt at length on infrastructure - the roads. I think for the first time, the relationship between the State of the Nation Address and the budget - (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I seek clarification, Mr Speaker. The presenter conceded and accepted to bring copies of the speech next week but he is continuing to bore the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the member has said he was concluding his speech on moving the motion. Yes, because you speak to your motion. By any definition, it must be a speech. So, honourable member, would you like to conclude your speech on the motion?

MR REMEGIO ACHIA: Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence. It is not the first time we have had a member of this House move a motion on the State of the Nation Address. As far as I can remember, in the last five or six years I have been in this House, apart from having your notes which you are allowed when you are moving a motion, I have not seen anybody distributing the motions. At the moment, I have even decided to put down my notes and stick to the motion. I have points with which I wanted to conclude. 

One, I wanted to conclude on the issue of infrastructure and the wage bill. I do not have to read it. I have it in my head. If you think I am looking at these papers, I -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable member, proceed and wind up with your presentation. 

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: One of the issues I wanted to comment on in the State of the Nation Address was on the infrastructure. I was just saying that for the first time, the link between the State of the Nation Address and the Budget hits about 99 per cent. The 19 roads the President mentioned in the State of the Nation Address have been budgeted for and the money -

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, I need guidance from you. The motion is extremely important and provided for in the Constitution. It is a constitutional matter. In fact, it is more important than a mere positive statement. I have been here for many years and this is the first time I am seeing a mover of a motion of this nature moving without giving copies. What we know is that there is a motion but the members do not have the motion. What are the members going to debate if the motion does not exist or is not on the Table? Guide me, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are two things here. There is a motion in the form and manner captured on the Order Paper: “Motion that thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the Address on the State of the Nation by His Excellency the President to this Parliament on Tuesday, 7 June 2012.” Normally, that motion has not more than two pages. That is the body of the motion where you make your recital, “Whereas…whereas…” and then you come to the final prayer for a resolution of Parliament. That is the text of the motion. 

It is different from the speech the honourable member makes in justifying his or her motion. Those two are separate. Have members seen the text of the motion itself? Yes, the text has been circulated. So, the honourable member is now speaking to his motion. I have seen a text of the motion which is two pages, if I remember correctly. He is justifying his motion and a seconder will be called upon and then we will start the debate by listening to the reply from the Leader of the Opposition. Let the honourable member conclude his remarks and move the motion so that we can proceed with the necessary formulations. 

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Speaker, you have consistently ruled on this. I think in future - (Interjection) - our people, the clerks, may need – I think even the text which the mover of the motion brings to this House should be made available to members. I think it would be useful-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable member, would you like to proceed.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. One of the issues I want this House to support the President on is the wage bill. This financial year, the wage bill is going to take nearly Shs 2 trillion. It is one of the highest costs in our budget. If we do not control this, all the districts we are creating, all the roads we are asking for may not have sufficient resources to run them. 

I think we need to thank the President for coming out clearly that it is high time we went into sequencing of what is important. Do we need to increase our salaries or do we need to first focus on productive investments, put money in agriculture, put money in tourism, put money in education and health? 

I wish to conclude by calling upon members to thank His Excellency the President for his clear, concise and well-informed exposition of the State of the Nation Address of Uganda as contained in the address of 7 June 2012. I would like to call upon members to join me in supporting this motion. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Seconder of the motion, you have eight minutes. 

Honourable members, in the gallery this afternoon, we have students and faculty members from an inter-university project between universities in Norway, South Africa and Uganda. They are attached to the Department of Food Technology and Human Nutrition at Makerere University. Please join me in welcoming them to Uganda. (Applause) Currently, they are studying about governance and are here to observe how Parliament operates. I am sure we are doing the normal things we do.     

4.03
MS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. I rise to second the motion raised by my honourable colleague, hon. Achia Remigio. 

The State of the Nation Address showed the strategic importance and brought into the limelight the drivers which are going to propel this economy to higher heights. I will hint on some sectors. 

Allow me to begin with agriculture. When you look at the State of the Nation Address, on page 3 His Excellency correctly stated that the subsistence farmers in this country comprise 60 per cent of all homesteads and they are still poor because we have not tapped their potential. I want to support the President. He has exposed us to all the countryside and we have noted that our people are still very poor. He has gone ahead to give us a strategy of how we can lead our people out of this poverty. The strategy he came up with was zoning. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, you are the custodian of our Rules of Procedure. We are setting a very dangerous precedent to have honourable colleagues violating our rules openly and with impunity. The rules provide that you cannot come here and deliver a speech. You are supposed to speak to the motion not to read the speech to us. 

May I, therefore, request you to guide our colleagues that they should speak to their motion and abandon their written speeches because it violates our Rules of Procedure? If they are not ready, they should ask those who are - [Hon. Members: “Capable.”] – (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have ruled on this matter. A member rising to speak on the Floor of the House has a right to refer to the notes that the person has prepared. Whether the member is referring constantly to the notes – (Laughter) - is another matter. But I would urge the honourable member to reduce the frequency – (Laughter) - of references to the notes so that the debate can be lively. 

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for your wise ruling. I was quoting what was stated in the State of the Nation Address and I wanted to quote correctly. By the guidelines of quoting, you are free to read and quote from the text. Allow me to continue.

I began with the sector of agriculture and I was saying that in the State of the Nation Address, His Excellency explicitly stated that 68 percent of the homesteads we have in Uganda are under subsistence production and they are too poor because they still have untapped potential. The strategy His Excellency comes up with is an agricultural zoning strategy. He laboured so much to take us and the district leadership through this strategy. We came up with packages for our local communities. I think the President set the ball rolling and the ball is now in our hands, in the hands of this House and those of the local government, to make sure that we implement the agricultural zoning strategies.

Mr Speaker, I therefore urge the following stakeholders as follows: One, I want to appeal to the Ministry of Agriculture to develop an agricultural zoning strategy. This strategy will help us popularise the zoning and then to implement it in order to make sure that it achieves the objectives.

Two, again I call upon honourable colleagues that we work hand in hand with the local government to make sure that we implement the zoning strategy. This is because we are part and parcel of the team that identified the packages.

Thirdly, I want to call upon the Ministry of Agriculture, through the NAADS Secretariat, that NAADS should revisit its reporting system. As we talk now, the system for NAADS reporting is quantitative. When NAADS is reporting, all that we hear is that, “we procured and distributed so many kilogrammes of improved bean seeds.” We want to move away from this today because the ultimate objective of NAADS is to get our people out of poverty. We want to make sure that NAADS reports qualitatively; we want to see how this programme is helping our people to reduce the poverty levels in our community. When you look at what His Excellency reported in the State of the Nation Address, the ball is in our hands to make sure that we improve agricultural production. 

Again in the State of the Nation Address, His Excellency continued to emphasize the need for value addition. He stated that we need to add value to the goods and services produced in Uganda. We all know that the biggest hiccup we have in our economy today is exportation of unprocessed goods and raw materials. If we are to balance our economy today, we need to urgently promote the manufacturing industry. Here, Mr Speaker, allow me to thank the NRM Government for ensuring security hence creating an enabling environment for investment. 

Allow me to call upon all honourable colleagues and Ugandans to desist from all actions and practices that may scare away investors, both local and foreign. Allow me to also call upon the Ministry of Trade to come up with a strong marketing and trade policy that will protect the local investors from unnecessary competition and propel the industrial growth in Uganda.

In addition, allow me to appeal to the Ministry of Trade to fight harder and make sure that it rids this country of counterfeit products. These products are giving a lot of unnecessary competition to the industries we have in this country and they are also bogging down efforts to industrialise this country.

Allow me to also call upon the Ministry of Finance to try and expedite the construction of the regional silos and warehouses because we cannot promote value addition in Uganda when we do not have those silos and warehouses. You will note that as we talk now, a lot of agricultural produce experiences a lot of post harvest losses because of lack of storage facilities. 

His Excellency went ahead to emphasise the deliberate need to nurture some core industries we have in this country by the state – (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude.

MS NAMUGWANYA: I thank you very much. Around this country, we hear critics who do not support the Government strategy to nurture some of these core industries. I just want to call upon fellow Ugandans and honourable colleagues that if we are to create jobs in this country and balance our economy, the government needs to nurture some of these industries. 

People fear that some of these industries have godfathers who reap big from them. I just want to allay their fears by calling upon the Ministry of Finance to come up with a strategy on how to nurture such industries that will help our country and again come up with an accountability strategy.

I want to thank the Government for expanding the immunisation scope to include pneumonia and diarrhea, which are claiming a lot of lives of the children of this country. I also want to thank government for the mama kit and for the immunisation of the girl-child against cervical cancer. These are very good plans that are going to help improve the lives of mothers in this country.
 
The President talked about the issue of the products of the brain, and in particular he pointed out the electric car of Makerere University and then the banana flour. Mr Speaker, I want to note that there are several scientific innovations around this country. When you visit the various universities we have, they have a stock of these innovations but my worry is that many of these innovations have remained on the shelf. 

I therefore call upon the Government to work out a strategy of commercialising these innovations. Government should also think about putting in place a ministry of science and technology to act as a one-stop centre for all the science and technological innovations we have in this country.

I want to thank Government for the improvement in hydro electric power generation. There is a lot of improvement in the country today and the business community is comfortable about that.

I also want to appreciate the President for the improvement in the road network. I want to thank him for the road units we have just received in the country. I am sure we shall go a long way in improving the status of our roads in the country. I want to thank him for the plan to tarmac 44 roads in the countryside. We are very grateful for that! 

However, Mr Speaker, I want to call upon Ministry of Works to help us and come up with a unit cost for roads, which will help us avoid wasteful expenditure. Allow me give an example. A kilometre of road worked on by UNRA costs three times more than a kilometre worked on by a district local government. So, we request Government to harmonise this.

On page 14, His Excellency talks about a provision of Shs 20 billion per annum to cater for the councillors at district level and LCI chairpersons’ allowances. Mr Speaker, this issue is very important and quite significant for the development of this country because these cadres are helping a lot to ensure development in this country. I want to call upon Government to expedite the elections of LCI because we are well aware that the current LCIs term of office is expired. 

I also want to call upon Government to cater for the whole LCI executive. When we talk about the chairperson alone, he does not do the work alone. So the whole executive needs to be catered for. Lastly, in the President’s proposal, the councilors at sub-county level are left out. They too do a lot of work in regard to service delivery in this country. I would request that they are also included in this proposal. 

I want to end by saying that Uganda is for all of us and we all have a stake and a role to play. I urge all Ugandans and my honourable colleagues to actively play their roles positively and competently such that we can go where we want to go as a country. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member for Mubende District, for that speech seconding the motion. Honourable members, at this time I should have gone straight to the reply by the Leader of the Opposition but I have just been consulting with him. 

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Murchison Bay Day and Boarding Primary School represented by hon. Fredrick Ruhindi and hon. Nabilah Naggayi Sempala. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

At this time, I would like to take off some ten minutes and allow hon. Felix Okot Ogong to make a statement of personal explanation under rule 42, and then I will go back to the proceedings of the motion. 

PERSONAL STATEMENT

4.20
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I am making this statement on behalf of Members of Parliament from Lango. 

Mr Speaker, you will remember that on 16 May 2012, an issue of land dispute was raised in this Parliament by hon. Fr Jacinto Ogwal, Otuke Member of Parliament, on behalf of some of his constituents from Atira Parish, Olilim Sub-county, Otuke District. He raised the issue of land disputes claiming that hon. Annet Okwenye, Otuke District Member of Parliament, wrote a letter to the President in which she had informed the President that some free land had been found beyond the expectation of the President. On the basis of the above information, the President wrote a letter to State House Controller, copied to the two Members of Parliament from Otuke, directing the State House Controller to among other things get a land title and fence off the land for animal multiplication. 

Hon. Annet Okwenye, in response, strongly objected to the contents and tone of the matter raised by the honourable Member of Parliament, saying that the owners of the land had voluntarily donated the land. She said the presentation of the issue was made in bad faith and was meant to undermine her politically. On the other hand, Fr Jacinto Ogwal stuck to his guns saying that the members of his community, who are the owners of the land, were neither consulted nor surrendered their land. 

Meanwhile, tension was building up not only in Atira parish and Otuke District but in the whole of Lango sub-region because of the wide media coverage of the issue. It became clear from the acrimonious tone of the two MPs and the mood in the sub region that there was need for our intervention, particularly to cool tempers and to reconcile the two Members of Parliament. 

Lango Parliamentary Group, as the umbrella organisation that brings together all the Members of Parliament coming from Lango sub region, called a meeting. At that meeting it was agreed that the members would travel to the disputed land in Atira, Otuke District, on a fact-finding mission to hear from all the stakeholders.

On 25 June 2012, in consultation with the two Members of Parliament, the district chairman, the speakers and councillors of the district, a meeting was held in Lira. During the meeting, the RDC openly showed disdain for the Members of Lango Parliamentary Group and threatened to block us from poking our nose in his district affairs. However, the district chairman, the councillors and Annet Okwenye showed a lot of cooperation during the preliminary discussions. 

In these discussions, Lango Parliamentary Group said their interest, and MPs with common interest with the people of the area, was to get the truth from all the stakeholders and try to intervene in order to bring peace and harmony in the area. In that meeting, a resolution was drawn and the meeting agreed that we should go and meet in the area. 

On Wednesday, 11 July 2012, the Rt Hon. Speaker raised concerns about the scheduled visit. His concerns arose from the letter he had received from Otuke RDC citing security concerns and high tension on the ground. The RDC claimed that the district, and in particular the RDC, was not aware of the visit of the Lango Parliamentary Group to the area on 14 July 2012. He also claimed that the visit would be in conflict with and jeopardise the planned visit to the area by the Committee of Physical Infrastructure. 

A clarification on the Floor of Parliament by hon. Betty Amongi, MP Oyam and vice-chairperson Lango Parliamentary Group, showed that it was not true that Otuke District was not aware of the planned visit of Lango Parliamentary Group. Indeed, it was explained to this august House that all the district officials, including the RDC, were part and parcel of the joint meeting in which the plan and programme for the meeting was drawn on 25 June 2012 where all Members of Parliament were present. 

After a consultative meeting with the leadership of Lango Parliamentary Group, the Rt Hon. Speaker okayed the trip of the Lango Parliamentary Group to Otuke. He wrote a letter to the RDC informing him that members of the Lango Parliamentary Group were free to travel provided that their trips were aimed at facilitating rather than complicating matters on the ground. 

The meeting was widely publicised and up to 13 July 2012, when we arrived in Lira, none of the district officials had communicated to us that there would be no meeting. True to the resolution of 25 June 2012, when we arrived in Lira we found Otuke District chairman, some of his councillors and the LCIII chairman waiting for us. We met and confirmed the programme of 25 June 2012. Although it was evident from the body language of the district chairman, Mr Benson Ogwang Ogoo, that he was not comfortable with the visit, we could note that he had developed cold feet about the visit.

During the meeting, we were warned by the LCIII chairman, who was in attendance, that the RDC, with financial assistance from some quarters that were opposed to our visit, had planned to foil the meeting with the stakeholders. They had mobilized hooligans for whom they had bought and supplied sachets of potent gin to morale boost them to disrupt the meeting. He therefore cautioned us that we would do well if we contacted the regional police commander to give us more security to travel with, a caution which we had to take good account of to guarantee our security.

When we arrived at Otuke District headquarters, there were no formal arrangements by the district authorities to welcome us. The RDC was conspicuously absent. The atmosphere clearly showed that our visit was not welcome. On our way past the district headquarters, we met the district chairperson who hastily stopped and informed us that he had received information from the venue of the meeting to the effect that there had been serious fighting and he strongly advised that we do not proceed to that venue. He also declined to go to that venue.

However, we were surprised when after seeing that we had declined to take his advice, the district chairman whom we had left a distance of nearly half a kilometre behind, came after us at a supersonic speed and overtook our vehicles. We found him picking the LC chairman of Olilim Sub County, one Okamara, on the way. We later learnt that it was this same Okamara who had earlier been at the venue and was one of those who had commanded the hooligans at the centre of the fighting that had been reported to us by the district chairman. It was most likely that he had been part of the fighting that the chairperson had told us about.

On our way, we met some vehicles with seriously wounded people being taken to Olilim Health Centre. One of them, Alfred Oluge, died later. One curious thing we noticed was that the pick-up, which we later learnt belonged to Obote Otti, one of the suspects, was being closely guarded by men in police uniform. We were later told that the RDC, with financial assistance from some quarters opposed to our visit, had instructed and deployed the bursar of Alanyi, Mr Obote Otti; Mr Opio Luciano; the chairperson LCII in Olilim Sub County, Mr Okamara, as mentioned above and others, to mobilise the hooligans and take command of the Anti-Stock Theft Unit (ASTU) police personnel dressed in regular police uniform to unleash terror on the stakeholders who had come to testify to us. They were financed to buy and distribute potent gin to the hooligans to morale boost them into committing the crime.

Indeed, at the venue we found many empty sachets of potent gin littered all over the place. Half-naked, drunken and rowdy young men were also present and upon our arrival, they started using foul words and vulgar language against us. They also threatened to rough us up. They were particularly focusing on hon. Okot-Ogong, the chairman; hon. Betty Amongi and hon. Cecilia Ogwal. That was their special target. It took the keen interest of the parliamentary police and the other twelve armed policemen we had come with from Lira to take control of the situation.

Mr Speaker, at the time we arrived, we found the suspects, a one Obote Otti; one Opio; the chairman LCII of Olilim Sub County, Mr Okamara; Omiat Moses, Opaka Alfred and others whose names were given as the ring leaders of the assault. They were clearly in command of the situation because we got them surrounded by ASTU personnel who were taking instructions from them. Some of the stakeholders who had fled to a safe distance, some with wounds visible on their bodies, upon seeing us returned to the venue to narrate to us how they had been attacked by the hooligans soon after they arrived at the venue of the meeting.

As they went to a nearby water pump to drink some water, those hooligans descended on them. When they attempted to take refuge at a place where the armed men in police uniform were, they were ordered to lie down as the hooligans attacked them with all forms of crude weapons. Every time they tried to escape, the men in uniform would shoot in the air to scare them into remaining on the ground at the mercy of the hooligans. It was during this episode that some of the hooligans, Omiat Moses, Opio and Opaka Alfred, delivered fatal blows that eventually caused the death of Alfred Oluge, a deputy clan leader of one of the major clans in Lango.

We were given the names of the people who were on the death list prepared by the commanders listed above. True to our fears, one of the persons on the death list was Alfred Oluge who had been killed. We noticed that the vehicle we had confirmed belonged to the RDC had been parked at the venue. After scrutiny by hon. Hamsom Obua and hon. Tonny Ayo, who are trained cadres, it was discovered that the RDC’s vehicle was carrying sticks. They later alerted hon. Betty Amongi. However, as they went to check that vehicle, the acting DPC of Otuke District, Mr Darius Awiyo, hurriedly ordered the police to throw away the sticks into the bushes. However, hon. Amongi, with the assistance of hon. Hamsom Obua and hon. Tonny Ayo, recovered some of the sticks from the bushes upon which the acting DPC struggled to wrestle them away. There were blood stains on the biggest stick recovered, showing that it could have been used when the late Alfred Oluge was at the venue. 

Although we were assured by some stakeholders who were present that there was no security threat ahead, the district chairman discouraged us from proceeding to the land in dispute, which was about nine kilometres from the venue of our meeting, claiming that he had credible evidence that there were armed hooligans hidden in the bushes with bows and arrows, spears and stones that they would use to harm us if we went to visit that land. To demonstrate his lack of commitment to our cause, he hurriedly left and ordered the policemen from Otuke District Police Headquarters to leave, leaving us at the mercy of the rowdy hooligans with depleted security force.

On our way back, we met a big group of people who claimed they are the actual owners of the land. Many had hired transport from as far away as Oyam District. They numbered nearly 60. They had relocated to Gwete Trading Centre after an attack on them at the venue of the meeting. We addressed them and they gave us a clear perspective of the historical background to the ownership of the land. Most of them belonged to Otek Okwero Wee clan

According to them, the land belonged to their great grandfather, the late Ojuka Angol, who curved it off as a hunting ground under his jurisdiction as far back as 1936. He lived, died and was buried there where his dependants continued living until they were displaced by the insecurity in the area. 

Our Observations

Disagreements between and among district political leadership remain disruptive and injurious to the interests of peace and harmony in the district. There was a deliberate attempt by some forces - the RDC - to prevent us from getting to the land in dispute or to listen to the stakeholders of the land in dispute. 

Although we were unable to reach the disputed land or formally listen to the stakeholders, it was obvious that the proposed government scheme on the land has evoked serious animosity and brought about serious social tensions in the area. In which case, the government would do well to cease any further dealings until all stakeholders are fully consulted.

The bloody confrontation at the venue of the proposed meeting was fermented and sponsored by the RDC of Otuke. This has seriously affected the confidence of the people in the state machinery especially the office of the RDC and the police.

There is urgent need for the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to expedite the visit to the area and they recommend appropriate course of action in this august House.

So many people who had originally occupied the land seem to remain in their displaced areas. Instead of the local district government encouraging and facilitating them to return and settle on their land, it seems they are being deliberately discouraged from returning and settling on their land.

Lastly, the district local government and the police seem to be at best complacent and at worst they are abetting the tension in the area. Those who claim to be actual owners of the land in dispute seem not to be getting the requisite protection from the authorities in the district, but those who are fraudsters are being protected by the state machinery. 

On the other hand, we would like to appeal to government to take this matter as a serious matter and immediately convene a meeting to ensure that this matter is handled without any further complication and tension. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Felix Okot Ogong. The statement is made under rule 46. It used to be rule 42 but because of the changes, it is now rule 46: “A member may explain a matter of personal nature but no controversial matter may be brought in the explanation nor may debate arise from it.” That is the rule we are proceeding with and so, the matter closes. 

However, since this matter had been substantially referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, this whole matter should go back there and the committee should expedite its work and report to this House so that we can make our statements on this particular issue. This matter does not attract any debate. 

RESPONSE BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN PARLIAMENT TO THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT ON THURSDAY, 7 JUNE 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you have one hour. 

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to be guided. During the State of the Nation Address, the people of Uganda and the people of my constituency are always very attentive. The media is always talking to them in respect to what His Excellency the President is going to tell the Ugandans. Equally at this time, this being a democratic country, we are also very eager and attentive to hear what the Leader of the Opposition is going to say in response to the State of the Nation Address. 

I need to be guided because the media houses which cover parliamentary proceedings stop at 5.00 p.m. This is 20 minutes to 5.00 O’clock. I doubt if the Leader of the Opposition is going to raise all the issues he has in his response in only 20 minutes. I do not know, Mr Speaker, if this is always a deliberate policy to frustrate the efforts of the Opposition. I do not know and I need to be guided. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, resume your seat. You are bringing the Office of the Speaker into disrepute. I consulted with the Leader of the Opposition. I requested him to make this statement on Tuesday and he said he wants to make it today. You saw me talking to him. I asked him to do it on Tuesday and he said he wanted to do it today. So, you are ruled out of order and you have to make an apology to the House. To impute that the leadership of this House plays games with the interests of the Opposition is a serious matter, and do not engage in this kind of talk. Please, withdraw those offensive remarks and apologise to the Speaker and to the House. 

MR SSASAGA: I said this, Mr Speaker, in the interest of the people of Budadiri East Constituency, who sent me to this Parliament. If that does offend anybody, I know the message has been taken but I withdraw the statement. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Leader of the Opposition is here. 

4.44
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, I consulted you on the issue raised and I agreed with you that this would be the first business after your communication and indeed we talked and agreed. Unfortunately, in the process, many issues have been presented until it is almost coming to 5.00 O’clock - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the record, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, would you like to capture the discussion we had with you just now?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, after that you wrote me a note saying that you want to allow hon. Felix Okot Ogong 10 minutes to present what he saw in Otuke Constituency. You also said the chairperson of the Committee on HIV/AIDS wants to travel today, so he could be allowed to present so that I can present on Tuesday. Those are the things you said. I said I would consult my colleagues, and I said it would be in the interest of time because this thing has been there and we should have done it early. 

Mr Speaker, I have no objection to this but we also need to consider what hon. Ssasaga brought up. This is a multiparty democracy and I think the issue of our responses should also be given opportunity as priority and not to come at the last minute when other people would have loved to hear it. In that regard, I have no objection. Next time, I believe that we should be allowed the opportunity to begin early. In everybody’s interest, I think we shall present this response on Tuesday and it should be the first item after communication.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the leadership of this House treats all members of this House with dignity and equally. It is never the intention of any member in leadership of this House to give any disadvantage to any member. The dignity of this office should be respected by all members. These discussions were held and those were the consequences that developed. 

The initial understanding was that the motion would be moved and the reply of the Leader of the Opposition would be brought. The very first Order Paper that was brought showed that immediately after the Communication from the Chair, we have a reply from the Leader of the Opposition but based on what is before the House. There is no rule that the Leader of the Opposition can just come and make a statement. So we said since the debate is on, after the motion is presented the Leader of the Opposition will have sufficient time to make responses to the State of the Nation Address. That, we agreed.

We have all been here, we have seen what has happen in this House; I even altered the Order Paper to allow the matter of the motion to come in front and then we deal with it. We have been watching the proceedings of the House; there has been nothing intentional or calculated to undermine the interest of the Opposition. Any statement made to that effect to impute such motives is unfortunate.

The leadership of Parliament stands committed to balanced debates, fair representation, preserving the rights of the minority and respecting the decisions of the majority. That is the commitment of the House and we should all respect it. So, honourable members, it is unfortunate that some statements have been made that draw sentiments which may not be right. If there are excesses that have been communicated to the House, due apologies are rendered from the Office of the Speaker but let us respect the Office of the Speaker. If you are consulted on something, do not come and make statements that are different from what you agreed. We leave those matters there.

In the interest of time, we will proceed to deal with the issue of the report of the HIV/AIDS committee before we conclude.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I am rise on the personal statement that hon. Okot Ogong has just made, which you rightly directed to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. This being a matter that has even resulted into fatalities and where tensions are rife in Otuke District, I thought we would need to give a very specific timeframe to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and also to pronounce ourselves on the happenings there in the meantime as the committee is doing its investigation.

There must be some restraint on the part of the local leadership in Otuke, otherwise these uncalled for deaths or mobilisation of hooligans to harm others is very unfortunate. Mr Speaker, I beg for guidance; we need a specific timeframe to arrest this matter in time.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When hon. Felix Okot Ogong was giving a statement of personal explanation, I as the chairman of West Nile Parliamentary Group was equally concerned because we also have a hot potato in our hands. The problem of border rivalry between the districts of Moyo and Yumbe has reached high escalation rates. It is all over the media houses in the region that clashes have reached a level where even weapons such as guns were used. This was reported by the DPC Yumbe and it is a reason of concern for us. 

Some time back, Parliament had agreed that the Committee on Physical Infrastructure will go into all these troubled spots to ensure that calm and sanity returns along the common borders. Government also should be able to resolve some of these problems through the appropriate institutions like Ministry of Lands and more particularly the commissioner for surveys and mappings.

I will appreciate, Mr Speaker, if you could guide us on how, in the interim, we can avoid shedding of blood in all these spots where tensions are rising every other day. My colleagues from West Nile are here; we have had this. I am afraid that the longer the Committee on Physical Infrastructure takes to reach those places and talk to the authorities, the more dangerous it will be for the ordinary people in those areas. Can we know, through the relevant institutions, how best they can help us in the meantime?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just rose to make a small comment on the issue of the Leader of the Opposition not giving his statement. I would like to clarify to the honourable member from Budadiri that the media start by sitting in the gallery but Parliamentary Commission has provided an office for the media in Parliament. So even when they are not physically in the gallery, they watch and follow proceedings through the screen in their office.

MR WADRI: I want to invite this House to read rule 78(2). Mr Speaker, you had ably elaborated on this issue involving and surrounding the presentation of the reply by the Leader of the Opposition to the State of the Nation Address. You had come to a conclusion and made a ruling on this matter. Both sides of the House had accepted your ruling. Is the honourable commissioner, hon. Dr Baryomunsi, in order to open a fresh debate on a matter which the Speaker has already made a ruling on as per rule 78(2) in our Rules of Procedure? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When the hon. Chris Baryomunsi rose on this particular point, I had no way of verifying what he was going to say. It is within his right to rise and say what he wanted to say, but the qualification is that it must conform to the rules that we follow. On this particular occasion, it was not conforming to the rules as provided. We will leave this matter there and allow the chairperson to present.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS AND RELATED MATTERS ON CHALLENGES AGAINST HIV/AIDS PANDEMIC IN SELECTED DISTRICTS

4.51
MS ROSEMARY NAJJEMBA(NRM, Woman representative Gomba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to present to you a report of the standing Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters on the challenges in the fight against the pandemic in the districts of Kasese, Kabarole, Mbale, Tororo, Jinja, Iganga, Kitgum, Gomba, Mbarara and Kiruhura. 

Before I present the report- it is a big report but I have a summary - I would like to present to you a clip from Bukedde TV highlighting the devastating effects of HIV/AIDS. I hope the IT personnel are ready so that you can see for yourselves what is going on and the effects of HIV/AIDS to communities, families and the nation at large. Mr Speaker, allow me present this clip. Thank you. 

(A video presentation was made.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the understanding was that this matter was to be translated because that is not the official language of the House.

MS NAJJEMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There was an English translation but I do not know why I am not hearing it. However, that is a clip from Iganga where a 31-year-old mother widowed by HIV/AIDS is already a grandmother with so many children. Many of them are malnourished as you could see; poverty is biting and the situation is pathetic. That is what HIV/AIDS does to our communities and families. 

I brought that clip because it touched so many people when it was broadcast, so I wanted members to also experience this and know what is going on in our villages and homes. The HIV/AIDS problem is a reality; it is not just a medical or health problem but it is a multidisciplinary issue, which calls for all of us to come out and support the initiatives to combat it. 

Having said that, I would like to turn to the summary report; HIV/AIDS remains a major concern. The recent Uganda AIDS Indicator Survey, 2011 shows that despite all the efforts that have been directed towards the fight against the epidemic in the last five years, the HIV prevalence rate among Ugandan adults rose from 6.4 percent, where it had stagnated for the last 10 years, to 7.3 percent in 2011. This is very serious! The gender disaggregated data indicates that 6.1 percent of those infected with HIV/AIDS are men while 8.3 percent are women. So, you can see that the situation is very bad. 

Although a number of achievements have been made in the fight against HIV/AIDS, recent evidence suggests that the epidemic has shifted from the single young aged population to the older married people or those in long term relationships aged between 30 and 35 years and beyond. We used to hear of HIV/AIDS mostly among the young people but it has changed face and is more among the older people. So, as we devise measures to combat this epidemic, we need to change our approach.

The committee also notes that there is limited programming for the most-at-risk population and yet conspicuous evidence notes the high prevalence rates among this population. This population entails the fishing community, the long distance drivers, people in war-affected areas and sex workers among others. There is, therefore, need for Government and all development partners and all of us to come out and fight this pandemic. 

For the leadership of this country, I would like to say that there is no other time to regain our past glory in the fight against HIV/AIDS like now. Honourable members, you remember that Uganda was at the forefront in the fight against HIV/AIDS and we were being glorified. People were coming here to learn our best practices I am telling you that is no more. We backslid and this has cost us millions of lives, including those of our innocent children, our future and our inheritance.

I would like to draw your attention to the objectives of the field visits by the committee in the report because I will not go through them. I will go straight to our method of work. 

The committee visited three categories of health facilities offering HIV/AIDS care in each district. These included a referral hospital or a district hospital, lower health centres, that is health centres IV and health centres III and the private not-for-profit health facilities.

Further, in each district, meetings were conducted with people living with HIV/AIDS as well as civil society organisations working directly with them to share their experiences. To adequately cover the above categories, the committee was in the company of the district health officers and the district HIV focal persons who guided the members.

At this juncture, I wish to lay on Table submissions from the districts that were visited, minutes of the meetings and documents of Ms Ayo Proscovia from Tororo District, who claims that she was discriminated against in accessing formal employment because of her HIV status. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay these on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such.

MS NAJJEMBA: Honourable members, I would like to turn to the prevalence rates in the districts that we visited. The committee noted that Kabarole District had the highest HIV prevalence rate among the districts visited, of approximately 12 percent, followed by Kasese with approximately 11.2 percent. Mbale and Tororo districts had the lowest rates of approximately 6.3 percent. The rest of the districts had their prevalence rates oscillating between 12 percent and six percent. Six percent is not good, so, even Tororo, Mbale and other districts are still doing very badly. I would request you, honourable members, to find out the prevalence rates of your districts so that you are able to intervene.

The status of funding for HIV/AIDS programmes

The committee noted with concern that most of the health facilities in the districts have partial Government funding. Donor agencies have played a central role in service provision and funding. The donor community has carried the heaviest burden when it comes to HIV/AIDS funding and this is very unfortunate. We need to come out as Government and devise means of mobilising our own resources just in case the donors are no more or if they pull out. We need to come out seriously on this one.

The committee notes that although the private not-for-profit hospitals get a grant from Government, they are exposed to external shocks in the event that donors cease to support or terminate support to them.

Most HIV/AIDS activities in the areas visited largely rely on external inflows for sustainability. In the long-run, this is not sustainable. Furthermore, it eventually affects the enrolment of patients since donors set their own targets on the number of enrolled patients. The donors will chew what they are able to swallow. They will not take on everybody. Their services are not universal like Government would be, therefore, we need to devise our own means of getting funding.

The committee highly recommends that Government seeks local means of securing funds to sustain HIV/AIDS programmes at the district level and the other levels.

In fact, as a committee, we strongly propose that the Government of Uganda establishes an HIV/AIDS fund like Zimbabwe has already done. When Zimbabwe realised that the donors were pulling out - and you know why they are pulling out - they decided to start their own HIV/AIDS fund. Of course, some people will be happy because they might encroach on it, but the watchdogs will always be around to watch over that. We need a fund to tackle this problem.

The services for Prevention of Mother-to-Child Transmission in the districts that we visited have the potential to succeed by approximately 99 percent if mothers report for antenatal care and voluntary counseling and testing with their partners early enough. This would enable them to receive counseling and treatment for themselves and for the babies.

They would also adhere to health advice provided, they would have their drugs on time, and would use condoms to avoid re-infection, hence reduce pediatric morbidity and mortality due to HIV/AIDS.

However, the Prevention of Mother-to-Child Transmission is threatened especially because expectant mothers seek the services late, there is low attendance of antenatal care, deliveries are mainly at home by traditional birth attendants and relatives with inadequate care and skills, and also, lack of male involvement among others.

Allow me to turn to the challenges, but as you may realise, most of the challenges are similar to those in Kasese and the other districts. I will not go district by district as I had planned because of time, but let me summarise all the challenges in these districts.

Limited funding; that is for sure. More than 50 percent of HIV/AIDS funding is by donors. 

We have high staff turnover. The staff in our health centres are not adequate to tackle the new infections. Honourable members, we have 130,000 new infections every year and this is too much. The health workers are not handling HIV/AIDS alone. There are also other diseases and problems. So, we need to look into training and proper pay for our health workers so that we can retain them and also accommodate them.

The other problem we found was accommodation. Our health workers are not well accommodated, their houses are in very terrible conditions. We always have drug stock-outs - I am summarising. We have drug stock-outs. In some districts, we would find ARVs, Septrin and TB drugs are either expired or unavailable. The situation is bad and we need to do something about it.

Low male involvement is another problem. Stock-outs of testing kits, condoms - you can imagine. So, we really have to do a lot if we are going to change the image of Uganda and if we are going to regain our past glory.

I would like to turn to recommendations of the committee. The committee notes that similar challenges are faced by all the nine districts visited and we recommend as follows. That Parliament should ensure that the HIV Prevention and Control Bill, when passed into law, addresses issues of male partner involvement, stigma and discrimination. There should be a deliberate policy compelling male partners to get involved in the PMTCT services.

Mr Speaker, the other day you ruled that the HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Bill be given to the appropriate committee because the Legal Committee does not seem to be doing anything with it. We really need to pass this Bill. We needed to pass it yesterday.

The issue of insufficient transport has come out prominently in all Government facilities. Government should procure adequate transport facilities for all health centres and hospitals to enable them offer outreach services more effectively. The same applies to ambulance services. Most of our hospitals and health centres IV have no ambulances worth their name.

The other recommendation is that the government policy on availability of ARVs in public health facilities should be changed to enable lower health centres to access ARVs up to health centres III. Right now, health centres III are not supposed to offer ARVs, but we think this should be changed because these health centres are nearer to the people than the health centres IV.

National Medical Stores should at all times provide an adequate number of testing kits to areas that have high HIV/AIDS prevalence rates to match the number of people coming forward to undergo the testing. Limited medical staff in all health facilities is affecting health adherence. Government should recruit more health workers and also work closely with various stakeholders like CSOs, NGOs and donors to supplement the existing staff in public health facilities. 

But, Mr Speaker, as we talk of recruiting health workers, we should seriously think about paying them well. Unless we do that, they will always run away to where they can be paid better. 

We also have another recommendation on viral hepatitis, a leading cause of death among HIV positive people. This is an emerging challenge for the health sector, especially in the HIV intervention. The package for treatment and care of HIV/AIDS should include treatment of viral hepatitis at health centres.

Mr Speaker, Government should expeditiously implement the policy of hard-to-reach areas by providing special motivation packages for medical staff working in those areas. We saw areas like Wanale Health Centre III in Mbale and Lwesande Health Centre IV and I felt bad for the health workers there because it is very far. Areas like Madui in my constituency should also be looked at as hard-to-reach areas and something should be done about them. 

In order to reduce on the waiting time, especially in areas where morbidity is high due to HIV/AIDS, Government should provide an adequate number of CD4 count machines. Right now, there are no CD4 count machines in most of our Government facilities. The only ones we have in the country are in private health facilities. We recommend that each health centre IV should be given a CD4 count machine. This is serious because when you are to tackle HIV/AIDS and you do not have a CD4 count machine, then you cannot succeed. So, we think this is very important if we are to tackle this problem.

The policy shift of providing Nevirapine to lactating mothers for one year rather than seven months, should be matched with supply, or else child health will continue to be at risk and PMTCT services will not be effective, especially in areas where mothers cannot afford supplementary feeds. Luckily enough, the minister is here. She should take note.

The National Medical Stores should decentralise its services to improve supply of medicine and equipment in time. What we realise is that in most of our health facilities, the drugs are not there and when they come, they do not come in time. We once visited the National Medical Stores offices and found a lot of drugs in the store. We wonder why they are not taken to the health facilities. The demand and supply chain of drugs should be streamlined. We also suggest that the National Medical Stores decentralises their services because it seems they have failed so far.

The other issue is on the community-based organisations or NGOs and civil society organisations. We feel they should continue to actively participate in local government budget processes to provide input for funding for HIV/AIDS activities at lower levels of their respective operations. The policy of having health centres II in all parishes should be implemented to free main and referral hospitals from an influx of patients, and to bring services closer to the people. This was established in Kabarole District where three-quarters of the parishes do not have health centres II.

Government should consider creating an HIV/AIDS grant at the local government level to fund activities for HIV/AIDS at the lower levels. 

Government should harmonise the salary structures in both public and private health facilities to prevent disadvantaging one sector over the other in terms of benefits of work. Here we have a lot to do because Government is the worse employer compared to the private sector.

The PHT Grant sent to private-not-for-profit hospitals should be increased to match the rising costs of treatment due to increased cases handled by this category of hospitals.

There is a specific recommendation for Kitgum; Kitgum Hospital should be upgraded to a regional referral hospital since it serves many other districts surrounding Kitgum. 

The Ministry of Health should consider the provision of drugs for sexually transmitted infections (STIs) to patients for free like it does with ARVs because the STIs accelerate the spread of the epidemic. 

Furthermore, the Ministry of Health should spearhead and expedite the setting up of a cancer unit in Mbarara Hospital in order to move services closer to the cancer patients, especially those that are affected by HIV/AIDS.

The Ministry of Health should ensure that the children’s hospital in Mbarara is accredited to carry out anti-retroviral treatment. 

The HIV/AIDS coordination structures which are redundant because they are no longer functioning like district AIDS committees, district AIDS taskforces, sub-county AIDS committees and taskforces, and parish AIDS committees and taskforces, should be re-awakened.

Lastly, a meaningful involvement of people living with HIV/AIDS in programmes and projects is still at its lowest level, right from the national to lower levels. People living with HIV/AIDS noted that they are best placed to help fight the disease because of the experience they have gone through. Programmes like NAADS, Microfinance and others should involve these people so that they can also benefit.

On the way forward, Mr Speaker, the committee advises the district leadership that the following must be done to accelerate the fight against HIV/AIDS. This was summarised in three Ts: 

(a) 	We must teach. We can only teach if we get the right information. So, the Ministry of Health should provide us with the right information, on time, so we too can teach our people on how to prevent and control HIV/AIDS. 

(b) 	We must test. We need to go for testing. As leaders, we need to know our HIV status. If you do not know, please, when you get out, try to discover so you can lead by example. 

(c) 	We must treat. If you have HIV, it is not the end of the world because ARVs are there and you can get treated and still survive. So, we need the drugs and we need them yesterday. The approach must be multi-sectoral and involving in nature. We must strengthen PMTC services. 

In conclusion, the HIV/AIDS situation in Uganda has reached worrying levels. Honourable members, it has reached worrying levels. We must take the lead. We must stop the silence. We must use our platform and vantage point to stop this pandemic. The government and Executive should also play their part to provide the much needed resources and support. Other seconders, including donors and civil society, should not tire but continue the fight. We do appreciate them for what they have done so far. We are only emphasising the need. At individual level, it is the responsibility of all of us to protect ourselves, our partners and our children against this monster. Let us embrace the prevention and control options that are scientifically proven like the ABC strategy: Abstinence, being faithful, condom use. If you cannot manage A, you can try B and if not, you can try C. So, you have options.

The voluntary counselling and testing: Let us take that on. Make sure testing kits are available and people go for testing.

Safe male medical circumcision

Honourable members, this is not 100 percent protective, but at least they tell us it is 60 percent. Let us get circumcised - those who are able to get circumcised –(Laughter)- it is for males and it has to be safe. 

Anti-Retroviral Therapy and PMTC among other programmes

We have the power to change the situation in the country -(Interjections)- all of us. We are all stakeholders, whether in Government, or in the Opposition, or outside Government in the private sector. We have the power to change the face of Uganda. We have the power to return to our past glory. We have the power to combat HIV/AIDS. Yes, we do. Mr Speaker, I beg to report. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. -(Hon. Ekanya rose_)- I have not even thanked the Chairperson for a comprehensive report on the subject and hon. Ekanya is rising on a point of procedure.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. I beg for your pardon, Mr Speaker. This is a very important matter and I thank you for granting it the degree of importance it deserves. Our disappointment is with the government. The minister in charge of this sector is not here -(Interjections)- because AIDS - no, I am speaking with authority. AIDS and related matters are under the Office of the President. It is not a health matter - (Interjections)- therefore, can we know from the Leader of Government Business who is in charge of this very important aspect, because HIV/AIDS is under the Office of the President? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. General. (Laughter)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, it is always a problem with our brothers on that side who ask impossible questions. It is just impossible. Otherwise, the government is fully represented here. If one minister is not in the House, I want to assure the honourable member that Government is fully represented. And I am in charge. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, information to - there is nobody – okay, to the General.

MR MUKULA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of information to the House that the Deputy Leader of Government Business is now a full General —

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We already had a statement on that.

MR MUKULA: And we want to congratulate him. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You missed the moment, hon. Mukula. We had some 15 minutes on this subject. Honourable members, this is a report of a committee of this House. It is subject to debate. Are we going to proceed? Dr Epetait.

5.31
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee chair and indeed the entire committee for this detailed report. In the last Parliament, I was the shadow minister for health. I am going to start on a matter to do with availability of ARVs. I remember that we used to have a certain allocation of Primary Health Care funding amounting to 70 percent, remitted to the district, and 30 percent was sent to the National Medical Stores for procurement of drugs. But upon noting that there was constant drug stock-outs in various health facilities, we lobbied Government - and I really thank Government for accepting our amendment, to reverse the percentages. We directed 70 percent of PHC funds to National Medical Stores who had earlier argued that the amount they were receiving was not adequate for them to procure enough drugs to supply the lower health facilities.

Last week, I happened to attend a radio programme by the general manager of National Medical Stores, where he argued that there are so many stocks of ARV drugs in the National Medical Stores. However, there are stock-outs in the lower health facilities. And his argument was that the lower health facilities do not requisition for those drugs. Our understanding at the time when we reversed those percentages was to enable the National Medical Stores to adopt a push system without having to wait for requisitions from the lower health facilities. Let the drugs be available. I would like to find out from Ministry of Health, what has happened of late? Let me take that information.

DR BITEKYEREZO: I thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, there is something that is in the Ministry of Health, possibly which we must tell the whole nation so they know. There is a problem of health workers at lower levels. It is a very critical problem in that you might tell them to get people to ask for the drugs. So, not until we have stocked the hospitals with personnel, I am telling you the issue of drugs being in NMS and not being asked for is going to remain. Time and again, remember before I came here, I was a clinician in Mbarara Hospital. The Minister of Health was a clinician in Mbarara Hospital. She is seated in front of me. But we do not have -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Technician repairing something?

DR BITEKYEREZO: No, she was a physician, a clinician - a specialised clinician. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh! I see.

DR BITEKYEREZO: But, Mr Speaker, when we move, we find that there are no drugs in health centres and there are no people even to give the drugs or to ask for the drugs. But painfully, if you go to the budget, you will be surprised to find that even in your own constituency, Mr Speaker, you may not have enough health workers, just because the remuneration of health workers is bad and treatment is very bad and now the budget has been cut -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now debating or giving information?

DR BITEKYEREZO: I have a –(Laughter)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much. (Ms Kabaale rose_) If I could wind up -

MS KABAALE: Thank you for giving way. Mr Speaker, we are privileged for the minister to be here. We have talked about Jinja and Iganga hospitals lacking drugs. When we visited National Medical Stores, we were shown boxes full of drugs. I really want to give information that given the situation of lack of drugs and the king-maker is here with regard to drugs, let us push for the push system other than drugs getting expired in National Medical Stores. Sincerely, they will regard our Government as not giving a way forward. Thank you.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, honourable colleagues, for enriching this debate. The issue is, why must we continue grappling with a problem of having too many drugs stuck in the National Medical Stores and yet there are stock-outs at the lower health facilities and we had recommended a push system? 

In addition -(Dr Baryomunsi rose_)- let me finish this. Whereas the chairperson of the committee did say that it is just about 50 percent of the funding that Government of Uganda contributes to HIV/AIDS prevention, I would like to inform colleagues that it is a miserable 10 percent. Most of the funding that this country relies on for HIV/AIDS prevention and control is actually from development partners. What are we up to? Those development partners will also get fatigued and once they pull out, to whom will Ugandans run? I would like to urge Government to take the HIV/AIDS fight very seriously and inject the commensurate funding to fight the challenge. 

This report is talking about sampled districts; just about 10 districts in the country, but the challenges that have been highlighted cut across the board. You cannot expect somebody to travel hundreds of miles in order to access a CD4 machine to have a CD4 blood cell count. We are happy with the slide that you showed. Most of the HIV/AIDS affected and inflicted families are impoverished and these are the very poor people we expect to look for money, jump onto taxis or whatever to travel hundreds of miles to have tests taken. 

We want to urge Government to look into this very seriously and support the committee’s recommendation that the minimum should be health centres IV; all health centres IV in the country and upwards must have a CD4 count machine. For lack of time, I will stop at that and I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, I am a member - I am just going to inform him on one matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, you inform the House, otherwise, I will make you -

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to inform the House on the matter of drugs as hon. Epetait was raising it. That in the last Parliament when we reversed the policy and shifted most of the monies from the local governments to the National Medical Stores, what was obtaining then was a pull system. The pull system is where the health workers in the local governments are able to quantify the drugs that they need based on the disease profiles of the communities, and be able to requisition these drugs, and it is the best approach. 

But what happened thereafter, the information I have is that most of the local governments rebelled because money had been removed from them. They actually deliberately refused to requisition for drugs and National Medical Stores has now resorted to a push system. Currently, it uses a push system where it just packs drugs and sends them to different districts. The challenge with it is that sometimes they send drugs which are not required in those communities. Sometimes they send drugs to health centres and yet those drugs are not for that particular level of a health facility. It is a serious challenge which the Minister of Health should take note of and be able to provide remedial action to ensure that drugs can be available at community level. It is true when you go to National Medical Stores, there are heaps and heaps of drugs. You go to lower level health centres, there is scarcity and lack of drugs. So, that issue must be addressed. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.42
MR MICHAEL MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and honourable colleagues. The matter that has been brought by the committee is a very important matter for this country. HIV/AIDS is the most serious pandemic that has hit the African continent, mainly the Sub-Saharan region. I would like to first of all adopt the recommendations that have been brought by the chairperson, and to say that, it appears the political commitment in this country has waned. Political commitment is very important because political leaders can be able to generate and send very strong vibrant messages to the nation. I would like to call upon His Excellency the President, ministers and all of us as leaders -(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I want to thank hon. Mukula for giving way. The information I want to give him in regard to his considered opinion that we are losing the support of the politicians in this country in the fight against AIDS is that previously, His Excellency the President was the chief campaigner against HIV/AIDS. Everywhere he would go, you would find him giving this message. Today, for example, you look at his speech, the State of the Nation Address; this is what he said on page 23. “There is an increase of about 3,500 new infections per annum. What a big shame. Why should anybody get HIV/AIDS today when all the information on prevention is available?” 

By saying this, it seems his Excellency believes that it is only people who go out and even he indicated it here -(Interjections)- this is not a laughing matter, Mr Speaker and I request for protection. This information which I am providing is very important. In his speech, His Excellency cites only one way a person can acquire AIDS. He forgets about the children and he forgets about faithful wives seated at home who contract AIDS from their husbands.

The information I want to give hon. Mukula, therefore, is that it is true indeed, the chief campaigner, His Excellency the President, it seems has given up on AIDS and he thinks that it is a disease for only people who are indisciplined. Thank you.

MR MUKULA: Thank you so much, hon. Nambooze, for that information. Honourable colleagues, I would like to first of all appeal to all of you who are here; we are all political leaders and we have a responsibility to this nation. It is important that every time we go out, a message is sent to the population to guide them and to caution them.

Mr Speaker, you will note that Uganda produces an average of 100,000 children every month. We produce about 1.2 million children every year. The way you get AIDS is the same way you produce babies. When you look at the rate of infection now being at an average of 136,000, it is comparative to the prevalence in the country. There are certain areas like the Ssese Islands where the average prevalence is over 14-15 percent. In the camps which we had in areas like the Acholi sub-region in Gulu, the Teso sub-region and parts of Lango, the prevalence was extremely high. Ultimately, we need to put a lot of energy into these areas where the prevalence has been high, and ensure that we have CD4 count machines and viral load count machines. We have to increase the voluntary counseling and testing capacity in these areas so that people get to know their sero status. We are sitting on a time bomb.

A few years back, Uganda had the highest rate of HIV prevalence in the world at about 30 percent. (Ms Jacquiline Amongin rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mukula, would you like to give the opportunity to other Members to debate? 

MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Mukula for giving me a few of his minutes. The information I want to give the House is that on top of what he has mentioned, it is very critical now as a country, that we take a new strategy on HIV/AIDS prevention. The alarming figures are definitely worrying for Uganda. One of the new strategies could be prevention with positive people; engaging the positive people so that those who are not positive will appreciate the situation. 

The other issue I want to emphasise is that as Ugandans and as a Parliament -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now debating?

MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: I am giving the information. If we do not come up clearly on the number of children which each person must produce, then we are sitting on a time bomb -(Interjections)- yes, the family planning drugs which we are giving out are not being utilised and we are spending lots of money. Also, when you look at people living with HIV/AIDS going on and producing without limitation, some of these children are produced when they are positive because of lack of clear care when a woman is giving birth.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you rose on information.

MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: So, the information I want to emphasise is that one, we must restrict the number of children per family or per person.

MR MUKULA: Mr Speaker, this is a very serious matter which we are experiencing. One of the key things I have seen is that the budget for the Ministry of Health has gone down. The budget allocation for HIV/AIDS drugs has gone down. It is, therefore, important for us to note that infrastructure and recruitment of new staff as recommended here cannot be matched if the budget is low. It is extremely worrying to see that at this stage the drugs which are supposed to be prescribed and dispensed in districts like Ngora and Bukedea, there is no doctor. How do you manage to control such a serious problem? Ultimately, even if you are to go and manage the prevalence in a district like Ngora where there is no doctor, how do you prescribe the drugs?

How do you manage the CD4 count and viral load count in a district where there is no doctor to evaluate the performance of patients?

It is important that the nation comes out to realise that if we do not take serious action and rise to the occasion, in a few years, Uganda will get back to the pandemic stage or levels where HIV/AIDS prevalence is above 16-15 percent and possibly head towards 30 percent. 

I would like to conclude -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Franca Akello

5.52
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. It is a very big shame for this country and this Government following the report from the committee, which was ably presented by the hon. Rose Najjemba with all those facts that indicate more than 50 percent reliance on donor funding for HIV/AIDS prevention. It is a very big shame. 

We took a lot of time singing about ABC not knowing that people are getting AIDS every other day. I want to thank hon. Mukula very much for indicating the fact that Northern Uganda, especially Acholi sub-region where people have been in IDP camps for over 20 years - today as I speak, you walk in Agago, you walk in Pader, you walk in Kitgum and almost everybody you see is sick. It is unfortunate, but it is a fact. It is unfortunate but it is a fact that a higher percentage than the national percentage which is being declared today is affected in my part of the country. 

When we speak today about poor health facilities, I want to give you an example. Agago is a district of its own. It does not have a hospital. It does not have a health centre IV. How do you expect - and we are making a resolution here that CD4 count machines and other HIV/AIDS related issues should be handled at health centres IV and we do not even have that health centre IV?  I think the question goes far beyond what we are seeing. It is us to look up health centres III as far as handling this scourge is concerned. 

I really wonder how much a CD4 count machine costs. In my district, it ranges between Shs 20 million and Shs 50 million. How many health centres IV do we have in Uganda? How many health centres III do we have? They are not as many. We can budget for these machines and put them in all health centres IV. In my district, some health centres III, I will give you an example –(Interruption)

MS KABAALE: On a point of information, given the situation which hon. Franca Akello is addressing, she is even lamenting about how much a CD4 machine costs. The information I would like to give is that when we went to NMS in Entebbe, CD4 count machines were packed in a ware house. So, the matter is for the minister to direct and every sub-county where there is a health centre will have a CD4 count machine. Thank you.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Now you can imagine the gravity of the problem. It is not even about the unavailability of the machines. So, where is the problem? The problem is administration. Can the ministers really give or design for us a proper way we can handle this problem because in my district, almost on a daily basis, I am burying people? They are dying not because they did not want to get treatment, but because they cannot access it. 

It is a very big shame to see people dying today. People are dying every day because they cannot access treatment. They may be sick because we do not have health centres IV and hospitals. There are some health centres III that are providing this HIV treatment but they do not have the CD-4 count machines and other testing kits.

I want to really re-emphasise the recommendation of the committee, which I strongly support. We have got to be a little more serious in handling the problem and all of us as political leaders must take up the responsibility and should not leave it to only one person. All of us must take on the responsibility of talking to our people. 

In fact, what I tell my people when I go for a rally is that HIV/AIDS treatment is now only available for whoever has it now and whoever gets tested and can get treatment. Those of you who are still looking for ways of getting it, you will not be tested and you will not even get treated. That is the message. So, the message actually means that you should not look for HIV anymore. Whoever has it now must get tested and whoever does not know his or her status must go and get tested and get treated. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.58
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. I will start with an experience that I have gone through and with a point that hon. Franca Akello was raising here that indeed health centres and health sub-districts should be equipped with all facilities like equipment for treatment and care for HIV/AIDS. 

In 2010, my father went for a test and the results were positive and they immediately started him on drugs. He weakened and weakened, but he continued taking ARVs. Last year, we agreed to test again and also test the viral load and CD4 count because where he was tested, there was no CD4 count machine and so they could not establish the viral load. Therefore, they straight away put him on drugs. 

My father has never been infected with HIV/AIDS but he has been on drugs for almost two years. We were all demoralised and stigmatised because an old man like my father – we were all wondering –(Laughter)- the health sector should really ensure that there is accuracy and the health workers are trained to do this kind of service, but not just testing and putting people on drugs. My father would have died by now, but it is a miracle of God that he is now a free man; free from HIV and free from those ARVs. HIV is a serious matter. 

When hon. Betty Nambooze read the speech of His Excellency the President, I got kind of demoralised because His Excellency the President has been very open and emphatic on the issues of HIV/AIDS, but the statement in the State of the Nation Address is frustrating the struggle to fight HIV/AIDS. We have been on top of the world as the best example because of the political commitment right from the President –(Interjections)– okay.

MR SSEWUNGU: I thank you for giving way. The information that I want to give about the President – you know that I am a primary school teacher although now a Member of Parliament. 

In Uganda, the President introduced what we called peer clubs in primary schools. When we were training children, the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education could forge a way in primary schools and give us a theme each year baaing on which children would act plays, compose songs – and I composed some of them and have them on CD. We could go out and children would sing to the extent that when they would have a concert at their school, they would present about AIDS only and you would see parents being affected. There is nobody who can deliver a message to parents more than children. Just go back to your homes and find out what children asked you in the morning and how you responded.

As we talk now, the information that I want to give is that our schools cannot even perform; they cannot go out to act and sing because they are poor. But it would be a very good signal of giving out messages about AIDS as we talk about this issue of AIDS out there.

MS NALUBEGA: I thank you for the information. As I was speaking about political commitment, we very well know that the Uganda Aids Commission is under the Office of the President and you know that this very matter is under the Office of the President. The Uganda Aids Commission has kept quiet and I think for the last three years, I have not heard this vigorous programme run by the Uganda Aids Commission and yet it is given a lot of money for such –(Interjections)- honourable member, can I conclude my point, please?   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you either accept the information or you do not. There is no negotiation. (Laughter)

MR MPUUGA: I thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information that I want to give my colleague is that I sit on the Committee on the Presidency, where the budget for the AIDS Commission falls and just this morning, we were discussing the budget and to our utter shock, the budget is not only reducing, but there are more allocations for travel and workshops by the Commission. You will not see outputs directly relating to their mandate as a Commission and we have every reason to worry as to whether this is a relevant Commission.

On the other pre-occupations of the Presidency, I am equally concerned like my colleagues that I think the works of the Commission are being abused and we need to give it direction and remind them of their mandate. That is the information that I wanted to give you. 

MS NALUBEGA: I thank you, hon. Mpuuga.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MS NALUBEGA: Indeed, the Uganda Aids Commission should really be at the forefront of this struggle and that takes me to the recommendations of the committee that - as hon. Mpuuga stated, these funds that we give the Uganda Aids Commission are not appropriated to the right functions and activities related to the work that the Commission has to do. We would establish a fund for HIV/AIDS, which we would monitor closely and see that this fund is tagged to activities of HIV/AIDS.

The other issue is male involvement. I normally interact with post-test clubs in my district, but you will hardly find men in those post-test clubs. The women and children you find there will tell you that we have husbands and fathers. When you ask where these husbands and fathers are, they say that they do not want to come to the health centres because they do not want other women to see that they are HIV positive. So, male involvement is very important here.

The world has declared universal access to HIV and palliative care. Uganda as a country does not have domestic funding to these programmes of HIV/AIDS, how shall we ever achieve this and yet we have so many being rolled onto the programme?

The ABC strategy helped the young people to overcome the infection and now we have also silenced that project and we think that the young people are well, but when events unfold you will see this HIV manifest itself again among the young people. 

As a country, we need to continue with our strategies of prevention among young people, the old and married couples. 

We need to do more research because we have people who are living hopelessly with the virus and we have those who are at risk of becoming infected. We need to invest in research. We have had hope in microbicides, female condoms to prevent infection. As a country, our domestic funding should go mostly into research to make sure that we prevent infections in this country. 

I would like to end by thanking the committee and the chairperson of the committee for the good recommendations and the work well done. Thank you.

6.08
MR HARUNA KYEYUNE (Independent, Kyotera County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the chairperson of the HIV/AIDS Committee for the wonderful report and recommendations. As we look for ways of stopping HIV/AIDS, we should also involve religious leaders. 

In my constituency, I happened to attend a function where one of the prominent religious leaders uttered a reckless statement  that Members of Parliament should not advocate for the use of condoms. This statement really annoyed me. (Laughter) We are in the struggle of fighting HIV/AIDS. This religious leader was condemning Parliament for advocating for the conservation and preservation of the environment, and he was asking himself when we shall ever advocate for preserving the human nature of women by not using condoms. 

We should involve religious leaders in the struggle to fight HIV/AIDS. We should also involve cultural leaders. I should thank His Royal Highness, the Kabaka of Buganda, because he has already started –(Member timed out.)

6.11
MR KEZEKIA MBOGO (Independent, Budaka County, Budaka): Thank you. I also want to commend the committee for the good effort  to come up with this very good report. The scourge we are talking about is a serious one. If we can, perhaps, voluntarily begin with us the politicians by first of all testing for HIV/AIDS and after that –(Interruption)

MR GILBERT OLANYA: I thank my colleague for giving way. Getting tested is the main problem that we have currently. I would like to give an example from my village. You may see a very sick and when you tell the person to go to hospital and get tested, the person will never go. We have lost so many youths. They have refused to go and get tested in the hospital and yet their wives are willing to go and get tested. You find the man dying and the woman will follow medical advice and live on. 

We, therefore, need to sensitise our people. Let HIV testing become compulsory in Uganda so that all people are tested. Thank you.

MR MBOGO: Thank you. When we talk about testing, I would also urge the minister to begin with the health workers themselves. Let it be compulsory that all health workers know their status. Not only health workers, but even MPs. (Applause) Let it be mandatory that all MPs test for HIV and on top of that, all the MPs should get circumcised. (Laughter)

MR KYEYUNE: Thank you, honourable Member, for giving way. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to inform you that even high poverty levels have also increased the prevalence of HIV/AIDS because you find a politician with authority and money seducing a young girl because he has money. So, honourable members, we should also make sure that high poverty levels are reduced. Let’s look for ways -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you had already contributed on this debate. Can you allow the honourable to finish - 

MR KYEYUNE: I am giving him information –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, no. Please let’s not abuse the rules. 

MR MBOGO: Thank you, my colleague. I also urge the minister to come up with a Bill on HIV/AIDS so that when such a Bill is tabled – I know a lot would be contained in that Bill so that we can say that testing is compulsory, be it of honourable members of Parliament, health workers, ministers, including the Speaker himself. (Laughter) 

I was also saying that it would be better if the honourable minister comes up with a policy where he can set up a task force at every district level so that those task forces can also form other task forces at the sub-county levels to monitor and try to sensitise the public on the importance of screening. With those few words, I thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.18
DR KENNETH OMONA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for presenting this very elaborate report. But allow me to begin by thanking the gallant health workers who have spent their time to do research and to manage conditions related to HIV/AIDS and to put out the work that we now can talk about in terms of policies to prevent HIV/AIDS.

There is a saying that the greatest wealth is health. Indeed any country that cares must invest a lot of resources in caring about the health of its people in order to create more wealth. The fight against HIV/AIDS should not be left to a particular group of people. When I hear the political class throwing blame on the health workers and on Government, I really wonder what this means. 

I want to say that the professionals have done their part. That is why we now know how to prevent and treat HIV/AIDS. The question now is: Who played this song well? Parliament, if you are the ones to allocate funds because you pass the budget and you turn round to blame the health workers on the way they are managing this scourge – who makes the policies? Isn’t it you? Should we be saying that even ABC should be the work of the President of a country? We hold huge rallies where people come to eat, drink and listen to you, but how many of you tell the people that it is known that you can prevent the spread of HIV/AIDS through the use of condoms?

It is upon us to use this chance to air these messages. That is why I would say that if there is any success story in the fight against HIV/AIDS, we should all be credited. And if there are any failures, we should all take responsibility.

The fight against HIV/AIDS brings in one common law and that is the law of contradiction. Uganda is known among the many countries of the world to have developed best treatment to HIV/AIDS. We developed the best strategies against the fight against HIV/AIDS and that is why now, when you move on the streets, it is very difficult to see a person suffering from HIV/AIDS. But in the past, many people would be seen walking with clinical symptoms of HIV/AIDS. And this is what brings out a contradiction that in our attempt to solve one contradiction, you create another. Yes, very many people are living with HIV/AIDS but you cannot see the symptoms which used to scare people. And because of that many people now take HIV/AIDS for granted. So, I must say that our country should be applauded for caring for the people suffering from HIV/AIDS though this has created another problem in terms of prevalence.

In very many cases, condoms expire in public places. Should it be the President to give out these condoms? I don’t think this should be the case. (Mr Waira Majerere rose_) I am sorry, hon.   Majegere, you could probably give me that information later.

I want to call upon leaders in this country at whatever level – politicians, please play your role and let the district leaders also play their role. This is something that we have discovered; we have the best policies here and so it is our role to work hard in the fight against HIV/AIDS. Thank you.

6.22
MS SARAH KATAIKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for giving us the information at the right time. I am saying this because I have been wondering what had gone wrong with the great country that had been known for or to which people were coming to learn skills of fighting HIV/AIDS. It is really unfortunate that we are closing out on that. Yet, I think we can recover. 

I am happy that the report has clearly highlighted the gaps, particularly on the levels of complacency. The report clearly indicates that all the systems that had been designed are ineffective. We have committees at all levels, but surprisingly, as the report has indicated, nothing is being done even at the level of the Aids Commission. 

The worst scenario is that we even seem to be promoting the spread of HIV/AIDS in that if the people on treatment do not have reliable supplies, the disease will become resistant. There are many cases of HIV/AIDS resistance that I have come across particularly for patients on TB treatment. You can imagine. Instead of curbing, we are just worsening the situation. 

A facility such as PMTC would be doing well to reverse or even to keep the prevalence low, but as my colleagues have clearly stated, the facilities are nowhere. The health centres that would be providing such services lack staff.

So, I would like to propose that as the ministry is still trying to work around the clock, let us rescue those we can. We are talking about the funds being limited, but I think even the little that is there isn’t being put to full use. How can we have the drugs expiring in the stores when people are lacking treatment? We need to exhaust and optimally utilise what we have at hand.

The other point is about the safety of our medical workers. Yes, we claim that there is need for medical workers to go and help the people upcountry, but there is also need for us to acknowledge the fact that these upcountry health centres lack facilities. We have records of our medical workers who have died. We need to take on things squarely. Let us provide the right facilities to our medical staff. For example, there is need to pay and motivate them well.

Lastly, let me say something on our HIV Bill. I would like to say that this Bill is long overdue. We know that there is a lot of abuse around the management of HIV/AIDS. A man or a woman can intentionally infect a partner, but with nothing being done as far as our laws are concerned. So, there is need to pass this Bill as quickly as possible so that those loopholes, especially around the law that let our children get defiled by people with HIV/AIDS are closed. Our children need to be protected and the culprits brought to book. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will not conclude this debate because it is not possible. The matter is very involving and the report is very involving too. So, it is important that we give it some deep debate in terms of the country’s perspective. 

I have urgent matters – you remember we communicated earlier that all urgent matters will no longer be raised at the beginning of our sittings and you can be sure that it has helped a lot. The Order Paper has been focused on. So, all urgent matters will be dealt with towards the end of the sitting. 

At this moment I will therefore adjourn the business on the Order Paper and allow some honourable members who have very urgent matters to raise them for information and direct them to the ministers concerned for action. I will have the honourable member from Bundibugyo, the honourable member from Zombo District and the honourable member from Bokora County in that order. Just raise the urgent matter and leave it at that.

6.27
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Cholera has broken out in Bundibugyo District; it is a very big outbreak, which has caused the admission of 124 people and three were dead by this morning. The cholera outbreak came as a result of lack of water for the whole of last week, which was caused by the clashes between the tribes in Bundibugyo - the Bamba and the Bakonzo - over cultural issues. 

The outbreak found the district incapable of handling the emergency. The main hospital, Bundibugyo, does not have enough health workers. They need volunteers who will handle the emergency. Some of the volunteers who are there - those who used to work during those days - can no longer work because the training they had the other time is not enough. Some of course were just volunteers who are now employed elsewhere. We need volunteers who will come in to supplement the efforts of the workers.

The district has no protective gear. The staff are willing to work and have struggled to work but they are working at their own risk. There are no gloves in the hospital and the workers are just risking their lives. 

Mr Speaker, case management is a problem. There is no isolation of these patients. The patients suffering from cholera are mixed with the patients suffering from other diseases hence the high risk of spread. Within one week, it has gone up to 120 cases both in Bundibugyo Hospital and Nyahuka Health Centre IV. 

I request that Government gives us urgent attention because the district has done its work. The district has responded in calling upon the workers who are there to remain calm and wait for the gear to come, but it has been a week now and they are just like that. We are, therefore, calling upon Government to assist us because cholera has already affected 10 sub counties. The patients in the hospital now are running out in fear because of cholera. So, they are all keeping at the clinic. Others are going to the villages. Now they are scattered everywhere. So, it is an emergency. 

I thought maybe this august House would really assist me by handling it, first of all, by setting up an isolation ward where these patients could be alone and handled there, and secondly, by handling the district budget. They have set up an emergency budget of Shs 80 million which they cannot handle. You know the releases of the district. The Ministry of Health released little money which cannot handle emergencies, and there are no drugs in the hospital at all. The few drugs which were there have all been consumed. So, we are just asking because this is an emergency. The caretakers are rushing here and there to buy drugs and it is really a circus in Bundibugyo. 

I requested that Government also procures supplies for the laboratory because the laboratory is empty. All the equipment which is there has been used and the laboratory cannot assist us in any way.

Finally, of course, the staff also need remuneration in form of risk allowance. They are handling a risk on top of their usual work. They need some allowances. I am calling upon the minister to come to my rescue. My people are dying, my people are perishing as I look on because of lack of capacity and they are vulnerable. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, an emergency has happened in Bundibugyo, what actions have you taken?

6.32
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Ms Christine Ondoa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Harriet Ntabazi for the information she has given us about the outbreak of cholera in Bundibugyo District. Indeed, we received this information last week in our ministry and we have already sent a team of health workers from the headquarters to go and assess. They will also beef up the team at Bundibugyo District assisting the district emergency team in management of emergencies like cholera. I have not got the update today but by yesterday, more essential medicines and health supplies were being assembled to be taken to Bundibugyo District for management of cholera cases.

We have also informed the Ministry of Water and Environment to rectify the broken pipes because this was the spark – it was the initiation of all this. So, when we handle the root cause, then we are able to control many more cases. For now, we are handling the cases that have already been identified, but the other ministries are also handling the other part - (Interjections)- At least, as I said, my ministry already have a team on the ground supporting the emergency team in Bundibugyo. Thank you. 

6.34
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I arise on a matter of national importance regarding the disaster in Zombo District. Zombo is in a highland area, very fertile and very rich, supplying the whole of West Nile with food. Ordinarily, I would not be complaining but of recent, Zombo has suffered very many disasters including fire from Lendu Forest, which affected 73 households. There were also the River Nyagak and River Dairuda disaster, which swept away crops in the valleys affecting seven parishes and two sub counties and another 63 villages in another sub county. 

I have been reporting this to the Minister for Disaster Preparedness but no help has come to the district. This has left me wondering why. Even mere assessment of the situation has not been done and yet people have been affected very much. 

The last incident which took place in April came at a time when the people were ready for their first harvest of maize, beans, Irish potatoes and sweet potatoes. All these were swept away and no assessment has been done. My people had requested that at least the government should come up with support in form of seeds so that they can plan for the next season. Now the next season is on and there are no seeds to be planted. This is going to cause a situation of hunger in the district. It is going to affect many people, and I do not know whether Government will be happy to see Zombo District dying while support goes to other areas of the country. 

My appeal, therefore, is that Government should support us with food items like beans and posho so that my people survive during this period. I would like to see this help so that I have trust in my Government.

Lastly, I have observed with concern that when areas in my district are mentioned, they are still referred to as areas under Nebbi District. Schools have been mentioned in my district and they are attached to Nebbi District.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is not an urgent matter, honourable member.

MS KWIYUCWINY: The point has been made, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not see the ministers in charge of disaster here. 

6.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHERN UGANDA (OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER) (Ms Rebecca Otengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been delegated by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to speak on behalf of my colleague, the Minister for Disaster Preparedness.

I would like to confirm that Zombo District is one of the model districts I am using under PRD region. They are very productive and the people are willing to work. It is therefore, it is unfortunate that they have gone through this kind of challenge. I promise to take it up and discuss with my colleague in the line ministry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When do we get an update on this honourable minister?

MS OTENGO: Mr Speaker, the Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness has been out most times and they are also the ones handling the area of nodding disease. I would prefer that if you do not mind, we put it to Tuesday. The minister will report back. (Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, as we wait for the minister to bring the full statement, I want to inform this House that relief food was seen being distributed in Bukoto South during the by-election, together with blankets. They were given to schools in Bukoto South, to women.
 
Masaka is a banana growing area and at the moment they have plenty of it because of the sunshine. It is getting ripe day and night. It was very annoying to see relief food being distributed to voters. The clarification I would like to get is if areas where we have by-elections also fall under the disaster preparedness ministry and they can benefit from relief items like food, blankets and medicine meant for people in disaster areas.

MS OTENGO: The information which has been given by hon. Nambooze is not verifiable. I wish it was given by a Member of Parliament from that place. 

I think if we are in power and authority, we should also take responsibility. It is not right for my sister to come and lie to the House to that extent. If I ask you to substantiate, will you really do it? Mr Speaker, I think we should not discuss rumours in this House. Thank you.  

6.41
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to bring up a matter of national importance. Bokora County is in Karamoja and the food security situation there is very deplorable. There are twenty people who have been registered dead and as if that is not enough, if we do not respond urgently we shall be getting more numbers added on.

The problem is attributed to the fact that most of these people who have died in these areas which have been registered have been affected by a sustained drought in the previous year. This year, they are waiting for the next harvest but there are still more months before they can get it. Many of these people do not have food in their manyatas and most of those who are affected are the elderly.

The list of the deceased as sent by the district chairperson is attached to the report which has been provided to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness. The purpose of bringing this to this honourable House is for the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to expeditiously respond to this cry. It is a reality that if we do not respond very urgently, more people will continue die. If I may give an example; yesterday, there was an elder who died and his wife was taken to the hospital. The situation is being monitored and I do not know whether she is still alive or dead. This is the reason I pray that the minister responds to this very urgently. 

I also pray that the minister goes to the place so that he confirms this reality. He will also be able to find out the actual numbers of the people we are talking about and the amount of food support that will be required. It is my prayer that they can be served for two months as we wait for the harvest; that would be good. Some of the World Food Programme support persons were taken to some of the areas I am talking about. They also have a report and I believe our Government should also come in strongly to be able to support.

As I conclude, I ask that the matter be expedited. Even the roads; for instance, the Iriri- Moroto Road is now cut off, so supply of food from Soroti may not get to those who want to buy. That is another problem, which may worsen the situation. Thank you.

6.44
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter of accessibility to Karamoja is now a serious one. Our colleague has just talked about a stretch between Iriri and Matany. For the last three days, even buses which had been plying the Moroto route have suspended operations. What most passengers now do is to go up to a trading centre called Lorengachora and then walk a stretch of 25 kilometres to cross to the other side of Matany. The road is cut off. 

Government should come out to do something. Otherwise, even if relief food would be available, no single truck is willing to risk going and getting stuck there for weeks because of the bad road. So, the Karamoja situation is dire. 

MR MPUUGA: I seek clarification, Mr Speaker, from the Prime Minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But we have not gone there yet. They are still raising the matter and I am about to call Government to respond to this. If you want to give information, then it fine. You cannot seek clarification when no one has spoken. We have a response on this particular issue of Karamoja, Bokora in particular.

6.46
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, first of all, we are sorry for this situation. It is not manmade. If there is too much flooding, that is beyond our control and even that of the Opposition. You cannot say that Government is the one responsible for the floods. (Interjections) 

No, we are only responsible for the effects of the floods and we are going to inform the minister in charge, that is, the Minister of Works, to go and assess the situation in order to know how it will be handled. That action will be taken very seriously, Mr Speaker.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How about the second one of the food issue?
 
GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: This is again as a result of the drought, but we shall have to inform the Minister of Disaster Preparedness, who is actually around that area - he is currently somewhere around Bududa. 

However, honourable colleagues should know that if there is a disaster in their districts, there are district disaster management committees. These committees have to collect facts on the ground and pass on the information about the extent of the damage and requirement so that it can be relied on by the people at the headquarters.
 
MR MPUUGA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from the Leader of Government Business is on two fronts. Clearly, we are a disaster prone country and from the submissions of colleagues all over here, there were reports of disasters. My sense is that there is a problem. While the Prime Minister is explaining the government position, we have variations of which ministry is responsible; on one point, the Ministry of Works and then the other the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness. 

When is a disaster management policy coming? Where is the Disaster Management Act and where is the disaster management plan from Government? I sit on the Committee for the Presidency and we review the OPM and its operations but there is no Disaster Management Act. Where is the Disaster Management Act from Government? 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I would like to seek is in regard to the situation in Karamoja. For the majority, perhaps you have not been to Karamoja and so it is difficult to imagine what goes on in that part of the country. I recollect that last year, Government made an undertaking to this House that they would come here with a plan detailing how they would like to work on the roads in Karamoja because they are pathetic.  The year came and went but nobody bothered to report to this House. 

There is the Budget Speech, there is the State of the Nation Address but they do not have a clear indication on how the situation in Karamoja will be undertaken. Actually, I was even at pains today watching my uncle, the hon. Remigio Achia, moving a vote of thanks on the State of the Nation Address. I was thinking about the state of Karamoja instead. (Laughter) 

The clarification I am looking for from Government is first of all, when they will come to this House because there has been an undertaking by the Deputy Leader of Government Business that they will come; two, whether they really think Karamoja is worth the intervention. It cannot go on like this year in, year out, loans in and loans out and Karamoja is not in the picture.  Do they have a commitment to Karamoja? 

MS EKWAU IBI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also share the same pain when the Third Deputy Prime Minister comes and talks about the issue of the disaster management committees in our districts. For the time I have been in this Parliament, honestly speaking, we have had cases where the Office of the Prime Minister takes relief items and even takes charge of their distribution when we have the disaster management committees in our districts. The items are taken when the plans have been made by the disaster management committees and they are not involved at any point whatsoever. 

At this point, the Third Deputy Prime Minister is telling us about the disaster management committees in our districts. Kindly, I implore you, Third Deputy Prime Minister, is it a new intervention that this time round members should start having some little hope - just a flicker of hope - that your management team will consider the use of the disaster management committees as far as disasters are concerned in our districts? This would bring a ray of hope to the members in this House. I thank you, Mr Speaker.
 
MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I hear the Deputy Leader of Government Business still referring us to the district disaster management committees, claiming they are effectively working, my heart begins to bleed. Why? Picking up from where the member from Zombo ended, the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness I think qualifies to be a disaster itself, I am sorry to say. This ministry should be reminded, through the Leader of Government Business, that it should be national in character. It is there to serve all Ugandans.
 
The mode of distribution of items and materials is selective. Personally, in the entire Eighth Parliament, I was hit by several disasters in my constituency. I kept writing, district disaster committees were set up but nothing was achieved from this ministry. Even here, the member is complaining - (Ms Franca Akello rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Muwuma is seeking clarification. Let him seek his clarification and you can also seek yours.  Let us have an orderly debate. 

MR MUWUMA: I was saying, now that the Leader of Government Business is a full General, and I congratulate him for attaining that rank, he should assert himself in this office and help us to prevail upon these ministers who feel that it is just a favour for us to get relief in case of disasters in our constituencies. This is an appeal. I am on the Government side but I should not hide the truth. This is what is happening. We are getting intelligence reports from different sources that these things are happening and they are being diverted by some of the implementers. I am sorry to sound hard but this is the reality on the ground. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek further clarification, and I would have wished hon. Musa Ecweru was around in person to respond. This being my sixth year in Parliament, whenever I have had disasters in my area I have ably presented them to this Parliament and informed the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness. The minister would promise to bring statements in regard to the disasters that have happened including promising to send relief items but to date, I have not seen anything. 

It is not only my case but many other Members of Parliament have complained of the same. I would like to seek clarification whether the Minister of Disaster Preparedness only belongs to Amuria District because relief items are only - with the exception of Bududa, which case was extraordinary. We would like to request the minister to come here with a comprehensive statement and accountability of how he has been using resources of this country in the areas of disaster management because we know that we allocate funding under this ministry. That is the clarification I want to seek. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, surely can’t we allow the Leader of Government Business -

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, I am very disturbed because it is a habit in this House that before somebody completes an explanation, he is interrupted and confused. I was trying to explain what the work of a district disaster management committee is but nobody allowed me to complete. I was going to explain how this district disaster management committee links us from where they are to the headquarters. It makes the work easier because this team is on the ground and they visit the place and write a comprehensive report to the headquarters. Even if you come here and then go there, they must send a report. So, I think we should learn to listen to each other and understand. 

The issue we are talking about now is disaster, and I said, let this committee get us a report quickly from the ground to the headquarters here and that will make the work easier and action will be taken faster. I am not saying the district disaster committee in your district will handle that matter; I did not say that. I am trying to explain to you the communication from the district to the headquarters and how the work can be easily handled.

Secondly, I do not see the relevance of the Disaster Management Act to help in this disaster now. It is confusing issues because even if the Act is here now, will the Act go to wherever it is required? It will not. These are confusing and diverting issues. We are seriously trying to find out how we can handle issues of disaster and not about - There is a serious allegation - (Mr Ekanya rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you allow him to finish what he is saying?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: This is exactly what I am saying; people do not want to understand. Why don’t you allow me to finish? There is a serious allegation here that relief is only in Amuria. That is wrong, and I am sure that such allegations, if asked, will not be proved. This is a serious allegation and it is below our level as MPs. You cannot talk about allegations that you cannot substantiate.

Mr Speaker, I want to say that I will take all the concerns to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and he will take up the matter with his people. I also advise the honourable members to go to the minister and talk to him about what has been raised. I will also take up the matter with the Ministry of Works to go and see the roads.

Another point of confusion is if somebody from Karamoja comes here to speak on the State of the Nation and then you connect it with disaster in Karamoja. This is another technical confusion. How do you mix the two? This is very clear. (Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, we have listened patiently to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. I did rise here and asked him to respond to the issue of having a policy and an Act in place. Gen. Moses Ali has informed this House that he finds the issue of a policy and law governing inter-ministerial workings irrelevant. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister would like to imply, as a graduate of law and a fresh one at that, that it is not important in this country to have legislations governing what we do as Parliament, rendering us almost inadequate in doing our business. Mr Speaker, is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I heard from the Leader of Government Business, Gen. Moses Ali, is that even if you pass the law now, it is not going to run and help the people who are suffering now. That is what I heard. I was still waiting for his response to the issue of when a law will come, which he had not - He said the law is not important in as far as this particular calamity is concerned. For the ones in Zombo and Karamoja, the law may not be important. That is what I heard him saying. 

I was still waiting for him to respond to the issue of when a law that regulates the entire sector was going to be brought to this House based on your inquiry, but now you have come forward and raised it. He had not finished. So, General, would you like to finish with some of these issues?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Exactly, you have heard me properly, Mr Speaker. That is my problem; colleagues are not paying attention. When somebody is speaking they do not pay attention and therefore, they get messages wrongly. Even if you pass 100 laws now, this law cannot change into relief.

I also want to advise that my colleagues ask these questions independently when there is a lot of time and not wait until there is a disaster and then you think about the Act. We will not pay attention to the Act because there is disaster now. That is why I thought we must listen to each other.

On the issue of the conditions of - (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I have a procedural concern here. The numbering of the rules are quite new, but I would like your guidance on the usage of the word “technical confusion”. I cannot raise a point of order given that the Third Deputy Prime Minister has just been promoted to a General. Secondly, he is my father-in-law; I have to be very courteous. I am seeking your guidance whether the use of “technical confusion” is parliamentary so that next time I also apply it wherever the opportunity occurs. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My understanding of the situation is that if Dr Baryomunsi comes to offer a technical opinion on a medical matter and Dr Bitekyerezo also comes to offer contrary technical advice on the same, it will create technical confusion. (Laughter) 

Similarly, if a lawyer comes to give a legal opinion, which is technical, on a subject and another lawyer gives another technical opinion, hence making people to fail to understand, that becomes technical confusion. That way, everything ends up not being understood properly, and a state where there is no proper understanding of a situation can be summarised as a situation of confusion. So, in such a situation, you will be perfectly in order to use the words “technical confusion.” (Laughter)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, I am grateful for the understanding. I am very careful when choosing my words and I also apply my knowledge of law. (Laughter) 

On a serious note, I want to appreciate the concerns raised by my colleagues. I will take it up with the ministers responsible and make a follow-up. I also want to advise my colleagues to speak about these things here and also follow them up with various ministries. If you need my help, I will be available so that we can do the follow-up together. That is why I am the Third Deputy Prime Minister as well as the Deputy Leader of Government Business, an Army General - (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have come to – (Dr Bayigga rose_) – Are you raising an urgent matter?

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, I was listening to you carefully and you said that matters of national importance would be presented last during a sitting. However, we all heard about the issue of a cholera outbreak; it is a matter of life and death which when considered early can lead to lives being saved. Even with a telephone call, one can mobilise or direct a series of events at the scene, leading to lives being saved. 

We have been debating from around 2.30 p.m. up to this time when matters of urgent national concern were raised. Within that time, I believe some lives could have been saved if a voice was raised regarding cholera issues in districts where there are outbreaks. Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be insensitivity if matters of urgent national concern are not given the urgency they deserve? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member speaks on the presumption that a matter becomes urgent from the moment it is raised in the House. That is not the case. From the time the attention of the Speaker is drawn to the issue, immediate consultation is made with the respective ministries. There have been situations in the previous sittings where the time for raising urgent matters comes but the member is not present. The member may have gone to check for some facts and by the time they come back here, that moment would have passed. This is what happens. 

When a matter is raised with the Speaker’s Office – and this is the point we have been making for a long time – it has to be urgent. If it is a matter which has been going on for six months, it ceases to be urgent. We have been mixing the two because of the laxity in the way the ministers have been responding to our parliamentary questions. Because of that, some of us would rush to raise such issues as matters of urgent public importance and yet they do not qualify as that. 

I want you to compare the things that were raised today with those of last week - which of them are urgent? Last week, we had matters of national urgent importance of trees that were cut six months ago, but for these ones, you have heard direct responses. The Minister of Health is here and because she was briefed about this cholera situation, she has given a direct response. 

My problem has always been that members come here without giving any information to the ministries and then we speak to ourselves and go home satisfied that we have raised issues. The ministers also say, “We will take appropriate action at an appropriate time.” There, you will not have saved the situation. However, if the consultation process is done, the matter will come to the Speaker’s office and a phone call is placed to the concerned minister. While they are coming here - they are obliged to be here; the ministers do not go to the field to distribute food items - they have already made deployments. While the Minister of Health is sitting here, she has already deployed the necessary resources. That is how best we can deal with these situations.

Matters of urgent public importance will therefore be raised before the House rises in the evenings. That will not change. The habit that members had was that the moment they raised a matter of urgent public importance, the next thing would be to get out. I sit here and observe. So, these are well informed decisions and are meant to help situations because we do not just stand here to speak to cameras; we do it so that we directly change the lives of those affected. 

That is the commitment from the Speaker’s understanding of the Ninth Parliament, and we will pursue that with vengeance. (Applause)  We will look for any method of work that will improve on our engagement. We will not be tied down to old procedures and practices as long as they are not delivering. I am sorry to say, but we will not follow them as long as they are not delivering on the parliamentary purpose. We want action-oriented discussions in this House so that we can deliver for the people who sent us here. Thank you. (Applause) (Dr Bayigga rose_) No, no, please. I thought I had done away with your issue. I have dealt with the question you raised. It was a question of procedure and it is the Speaker who rules on it, not the member who has raised it.

I will now go back and we review how we shall process the discussion on this report by the Committee on HIV/AIDS, and the hon. Ekanya has some brilliant ideas on how we can deal with this. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your ruling. I want to thank the committee. As you have stated, this issue is multi-sectoral. So, I want to propose to honourable members that the Leader of Government Business tasks the relevant ministers to study this report and present responses based on timeframe and resource allocation. I really want to emphasise resource allocation and timeframe to each issue that the committee has raised here, so that before we proceed with further debate next week, we can get a comprehensive response based on timeframe and resource. Maybe we could also look at action that Government has taken, since this report is old and time has passed, and the new action Government intends to take in the short term, medium term and long term based on resources.

I want to plead with the Leader of Government Business; we have indicative figures for the next five years up to 2017, so please, if you are bringing responses based on resource allocation, be aware that the MPs are armed. If you are making changes, indicate to us that you are making changes to the indicative figures for long term action. Some action may not require resources, like the issue of Ayo, the teacher in Tororo who has been denied employment for many years. It requires action of Government to direct the relevant Government officials to take action. 

Therefore, may I propose, Mr Speaker, that this be the case with this report, and you give the timeframe when we expect adequate response to this matter. Thank you.    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the point raised by hon. Ekanya is certainly important. These issues are involving, like I said at the beginning. We need to find a good way of processing the decision points in this report so that we deliver on its purpose to our people. I think that is what we need to achieve. 

The proposal has been made that the ministers look at this and take their pick on the recommendations of the report. They then can come and speak to the House on what they intend to do and how much money they will be throwing at the problem to try and deal with the situation. 

What I need to know is whether this will stop the debate. If it does not stop the debate, then we can continue with the debate on the issue at the next sitting of the House. We can do this while the ministers understand that they will now have to appropriately prepare responses to the issues that are going to be raised in a timely manner and a resource-based manner, so that we can see how best these matters are solved properly.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Ekanya for the proposal. However, the way HIV/AIDS is managed in Uganda, as the chairperson correctly said, is multi-sectoral. Uganda AIDS Commission was actually established by a statute of this House to do coordination including coordination of funding. It is better placed as a supra-sectoral body to see to the requirements of the different sectors. 

Maybe instead of listening to the several ministers, wouldn’t it be better that through that kind of arrangement, all the issues from different ministries are put in one report to be presented by the Ministry for the Presidency where the Uganda AIDS Commission falls? In that way, it would be a coordinated report presented by the minister but bringing out the different sectoral requirements and allocations, still to answer what you want.  Instead of having numerous reports, it could still be coordinated in one report and then the way the understanding of coordinating HIV/AIDS is - (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I am sure this is going to cause a bit of technical confusion, and I want Dr Baryomunsi to help me. We both have been on the Committee on Health and for years the dominant challenge to us in matters of the budget ceiling for Ministry of Health has been the fact that the money for Uganda AIDS Commission is under Ministry of Health. 

We never even have the opportunity to get a report- (hon. Epetait rose_) I am just seeking clarification - to get a report on the activities of the Uganda AIDS Commission. This is because the sessional committee that handles those activities is the Committee on Presidential Affairs. So, in that mix up, really, if you now suggest that we have one sector, what about the sector responsible for the money and these activities?

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. It is true that for some time the Uganda AIDS Commission was getting appropriation under Vote 014- Ministry of Health. However, after concerted debate, we are glad that the Uganda AIDS Commission ended up getting its own vote. It no longer gets appropriation through the Ministry of Health headquarters. So, we achieved what we wanted. It has its own vote and it is under the Presidency.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that the position? Okay. Please close.

DR BARYOMUNSI: After listening to hon. Mpuuga saying that in the presidential affairs committee they were considering the budget of Uganda AIDS Commission, then it must be correct that the monies have since shifted from Ministry of Health to the office of the President where - (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, thank you. What I see here is different from what colleagues are saying. If you look at the Background to the Budget, Uganda AIDS Commission is vote 107, statutory, under Ministry of Health. So, I do not know which is which. Maybe the Leader of Government Business needs to sort this out. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there two votes - 014 and 107?

MR EKANYA: Ministry of Health is vote 014 and Uganda AIDS Commission is statutory, vote 107 under Ministry of Health coding here. There is a coding. So, maybe we need clarification from the Leader of Government Business; is it Presidency or Ministry of Health?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think it is an issue that is raised. Can you consult on this and then as the debate progresses, we can improve on our understanding of this situation.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, maybe before the Leader of Government Business comes in, what hon. Alaso raised is correct; it has been a challenge that the money for Uganda AIDS Commission passes through the Ministry of Health vote and this has constrained even the ceiling of Ministry of Health. 

My understanding from what hon. Mpuuga said was that maybe this has been sorted out. He said the presidential affairs committee has been discussing the budget of Uganda AIDS Commission, which is a departure from what has been happening. It is the social services committee and this time health committee, which has been dealing with the budget of the Uganda AIDS Commission. So, maybe the Leader of Government Business or the Minister of Health or the Minister for the Presidency should clarify what the situation is. 

The point I was raising was that even when the money was passing through Ministry of Health, just administratively, still the work of Uganda AIDS Commission was that of a supra-sectoral institution - and I am also careful like General when using the word - in a sense that it oversees all the sectors in as far as HIV/AIDS is concerned. So, still its work is to coordinate all the sectors, both Government and non-government. So, they should be able to be in position to tell us how much Ministry of Health is spending or has budgeted for HIV/AIDS, how much Ministry of Gender is allocating or it needs for HIV/AIDS, how much NGOs are putting in HIV/AIDS. 

The information hon. Ekanya wanted can still be got but presented in one report by the Minister for Presidency, hon. Banyenzaki, who is here. That is the information I wanted to raise.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Banyenzaki, do you want to say something on this?

7.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ECONOMIC MONITORING (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT) (Mr Henry Banyenzaki): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true the Uganda AIDS Commission is under the Presidency and even the policy matters are under the Presidency. However, in as far as the budgeting is concerned, what is being quoted here could be something which can be sorted after consultations. It could be a technical error or confusion, but it is something that we shall clarify after having consulted - it could be a clerical error. It is something I need to consult on and we shall consult with my colleagues and then we come with an explanation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we stay this discussion and have more consultation? In the course of the debate on this report, we could have got a better position on how to handle this matter. Would that not be appropriate? If that is appropriate, then I will close debate on this issue because there are issues that are urgent that we need to deal with. 

The issues that were raised were things going wrong on the ground now. Parliamentary committees have some powers; they can sit and give some interim guidance on how situations should be handled. They can also give some interim requests to ministries while they wait for the final processes to be complete and bring a report to Parliament. They can also take interim decisions on urgent matters. So, we will leave it within the competency of the committees to handle those specific cases and make recommendations that can deal with the existing situations. They can hold some and give guidance on others while they are going on with the longer term handling of the business. 

So, the committees responsible for the operations of the things happening in Otuke, in the border areas of West Nile and several other places - I have seen the one of Adjumani; there is an interim statement from the chairperson of the committee. I read the statement this morning in my office. They should be able to engage with the responsible ministries on all those and take some remedial steps to deal with the situation. That is still within your mandate, so that the whole House is not bogged down to directing that, “Let this be done”. Your committees can do this and just report to the House. If you did that, that would be very helpful to the House.

Honourable members, tomorrow the body of the late Andrew Adimola will be brought to this House at 9.30 a.m. Those of you who would like to come and sign the condolence book it will be available from 9.30.a.m. The body will be here for you to pay your last respects. 

In the afternoon, we will have a special sitting to deal with the motion as appropriate. That will be the business. Otherwise, proceedings of the normal business of the House will continue on schedule. This House is adjourned to tomorrow, 2.30 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.30 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 19 July 2012 at 2.30 p.m.) 

