Tuesday, 16 July 2013

Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting and I want you to join me in welcoming our guests who are in the public gallery, the students and teachers of Winston High School represented by hon. Lukyamuzi and hon. Nagayi. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also welcome students and teachers from Katovu High Way Primary School represented by hon. Kitatta and hon. Getrude Nakabira. You are welcome. We also have students and teachers from Kasawo Secondary School represented by hon. Sekitoleko Kafeero and hon. Peace Kusasira. You are welcome. (Applause)

Last week, I officiated at the launch of the national dialogue on Sickle Cell Anemia at Hotel Africana. It was a very big meeting of 3,000 people all suffering from sickle cells and their parents; they have requested us as government and leaders to take more interest in the issue of sickle cell anemia. They are asking us to establish screening facilities as well as increase advocacy on that issue. 

I also want to thank the government - in the Eighth Parliament, there was a petition from the sickle cell association and I know that some action was taken to create a budget line. But I think we need to do more to create awareness so that the sickle cells clinic at Mulago can work for 24 hours a day to cater for critical stage sicklers. We also ask the minister to disseminate information about the disease because many people do not even know that they have the disease.

I also want to ask the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to endeavour to sensitise employers who have been discriminating against people with sickle cell anemia in the job market. I hope the minister can assist in making their life a bit easier. I also want to appeal to honourable members to contact the sickle cell unit to get some literature and information to sensitise our people about this matter.

The second one was the Source of the Nile Agricultural and Trade Show in Jinja organised by the Uganda National Farmers Federation. We want to thank them for the effort and the capacity to showcase what is being produced in Uganda. But their main request is that the agricultural show, which is an annual event, should be given more support. They are asking for fencing for the ground so that they can run it throughout the year to enable the people of Uganda to go there and learn more about agriculture. At the moment it is only once in a year and then they carry away the plants and the installation until the following year when they return. So they are requesting for permanent fencing to the grounds, more infrastructure like roads, lighting, water supply, modern sanitary facilities and others which I will write to the minister about. 

I also want to inform Members that the issue of your gratuity has been handled and by the end of this week, what is due to you will arrive on your accounts through the EFT just like any other payments. The computations have been done and completed and what is now remaining is just to transfer the money to the Bank of Uganda. So you expect a boom at the end of this week. (Laughter)

On a sad note, our colleague, hon. Rose Akol, lost a daughter, Grace Akwero, who has been an intern here at Parliament in the Corporate Planning and Strategy Department. She recently graduated from Mukono Christian University, and we had high hopes that she would raise to something important but God decided to take her away. 

Burial will be tomorrow, in Udende village, Padyere County Nebbi, starting at 11.00O’clock in the morning. Transport for the Members will be available. We have made arrangements to ensure that those who want to go can leave here at 5.30 a.m. from the Parliamentary Parking Yard. 

So on behalf of Parliament, I convey our sincere condolences to the family of hon. Rose Ongom and we commit Emily to the Almighty God. May I ask that we observe a moment of silence in her honour?

(Members observed a moment of silence.)

Again on a sad note, I bring to your attention the death of hon. Oyat Balimoyi, former Member of Parliament for Lamor County in Kitgum who has also died today. We shall be informing you about the arrangement for the burial. He was a Member of the NRC.

Finally, I am bit disturbed by reports I received yesterday concerning the salaries of the civil servants that they have not reached their accounts, and yet this House worked under a lot of pressure to have the supplementaries passed mainly because we thought that the civil servants were going to get their money! I shall want an explanation why the money has not gone to the respective accounts – (Applause) – I hope the minister will be able to explain to us what is happening with the salaries. Thank you very much.

There were a few Members who had asked for permission to speak a few words; hon. Kyamadidi, two minutes.

2.58
MR VINCENT KYAMADIDI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. As you could be aware, on 14 April 2013, I received a suspension from the ruling party, my party, the NRM, for which I subscribe and I owe allegiance. Among others, it required me not to participate in NRM activities but also more importantly not to participate in the committees of Parliament –(Interjections)- of course, it was not only intriguing but it was also very challenging. 

As an obedient servant of Uganda who was meant to serve my people, I thought that was the right thing to do. I did it, I served the suspension and it ended on Sunday. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, this was a very great experience –(Laughter)– and I am actually standing and I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to tell the country and honourable members that it was not an easy one, especially, in the event that you have a constituency to serve where someone will go on air and say, “you are suspended”. It takes a lot of effort for you to explain to your voters and the country that you are not suspended from Parliament. It takes that.

Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for being there for this Parliament and we pray that you continue doing that. I would like to thank everyone who has been by my side, especially my voters, the people of Rwampara. I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, as it was not very easy. 

I want to thank those who think that they can always be right and others are wrong. Madam Speaker, I am making this statement to clear one thing; my voters have been asking what happened and I needed to give them this explanation and I want to thank you for giving me this opportunity. I would like to end with one verse, which is in the Bible. (Laughter) The Book of Prophet Jeremiah 1:19 has this say: “They will fight against you but I will shield you, so declares the Lord.” I thank you very much. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on behalf of all of us, I want to welcome back hon. Kyamadidi and I wish him a good tenure. We shall have hon. Waira - two minutes - then hon. Alaso and hon. Ssebaggala.

3.03
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. You are aware that in Busoga, coffee is one of the main cash crops and you are also aware that as leaders, we have been struggling to persuade the farmers from planting sugarcane to coffee planting. As I talk now, we have been hit by a very serious disease called Coffee Twig Borer in the entire Busoga region, especially in Mayuge and most specifically, in my constituency.

I tried to discuss this with the Coffee Development Authority and they are saying that they are able to only spray just one parish and yet, the impact is terrible on our farmers. 

My prayer now is that the minister concerned comes up with a statement and a strategy to mitigate this because our people have been struggling to come out of poverty. Now, if we leave this disease to hit the only income they are surviving on, then Busoga will be no more. I request the Ministry of Agriculture to give us a statement on how he is going to mitigate this problem. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: I think the minister has heard that there is a problem. Minister of Agriculture -

3.05 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have received reports and we have sent our officers into the field to compile a report. We shall inform Parliament in a week’s time on what course of action we are taking. I thank you.

3.05
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues and the first one concerns a complaint that I am getting from the landing site of Lake Kyoga, particularly, the one that I represent in Kagwara, Mulondo, Bugondo and the rest.  

There is a problem and it has to do with the number of taxes that are being levied on the fishermen. First, they pay for licensing their boats something up to Shs 102,000, then, the fishmongers pay another Shs 53,000 and then they pay something called “barrier.” I do not know what it means but it is Shs 28,000 and last week, they imposed another tax on them called “lakimo”. Now I used to think “lakimo” was an organisation but now “lakimo” has also imposed another Shs 4,000 per day, on top of the charge they pay whenever they go fishing.

There seems to be a lot of extortion going on in the lake, to the extent that life for the fishermen is becoming unbearable. There is also a lot of harassment, bribery and intimidation. I would like Government to first of all, clarify to the fishermen on Lake Kyoga; which of these taxes are genuine?

Two, I would like them to investigate the brutality and the harassment on the lake because even for people who have complied and adopted the right fishing gear, the same harassment and intimidation is being meted out on them.

I would like to invite Parliament to take interest in this. I think much of the time we are thinking about the right fishing gear but we are not thinking of the livelihoods of these people. People are being thrown out of the lake as though they are not entitled to fish and to survive. We need to create harmony on those two scenarios. 

Madam Speaker, the second issue has to do with the student loan scheme. I heard in the State of the Nation Address that it is going to be operational this year. I have also heard a number of statements attributed to the ministry and to the technical people in the Ministry of Education. But it is important that we are informed. 

What is the extent of policy formulation in regard to the loan scheme? In 2008/09 and 2009/10, this House passed money to give to the Ministry of Education so that they come up with a policy but also, so that they come up with a legal framework. We are being confronted with questions and people are asking us, “What is the criterion for accessing the loan scheme? Is it like the ‘Entandikwa’ or like some of those handout programmes? Who will access, how do you repay” and issues like that. 

But, Madam Speaker, I am aware that there are no Bills before this House to help us administer the loan scheme. So, is it possible that the Minister of Education – unfortunately, I do not think that they are even listening! The ministers are very busy on something else. But is it possible that the minister or the Ministry of Education clarifies to us and this nation, how they intend to administer the loan scheme without disseminating a policy and without bringing in the legal framework to guide the process? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I recall from the Business Committee is that the government came with a list of intentions to bring legislation and I noted that the loan scheme was one of them. But I think in view of the excitement and the need, maybe, she wants things to come quicker than all the others because the young people need the money. When they heard the President speak, they thought the money was available. I have also been inundated by calls from my people. “How do we get the money?” They ask, and I do not have answers. So, I do not know how quickly it will come. 

3.10
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance. My issue is of a serious nature and it concerns the National Drug Authority. About two years ago, the National Drug Authority had problems, especially with the board and indeed, the then Minister of Health, hon. Christine Ondoa, appointed an interim board, which lasted for one-and-half years. The interim board was dissolved on 27th February this year and a new board was appointed and the appointment was with effect from 1st March this year. 

As we speak, the authority is operating without a board. Those who were appointed up to now have not taken their seats and we are getting rumours that someone who was in office by then, the board chairman, Mr Frank Mwesigye, may be behind this kind of delay.

Madam Speaker, are Ugandans safe? How are drugs being managed without the board, yet we know, according to Clause 5 of the National Drug Authority Policy and Statute of 1995, that the board is mandated to carry out various functions and indeed, the roles and functions that are being carried out by the management are just delegated roles. How do we really expect an authority, which is expected to monitor all the drugs in this country, to work without a board? 

My major concern is to the Minister of Health, on why the board, which was appointed four months ago, has not been facilitated to be in office. Why is it that there is such kind of dragging because we have been informed that maybe Cabinet has to approve them first and if the delay is from Cabinet, then how can someone be appointed first before Cabinet approves them? I think you first take them to Cabinet for approval and then they are given the appointment letter but these people were given appointment letters in March this year. 

Up to now, nothing is going on. We are worried because the authority cannot transact its businesses without the board. My humble request to the minister is to come clearly to this House and tell us why there is a delay. Is it the same scenario like it was for the Uganda Wild Life Authority? Is it the same scenario like the National Water and Sewerage Corporation? Why has the government not given all the necessary facilitation to the board to function? Operation of the authority without the board is very unfortunate. I request the minister to come up with a statement as to why there is a delay and why the people who were appointed by hon. Christine Ondoa, up to now, have not been given their offices. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Baryomunsi, you got two minutes.

3.15
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also rise on a point of national importance with respect to our International Airport, Entebbe. Many Members of Parliament here have travelled through our airport and other airports elsewhere in the world but there is one strange phenomenon with our airport where you go through three security checks. One is before you reach the airport and there are two other checks inside. 

While we appreciate the need to address security interests, many people have complained of the inconvenience because in many other airports, that is not the situation. Secondly, even after going through the first security check, members of the public are dropped in the parking yard and they have to walk a long distance to reach the “Arrival” area of the airport and our airport seems to be the only one in the world that does that because in many other airports you are dropped at the departure side of the airport. 

So, I just want to get clarification from the responsible ministers – maybe, the Minister for Transport and the one for Security. We do appreciate the need to address security but I think there is a lot of inconvenience and many people, especially those outside the country, including tourists who have passed through our airport, have raised complaints because of the inconvenience at the airport. So, can I get clarification from Government on what arrangements Government intends to do to rearrange their force so that you minimise on the inconvenience that passengers go through?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall expect a response from the Minister in charge of Fisheries on the task. The Minister of Education, I think, has heard about the student loans. I hope she will be able to come and tell the children what they should do when bringing the law on the student loan scheme. 

The Health Minister will explain to us about the National Drug Authority. Then hon. Waira had raised the issue of agriculture. The minister has already committed himself to come and inform us. The Minister for Transport will be able to explain to us about what has been raised by hon. Chris Baryomunsi and of course, the Minister for Public Service, the salaries, the salaries, the salaries; we shall want to know what has happened to the salaries of the civil servants. 

So, let us go to the next item. (Mr Odonga Otto rose_) but you are not the minister. (Laughter)

3.18 
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When the Deputy Speaker was in that Chair, the issues of salaries rose again. This Parliament was blackmailed that we were delaying the supplementary schedules 2 and 3 because the teachers, the policemen, the civil servants and the health workers were not paid. 

On 28th of last month, which was a Friday, Parliament was persuaded to pass the sum of Shs 46 billion without the committee scrutinising it in detail to enable the teachers, the medical workers and the policemen get salary but as Members of Parliament, we still receive complaints from all over the country that teachers, health workers and the police have not been paid their salary. 

Can the Minister of Public Service explain to this House, right now, what the problem is? Where has the money, which we passed here, gone? You told us that if the money were given on Friday before the financial year could close, you would have wired it to the teachers. Can the Minister of Public Service and Minister of Finance explain to this House before we can move a motion, if their explanation is not adequate, that they be suspended from this House? I seek your indulgence, so let them explain. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I was here and we sat for many hours battling over this money; where is the money for the civil servants?

MRS SEZI MBAGUTA: Madam Speaker, the issue of Police and teachers’ salaries and some of the health workers was in the third supplementary schedule. We paid, using the money that was appropriated for the second schedule and we still had some votes that had inadequate wage provision. Parliament discussed the third supplementary schedule and we advised that it was caught by time and I hope the chairperson –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for the Minister of Public Service to stand before this august House and lie when on the 28th and the preceding meetings that we had – the last meeting on the third schedule, the Minister of Finance assured this august House that the following day money would be wired? Members of Parliament did not actually want to pass this third schedule and they promised that money would be wired the following day. Is it in order for the minister to come and lie to this House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, first, I want to say that this House is normally reluctant to pass supplementary budgets but you appealed to our sense of understanding and the need for people to get their money. So, we passed the first, which contained salaries. Then you came back and said you still needed money for salaries and after a protracted battle on this Floor, we gave it to you.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, let us get our facts correct; under Supplementary Schedule No.2, there was a little element of salary and that money was released. When Schedule No.3 came, you all know its fate; you did not appropriate that money because we were caught – (Interjections) - please, I want you to mark my words well. But there is a solution; we have agreed that although Supplementary Schedule No.3 was not passed by Parliament – (Interjections) - I am talking about the ministry and the government – there is a government in power, in case you do not know. [Hon. Members: “Intimidation.”] No, I am not intimidating; I am only informing. 

The problem arose like this – we could even have already frontloaded against the Vote on Account but the Auditor-General raised a query on some of these lists. Now, as Ministry of Finance, we had a debate: “Should we go ahead and release this money, with this query?” We went back to the Auditor-General and told him, “Look, we have the civil servants who need their money; they must be paid.” (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, the matter of salary, under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda is charged on the Consolidate Fund. The Auditor-General does work of auditing. I mean, this is simple knowledge, hon. Minister. So, based on this clear fact, Madam Speaker, can this House order the minister to go back to the Ministry of Finance and bring documents regarding the release of salary to the civil servants - because this House ends today? I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, are you in position to present the schedule of payment effected for the civil servants?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, Government does not operate that way. I will not deceive this House that I can now rush to the ministry, bring – maybe my colleague here, but not me.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I asked whether you are in position. So, if you are not in position today, when can you do it?

MRS SEZI MBAGUTA: Madam Speaker, we are in position to give the pay schedules – heavy as they may be – for the month of June for those who were paid under the Supplementary Schedule No.2. We will be in position by 28th to provide pay schedules for the month of July, under the new financial year. And I want to assure the honourable members that all those who missed their pay in May and June will be paid. All those who did not get their salary under the Supplementary Schedule No.3 will access the payroll for July and it is after we have prepared that payroll and paid, that we can produce the pay schedule.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, we cannot hide our heads in the sand like the ostrich, when the rest of the body is out. There is a problem of the payroll with Public Service and Ministry of Finance and you know these things. 

The clarification I am seeking from the ministers of Public Service and Finance, who are both here - there is a big one and a small one. (Laughter) Are you going to tell us how many ghosts have received salaries - because we want to know how many are ghosts and how many are real teachers because irrespective of what we do, they are still going to pay the ghosts? Are they still there?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister has said she has the lists for June which are ready. Can you, please, lay them on Table tomorrow? And are you saying you will lay the ones for July on the 28th?

MRS SEZI MBAGUTA: Madam Speaker, we shall provide the pay schedules for those who were paid in May and June electronically. We are also in position to indicate how many teachers and Police have not been paid until the Supplementary Schedule No. 3 is sorted out. On the issue of ghosts, I do not know. Ghosts do not talk but regarding invalid records, it is an audit issue and can be audited. Our books are open and those invalid records can be audited. As for me, I do not know any ghosts. I only know invalid records.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Let me supplement on what my colleague has said. First of all, I want the country to rest in this statement I am making and deliberately so. Before I was interrupted, I was about to say that we have agreed that we cannot continue punishing the good officers because the lists may have some ghosts. We are releasing money and indeed, as I speak, the warrants of releases are on my desk this afternoon.

I will sign them tonight and money will be released. But I want to caution and this is where I want Parliament to help the Minister of Finance –(Interjections)– Why don’t you allow me to make the point and then you can –(Interruption)

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure and also to seek your guidance. In Schedules No. 2 and No. 3, we considered some salaries that you drafted for the attention of the Budget Committee but these were overtaken by events and never presented. It is where salaries for teachers in all districts where we all belong - Almost everyone here had their district included in the salaries list on Schedule No. 3 with over 5,000 teachers. The issue was that when there was an audit report, Ministry of Finance acted basing on the audited report and they deleted several teachers from the payroll, which teachers have not been receiving salaries over a period of time.

Secondly, when Public Service got that report, they got complaints from all districts and acting on these complaints received from the accounting officers, they went and conducted a validation. Upon that validation, it was realised that many of the teachers who were actually deleted were there and they are the ones who are doing the work.

I have my own assumption, that perhaps those who were not deleted were the ghosts and those who were deleted are the teachers who are actually there taking care of our children.

Madam Speaker, it is true that after the Budget Committee had finished the report, it was overtaken by events because the financial year had ended. That means they have not been able to access salaries and even the report the minister is giving right now – She is talking about those who are already on the payroll but not those legitimate teachers who are toiling and taking care of our children.

My point of procedure is to request you, Madam Speaker, on how we can proceed on such an issue. Even in this financial year, can we be assured that those teachers who are doing the work are going to receive their salaries? What about the salaries they have not received? How are we going to proceed?

THE SPEAKER: I think the matter is a bit intricate and I do not think we can get answers today but the minister has heard. You have heard about the deficiencies and allegations of unfair deletion. I think we need a statement on it.

MRS SEZI MBAGUTA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a consistent allegation that those who were deleted were teachers in position and those who remained are ghosts. I want to request my colleagues, honourable members, to produce a sample in your own districts of those ghosts.

Secondly –(Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I think the President of the Republic of Uganda chose these ministers, well knowing that they were going to perform to the best of their ability. There is no minister who moves on foot. There is no minister who has no fuel. There is no minister who has no political assistants. There is no minister who does not have some subordinates inside the ministry. The ministries of Public Service and Finance have got everything the Government of Uganda has provided for them. Is it in order for the Minister of Public Service to tell us to go and do her work when she has everything in her hands? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think you should bring a statement and we debate this matter comprehensively. 

Honourable members, in the Public Gallery we have young people from Pader represented by hon. Odonga Otto and hon. Oketayot. The youth from Pader are up there. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have students and teachers of Blessed Academy in Soroti represented by hon. Osegge and hon. Mukula. They are up there, you are welcome. We also have petitioners from St Balikuddembe Market, you are welcome. (Applause)

Hon. Minister, when can you bring the statement?

MRS MBAGUTA SEZI: Mr Speaker, we are at the height of preparing the July payroll and any interruption will mean that the July salaries will be late. However, as soon as we finish that process, we shall electronically submit the payroll to the Office of the Speaker. We cannot interrupt the process. Otherwise, salaries will be late.

3.39
MR SAMUEL ODONGA-OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): As the Chairman of Government Assurances Committee, what the Speaker is asking for is a comprehensive statement on the status of the salaries countrywide not just a payroll, which may be a very big document, which we may not even comprehend. So, can you commit yourself on when you can bring a comprehensive statement on the status of salaries all over the country as the Minister of Public Service? Comprehensive to include validation, ghosts, arrears, pension. When are you bringing a comprehensive statement so that we put you on the record and get you on that?

MS MBAGUTA SEZI: Madam Speaker, we need approximately three weeks – (Interjections) – because you have asked for a comprehensive statement. I cannot interrupt the payment system.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, she has said three weeks. So, that is an assurance. 

Honourable members, in the Public Gallery, we have reporters from the Parliament of Mozambique? Okay, they are on this side. You are welcome. (Applause) They have come to observe our proceedings. 

Let us go to the next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

ON SUPERVISION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMPANIES

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I wish you would take only 10 minutes to present that.

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Nyombi Thembo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This statement is in response to the statement that was made to Parliament on 2 July 2013 by hon. Winifred Kiiza, the Woman Representative for Kasese regarding an alarming sms message that was sent to the residents of Kasese, indicating that the water system there had been poisoned and that people should not consume it, on the one hand and on the other hand, the concern by hon. Odonga-Otto about the improper use of sms messages by companies that provide the service.

From the onset, I would like to clarify it to the honourable members that there is a clear separation of roles and mandates between the Ministry of ICT and the independent regulator, which is the Uganda Communications Commission.

The mandate of the ministry is, among others: to provide strategic and technical leadership; overall coordination; support and advocacy on all matters of policy and legal framework as well as strategy for the ICT Sector; and to monitor and evaluate the implementation of policies and laws governing the sector.

The role of the UCC on the other hand, which is the independent commission is to: monitor, inspect, license and regulate communication services; make recommendations to the minister in the issuance of major licenses under the Uganda Communications Act; supervise and enforce the conditions of those licenses; and to receive and investigate complaints relating to communication services and to take necessary action upon them.

With that background, let me also say that Section 81 of the Uganda Communications Act, 2013 provides for appropriate legal action that can be taken against any person who sends false and distressing signals similar to the one reported by hon. Winfred Kiiza.

Where such person is convicted, they are liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding Shs 600,000 or to imprisonment not exceeding 48 months or both. As you may appreciate, Madam Speaker, the penalties are so low given the disruptions such messages can cause. In the near future, my ministry will seek to amend the Act so that more punitive measures can be put in place.

Furthermore, to allay the concerns of hon. Odonga-Otto regarding the criminal use of sms messages by companies providing those services, I want to say that the Uganda Communications Commission, in October 2012, issued guidelines on the content, services and applications that govern transmission of text messages by telecom companies and content providers.

The guidelines, among other things, require service providers and telecom operators to put in place procedures and mechanisms to trace the origin of content and to provide the source of that content if requested by UCC. A copy of those guidelines in hereby attached. I beg to lay the same on Table, Madam Speaker.

We have, therefore, initiated investigations accordingly, which should lead us to identifying those responsible for sending the alarming messages to the residents of Kasese. When investigations are concluded, we shall work with the police to ensure that the perpetrators of the said criminal act are brought to book. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for presenting that statement. Have your concerns been answered, hon. Winfred Kiiza?

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I also would like to thank the honourable minister for delivering this statement. One thing that is of certain is that, Government just wants to pull away from this question. Where the minister says that it is not his role, where the minister points out that the role – the minister is kind of giving a disclaimer in that statement. I thought that being the supervisor of UCC, you would be in a good position to come here and speak on their behalf. You know for sure that UCC cannot come to Parliament to explain what happens out there. It is okay that you are going to follow up that matter. However, I am not comfortable with the part of the statement that says that the fine of Shs 600,000 is very low.

Madam Speaker, I imagine that it is the duty of Government at whatever cost, to enforce the laws and to ensure that the citizens of this country are protected; that they can get information at whatever cost, as long as it is information that is supposed to assure them and guarantee their security.

Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I wonder whether this minister is serious. When you look at this statement, you realise it is the very verbal statement that he gave here sometime. That time, he said he was going to investigate and bring a statement to Parliament. In this statement, he is still saying he has initiated investigations meaning - (Laughter)– he has completely done nothing –(Laughter)– this is the very statement he gave to Parliament verbally.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you, my brother. And I personally would be comfortable with the minister coming here to say that, “With this law, we have so far arrested” such and such number of people who could have paid - for example, Sh 2 million but that Government had used for example, Shs 400 million to track them, on the basis of which he would ask Parliament to amend the law.

How can we start amending a law without a starting point? You would tell us some exact figures, for example, by stating that tracking a person would cost us, for example, Shs 500 million and on that basis you would say, to be on the safer side, the law should be amended to a higher figure. But as we talk, we have not seen anyone being arrested and not known how much it can cost us.

It is on this basis that I feel very uncomfortable with this statement. And I think, as we get to eject telephone –(Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to interject on the issue of the cost. You cannot use the cost as an excuse because Government gets money appropriated to investigate and arrest culprits including even those who steal chicken. So, that is not a reason to run away from taking our responsibility of investigating and bringing the culprits to book.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: And we were informed, as a country –(Interruption)

MR TANNA: I would like to thank my honourable colleague for giving way. I would like to inform her and this honourable House that the cost is not an element in this argument. Those who are conversant with working - we do have hon. Baliddawa there and I know he will agree with me that for one to trace the origin of crime, for example, where was this SMS sent from, you do not need any money. You need only know how and identify the IP address. The IP address gives you the CPU that sent out that message. 

So, all you need is a knowledgeable person who can access the server that sent the message. It is not about money. It is about the will to track the person. 

Secondly, on the element of cost, I am very much aware that the regulatory body he has referred to has the necessary mechanism. This is not only about that one message this House talked about that day. We are talking about several such messages. For example, a couple of weeks back, somebody relayed a derogatory message about me in the constituency. This is about what measures the ministry and the regulatory authority have put in place regarding protecting of all of us. I remember when the NRM primaries were taking place in Namboole, names were used that so and so supports so and so and these were messages soliciting for support.

So, these are things that have just started. The fraud or crime, whatever we can call it, has just started but are these guidelines in position to curb and if so, what is the ministry doing about that? That is what we expected in his statement, Madam Speaker. It is not about the cost element in my opinion. I thank you honourable colleague. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you very much, hon. Tanna for the information. After his information, I feel there is enough that I should have said which has been tackled by him. All I can say is that our people are going ahead to be told to register their telephone numbers and I thought this would be the time for us to put to test this mechanism, whether it is of help to Ugandans; whether it is going to reduce the rate at which people are committing crimes in the dot.com world and, Madam Speaker, we have been tested and found wanting.

Therefore, I wish to say that the minister needs to do much more than what he has done. Ugandans are still at a loss. Crimes can still be committed and nobody can track a criminal. And I would request that possibly the minister – this is the statement that he said he was going to bring so there is not much that the minister has said. Maybe he can promise that he is going to bring a thorough statement by withdrawing this one. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, there is nothing to contribute because the same thing she said is what he has written. There is nothing new. He says he is still investigating. So, is it worthwhile to debate something they are investigating? 

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I do not know why the issue of the Shs 600,000 fine has taken centre stage in this because when you read - (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have seen and been guided rightly that the hon. Minister is yet to comprehensively investigate and give us enough information and safeguards that can help us guard against this menace. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we give time to the hon. Minister to withdraw this statement, go back and do a thorough investigation and come back later to give us a comprehensive statement? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the question was about a specific incident in Kasese but you have not answered what happened in Kasese and you say you are still investigating. What you have brought here is the functions of the UCC - (Laughter) – the work of your ministry. So, you have not told us anything. 

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Madam Speaker, if you can allow me to explain this. One, when these offending SMS messages are made there is a time when they are a regulatory issue, a communications issue and there comes a time when it becomes a criminal issue. So, what I am saying in this statement is that at a regulatory level we have set the guidelines, which I have laid on Table. But of course we know that these offending messages that were sent, when we know that they were sent they become a crime.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister is talking about messages. We are talking about these particular messages of Kasese. Is he in order now to start telling us about other messages when we are talking about Kasese issues? And how long does it take to get a criminal who has sent a message on air? Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the question was specific to a message sent in Kasese. That is what they wanted you to answer but you are answering on policy and the functions and the work of the UCC and you are still investigating. Are you ready? You have not got the results from the investigations. 

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Madam Speaker, colleagues may appreciate that investigations of this matter at a regulatory level are not easy. In fact, I have heard a colleague of mine saying that what you only need is to identify an IP address, to identify a server – yes, that is the statement but you know that the kind of people who send such messages have what we call elusive servers and elusive IPs. They are not stupid. They are very hard to catch. It does not take a day or one week. You need a lot of resources to investigate these people.
 
So, what I am saying is that for us as the Ministry of ICT we have noted what the Member has reported. We have confirmed that these offending messages or distress alarms were sent. What we now want to do is a thorough investigation and when we get the source, we hand over to the Police because then it becomes a crime. UCC does not investigate crimes. That is the work of the Police. For us, we can give them support in their investigations.

MR SIMON PETER ALEPER: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought you had wisely guided the minister, having looked at the statement that the minister has issued and we have seen that it contains nothing different from what he had earlier on verbally communicated and also having guided the minister that he has just attached the guidelines of UCC, is it right for the minister to continue proceeding on a matter that you have wisely guided on?
 
The minister just needs to ask for more time to go and come with a comprehensive and convincing statement. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, complete your investigations and then come back and inform us because she was specific.

MR NYOMBI TEMBO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not think the investigations are in his hands; they are in the hands of the Police. When you are ready, bring back the statement.

MR NYOMBI TEMBO: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I refer Members to the last paragraph: “The investigation we have initiated.”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am trying to help you but you are putting yourself in the arena.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

ON THE PROPOSED NEW TAXES ON THE TOURISM SECTOR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was informed that this statement should come from the Minister of Finance rather than Minister of Trade. Let us hear from the owner of the taxes.

4.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Yes, Madam Speaker, because taxation is a responsibility of the Minister of Finance but I have a procedural point on which I want to seek clarification. Taxation proposals are coming in the Bills so, I am wondering whether we will be proceeding correctly by my coming here to make a statement rather waiting to receive the submissions from any of you in the committees once these Bills have been laid before Parliament. Won’t we be pre-empting ourselves? Supposing the committee comes up with a different recommendation, what shall we do? 

It is my suggestion that that matter be deferred; we will debate it when the executive committees make their submissions of the financial Bills. Then it will be able to make a little bit more sense.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if the matter is contained in the Finance Bill, the debate be at the deliberations of the committee.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, during the discussions on the Vote-on-Account for financial year 2013/2014 Parliament made a recommendation that the following permanent secretaries should not be appointed as accounting officers due to the alleged misappropriation of funds under either their current or previous dockets:
    • Mr Pius Bigirimana, Permanent Secretary Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development
    • Dr Asuman Lukwago, Acting Permanent Secretary Ministry of Health and
    • Dr Steven Kagoda, Permanent Secretary Ministry of Internal Affairs.

My ministry sought a legal opinion from the Solicitor-General. According to the Solicitor-General’s legal advice, the power to appoint and remove a permanent secretary is provided for by an Act of Parliament and it is on the basis of that law that they can be stripped off their accounting powers.

The Solicitor-General further stated that since permanent secretaries referred to above have not been arraigned before any court of law and found guilty –(Interruption)
 
MS TAAKA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I remember when we were debating this same item, we deferred it because we wanted the list of the members who do not want - but we do not know even what the minister is talking about because we do not have copies of what he is talking about. Is he procedurally right to continue when we do not have copies?

THE SPEAKER: I thought his statement is very small, just one-and-a-half pages. I thought you could listen. It is very small.

DR LULUME: Madam Speaker, it was out of goodwill that Members kept quiet in order to listen to the minister reading a statement and we did not know how serious this statement was until he started mentioning what has got reverberations in this country. So, I would think that it would be unwise of this Parliament not to have a written statement. We can stand over this so that the statement can be given to the rest of the Members. It looks like it is going to generate a lot of debate.

THE SPEAKER: So, can I direct the Clerk to produce some copies while we do some other business. Let us stand over this for now.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we lay the papers, join me in welcoming the youth from Amuru District represented by hon. Gilbert Olanya and hon. Betty Bigombe; they are up here. They are very welcome. (Applause)

Also, join me in welcoming students and teachers from Kalagala Primary School represented by hon. Godfrey Lubega and hon. Benny Bugembe. They are from Mubende. There are also sisters from Kisseka Sub County in Bukoto South represented by hon. Mathias Nsubuga and hon. Gertrude Lubega of Lwengo. They are welcome. (Applause)

PROMOTING CHEMICAL SAFETY FOR CHILDREN AT WORK IN RURAL AGRICULTURAL COMMUNITIES IN UGANDA – UNDP FUNDED PROJECT NO: 00062527 – 00080060 – REPORT AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31ST DECEMBER 2011

4.04
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the audit reports for UNDP funded and nationally implemented Government projects financial statement for the year ended 31st of December 2011. 

REPORT AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF UGANDA MANAGEMENT INSTITUTE (UMI) FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

4.05
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statement of Uganda Management Institute for the year ended 30th June 2012. 

REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MAKERERE UNIVERSITY BUSINESS SCHOOL (MUBS) FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

4.05
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Makerere University Business School (MUBS) for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE SECOND NORTHERN UGANDA SOCIAL ACTION FUND PROJECT (NUSAF 2) IDA CREDIT NO. 46260 – UG FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

4.06
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Second Northern Uganda Social Action Fund Project (NUSAF 2) financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF COORDINATING OFFICE FOR THE CONTROL OF TRYPANOSOMIASIS IN UGANDA (COCTU) FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

4.07
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Auditor-General’s report on the financial statements of Coordinating Office for the Control of Trypanosomiasis in Uganda for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

MINISTRY OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT UGANDA SMALL TOWNS WATER SUPPLY AND RURAL GROWTH CENTRES PROJECT (GRANT NO. TF057884 – UG, TFO57883-UG AND TF057882-UG) FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

4.07
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Auditor-General’s report on Ministry of Water and Environment Uganda Small Towns Water Supply and Rural Growth Centres Project (GRANT NO. TF057884 – UG, TFO57883-UG AND TF057882-UG) containing the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

CREATION OF SUSTAINABLE TSETSE AND TRYPANOSOMIASIS FREE AREA (STATFA) PROJECT NO. ZI-AZO-006; LOAN NO. 210050009197; GRANT NO. 2100155003920 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

4.08
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Auditor-General’s report on Creation of Sustainable Tsetse and Trypanosomiasis Free Area Uganda Component Project financial statement for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The reports should be sent to the Public Accounts Committee for perusal and report back.

UGANDA REVENUE AUTHORITY (URA) MODERNISATION PLAN PROJECT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

4.09
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Patrick Amuriat): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 together with a report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the Uganda Revenue Authority Modernisation Plan Project. I beg to lay.

COTTON DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION (CDO) FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31ST OCTOBER 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

4.09
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Patrick Amuriat): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the financial statements for the year ended 31 October 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General on the Cotton Development Organisation (CDO). I beg to lay.

KILEMBE MINES LIMITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

4.10
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Patrick Amuriat): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for Kilembe Mines Limited. I beg to lay.

NATIONAL ENTERPRISE CORPORATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

4.10
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Patrick Amuriat): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the National Enterprise Corporation. I beg to lay.

FORENSIC INVESTIGATION INTO THE OPERATIONS OF UGANDA PRINTING AND PUBLISHING CORPORATION REPORT BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

4.11
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Patrick Amuriat): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a report on the forensic investigation into the operations of Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

REPORT AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF NILE HOTEL INTERNATIONAL LIMITED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31ST DECEMBER 2011

4.11
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Patrick Amuriat): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Nile Hotel International Limited for the year ended 31 December 2011. I beg to lay.

REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE UGANDA REGISTRATION SERVICES BUREAU FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012
4.12
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Patrick Amuriat): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the financial statements of the Uganda Registration Services Bureau for the year ended 30 June 2012 as reported by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay, and I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all those reports are sent to the Committee on Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for perusal and report back. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS ON A PETITION ON THE MISMANAGEMENT OF ST BALIKUDDEMBE (OWINO) MARKET

4.13
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not the chair of the committee but I have been delegated by the leadership of the committee to present it on behalf of the Members. I hope that the copies are being distributed. I am going straight to read the report.

Introduction

On the 1 November 2012, hon. Rosemary Seninde Nansubuga, Woman Representative, Wakiso District, presented a petition on behalf of the members of St Balikuddembe (Owino) Market Women Vendors. The Speaker directed the Committee on Presidential Affairs to look into it.

Background

The substance of the petition was as follows: 

    1. The petition regards the operations of St Balikuddembe Market Stalls Space and Lock-Up Shops Owners Association Ltd (SSLOA), an association contracted by KCCA to manage St Balikuddembe Market.

    2. The petitioners are women/mothers who operate in the market of St Balikuddembe and are facing serious hardships in carrying out their businesses in the market, due to the persistent wrangles between vendors and St Balikuddembe Market Stalls Space and Lock-Up Shops Owners Association Ltd who claim to be the legitimate owners of the market.

 
    3. The petitioners cited the mismanagement of the market and fraud committed by St  Balikuddembe Market Stalls Space and Lock-Up Shops Owners Association Ltd (SSLOA) as hindering their work in the following ways:
    a) The lorry donated by H.E, the President, to Owino Market as well as the proceeds from the same have not been accounted for since 1992

    b) Profits made by FAMUSA from monies meant for purposes of constructing stalls amounting to Shs 1,225,000,000 have not been accounted for since 1995.

    c) Dividends from FAMUSA have not been issued.

d) The Inspector-General of Government’s report and recommendations concerning the management of the market have not been implemented since they were made in 1998.

e) 	Failure to conduct elections for the Owino Market vendors’ leaders for the last 14 years.

f) 	Failure to account for Shs 3 billion, being monies advanced by vendors to purchase Owino Market from Kampala City Council Authority.

g) Numerous fraudulent dealings perpetuated by a one Kayongo Geoffrey Nkajja, a leader of SSLOA including:
 
(i) The purported acquisition of a Shs 4 billion loan from DFCU Bank purportedly to pay for the market lease from KCCA, which has since increased to Shs 8 billion.

(ii) The continued and forceful levy of market dues helped by the Police and illegal muscle men (kanyamas), contrary to KCCA’s directive stopping the same.

(iii) The non-remittance of market dues amounting to Shs 1,261,250,000 to Kampala City Council Authority, yet the same had been collected from the vendors.

4. 	De-registration of over 30,000 vendors from the list of entitled persons under the lease offered to the vendors on the directive of His Excellency the President of Uganda to all Owino Market vendors.

5. 	Non accountability for the Entandikwa Scheme funds since 2011.

The petitioners prayed for the resolution of Parliament that:
a) 	Government suspends dealings with Mr Geoffrey Kayongo and SSLOA until they have been investigated.

b) 	Mr Geoffrey Kayongo and SSLOA management be investigated for fraud.

c) 	The SSLOA, Mr Geoffrey Kayongo, the Police and their agents are prohibited from collecting market dues forthwith.

d) 	Elections are conducted as soon as possible to elect vendors’ leaders.

e) 	Geoffrey Kayongo and SSLOA management make good any loss suffered by KCCA as well as the vendors for mismanagement of funds as outlined above.

f) 	Mr Geoffrey Kayongo and SSLOA management be required to refund all monies collected from vendors in form of market dues.

g) 	An all-inclusive organisation made up of vendors be allowed to run the market.

h) 	Investigations be carried out for purposes of ascertaining the true owners of lock-ups, shops and stalls with a view of allocating the same to vendors.

i) 	The Police and other security agencies stop forthwith intermeddling in the internal management issues of Owino Market.

Methodology

Madam Speaker, since Members have got copies of the report, I will skip the methodology. I will go to the observations. 

Findings

Facts about St Balikuddembe Market 
    • St Balikuddembe Market, commonly known as Owino Market, is the biggest market in Kampala. It was started in the 1970s. It is located between Kisenyi, Kafumbe Mukasa Road and Queensway. It provides a trading place for tens of thousands of people. The management, maintenance and control of Owino Market was, until recently, under the then city council of Kampala as the market authority under the Markets Act, Cap 94 and the subsidiary legislations made thereunder.

    • On 19 May 2008, Kampala City Council, as it was then, received a formal application for the communal sublease of St Balikuddembe Market Stalls, Space and Lock-up Shops Owners Association Ltd (SSLOA).  

    • On 19 January 2009, H.E the President, in a letter addressed to the Minister for Local Government, directed that the sublease for St Balikuddembe Market be offered to the market association of the vendors themselves.  

    • In compliance with H.E the President’s directive, KCC through the Kampala District Contracts Committee awarded a sublease to the aforesaid company subject to the payment of a premium of Shs 4 billion and ground rent of Shs 200 million. St Balikuddembe Market Stalls, Space and Lock-up Shops Owners Association Ltd accepted the award of sublease on the aforesaid terms on 22 February 2010 

    • However, in 2001, J.B. Kivumbi and 11 others filed a civil suit vide High Court Civil Suit No. 947 of 2001 against Kampala City Council claiming inter alia land upon which the market sits. St Balikuddembe Market Stalls, Space and Lock-up Shops Owners Association Ltd and 10 others were subsequently added as parties to the suit. 

The same was settled under a consent judgment on 19 February 2010 wherein it was agreed that: the various vendor groups would merge to form one company; SSLOA calls a general meeting of the company to reflect on the admission of the new members; a register of all individual persons operating a stall, lock-up or registered space in St Balikuddembe Market be compiled and filed with the High Court and KCC and that the said individuals be admitted as members of the new company; and KCC grants the sublease interest in the land to the new company. 

    • Accordingly, St Balikuddembe Market Stalls, Space and Lock-up Shops Owners Association Ltd was formed as a result of the aforesaid merger and has managed St Balikuddembe Market ever since the completion of payment of premium and ground rent in March 2011.

    • The wrangles in the market had persisted in spite of a ruling of the High Court that a creation of SSLOA meant that the consent judgment in civil suit No. 947 of 2001 had fully been complied with and all the vendors in the market were henceforth to be members of the company and to resolve their disputes through the organs of the same. 

    • Kampala Capital City Authority was approached by various factions of SSLOA to mediate the wrangles that beset the management of the same. As a result, a meeting of the parties was convened by KCCA on the 5 January 2012.

    • After long deliberations by various representatives from KCCA, SSLOA, Bamufunampola and St Balikuddembe (Owino) Market Produce Traders and Vendor Cooperative Ltd, it was unanimously resolved that a committee be set up including the representatives of the parties to inquire into the wrangles/disputes in the market.

    • The committee sat on 6 January 2012 and subsequent to the said meeting, SSLOA disowned the aforesaid reconciliation exercise and instead accused KCCA of meddling with the management of their limited liability company. 

Kampala City Council Authority’s involvement in the mediation to resolve the wrangles was solely for the purpose of precluding the eruption of violence as often happened as a result of the differences between the aforementioned vendors’ group/associations.

    • St Balikuddembe Market Stalls, Space and Lock-up Shops Owners Association Ltd had been collecting monies in respect of market dues thereby arrogating itself a role that is the sole preserve of KCCA. All pleas to the company to cease the aforesaid illegal conduct and to surrender the revenue lawfully due to KCCA were to no avail.

    • St Balikuddembe Market Stalls, Space and Lock-up Shops Owners Association Ltd over time accumulated arrears in respect of market dues to the tune of Shs 1,261,250,000 as at the end of January 2012 and KCCA was in the process of trying to recover the same. 

    • In a meeting with SSLOA, KCCA asked the company to pay the market dues, and they contended that as lessees of KCCA they had no obligation to pay the same since they paid premium and ground rent. 

    • Kampala City Council Authority argued that payment of premium and ground rent only created a lessor and lessee relationship, which is a landlord and tenant relationship. Kampala City Council Authority, in levying market dues/rates, was exercising a statutory duty vested in it by the Markets Act Cap 94, the Markets (Kampala Markets) Byelaws Statutory Instrument No. 94-15, Kampala Capital City Act, 2010 and the Kampala City Council approved market charges, 2005.

    • On 18th July 2012, the Solicitor-General rendered an opinion on the issue as to whether SSLOA was legally obligated to pay market dues and/or charges, opining that no such legal duty existed in light of the lessor/lessee relationship between the parties. It was the considered opinion of KCCA that the aforesaid opinion of the Solicitor-General not only bars Kampala Capital City Authority from collecting market dues/charges but by necessary implication also bars SSLOA from doing the same.  

    • From the terms of the consent judgment, the only pending action on the part of KCCA was to prepare and execute the formal documents conveying the sublease interest to the vendors’ company.

    • The Ministry of Lands was processing the amalgamation of the several plots of Owino Market land into a single certificate of title, and on completion of that process and handover of the title deed to KCCA a lease agreement shall be prepared and forwarded to the Solicitor-General for clearance as required by law and only thereafter will it be executed by the parties. 

Submission by SSLOA

The management of SSLOA informed the committee as follows:
a)	St Balikuddembe Market started in 1971, but by 1989 the conditions of the market had worsened with the loose ground making it inaccessible during rainy seasons, dusty during the dry seasons, lack of storm water drainage and poor sanitary conditions, among others. Owing to those problems, the World Bank and Government of Uganda represented by KCC contracted consultants M/s John Van Nostrand and Kagga & Partners Ltd to undertake a study for the improvement of Kampala’s urban markets. As a result, only three markets were improved with St Balikuddembe Market inclusive. 

b)	At the time of redevelopment, there were 3,300 stalls in Owino and the design and planning was based on this number. Before commencement of the civil works, all stall holders were registered. This registration was intended to know who existed and owned stalls in the market so that they could be reconsidered back in the constructed market. 

c)	A total of 4,500 permanent stalls and 800 seasonal stalls were registered as opposed to the design, which had considered the 3,300 stalls. This problem escalated further by reducing the market area. In April 1995, a portion of the project area was left out to Nakivubo Settlement Primary School, and construction of Kafumbe-Mukasa Road reduced the market land. These developments were reducing the number of stalls, which had increased already at the time of implementation. This required serious input from vendors at implementation so that they could feel that the project was theirs. This prompted the formation of a market development steering committee.

d)	Due to the deficit of about 2,000 stalls, the building team and the committee agreed to reduce the stall sizes and to rearrange facilities to fit in more stall sheds. The construction of the stalls was purely on self-help basis.  The vendors submitted quotations through M/s Lukwago Construction Company Ltd for a stall with a top concrete slab and locker. On the other hand, lockup shops were designed to be constructed on the boundary wall and the contract for their construction was awarded to M/s Midland Famusa Construction Ltd.

e)	 By then, Government’s policy of privatisation/decentralisation had taken off and the market was being managed by Owino Traders & Transporters Ltd (OTT) on behalf of KCC, and it was remitting money to KCC monthly till the cancellation of the contract. 

f)	Initially, the vendors’ leadership was based on consensus. However, in the late 1980s, the vendors formalised their leadership by forming a vendors association and writing a constitution to govern the association.

g)	In spite of the formation of the association, KCC remained supreme in the market and used to oppress the vendors. 

h)	Market leadership was organised along departments, zones and then the executive for the whole market. It is the leaders who constitute St Balikuddembe parliament/leaders’ council and it is the council which deliberates and resolves on all issues concerning the market. 

i)	The current development in St Balikuddembe Market was a partnership of government/KCCA and the vendors. It was on the basis of that partnership that the vendors embarked on applying for a lease from KCC in order to protect their interests. However, KCC did not respond to the vendors’ application and instead KCC in early 2000 embarked on allocation of Kampala prime land to private investors.

j) 	The vendors did not agree with KCC’s decision and, therefore, the market leadership resolved to suspend election of market leadership before a lease for market land was acquired. This, according to the SSLOA leadership, was not in bad faith but it was intended to protect the interests of property owners in the market and other vendors in general. The leaders’ council also resolved to form and incorporate a company to spearhead lease acquisition and redevelopment.

k) 	When the sale of land in the city by the then KCC started without sparing market land, the vendors of St Balikuddembe Market in their leaders council held in June 2006 resolved to form themselves into a company. This company was St Balikuddembe Market Stalls, Space and lockup Shops Owners Association Ltd (SSLOA). It was incorporated in November 2006 as a company limited by guarantee and which was later transformed into a public limited company. The membership at formation was 156 members. The company was owned by vendors of St Balikuddembe market who own stalls, registered spaces and lockup shops. 

l) 	After incorporation, SSLOA again applied for a lease from the then KCC who refused/neglected to address its application. The vendors’ leaders petitioned H.E. the President who replied by directing the Minister for Local Government to ensure that vendors get a lease for their market.

m) 	Rival groups against SSLOA emerged, prompting the then Minister for Local Government to call for a meeting to ensure that the President’s directive could be implemented.  

n) 	Upon solving the rivalries, spearheaded by the Minister for Economic Monitoring, the Minister for Local Government wrote to KCC briefing them of the development and advised them to give a lease offer to SSLOA because it had catered for all interests of the vendors who own property in St Balikuddembe Market. The lease offer was given to SSLOA on 3 February 2010. 

o) 	Upon receipt of a lease offer by SSLOA, J.B Kivumbi and others resurrected their case against KCC. They contended that KCC should not give out a lease for market land to SSLOA or any other entity because they claimed interest on the same land. The SSLOA, having acquired interest in St Balikuddembe Market land, applied to court to be joined as party, which the court accepted so that they can defend interests of their shareholders. A consent judgment was entered subsequently.

p) 	Due to the negative impact on the collection of an investment fund caused by the consent judgment, the directors of the company sat on 25 March 2011 and resolved that the company opens up a project current account with DFCU Bank, Owino branch. The account was to be operated by four principal signatories, who included Mr Kayongo – I think you can read that part.  

q) 	The company resolved and on 6 April 2010, applied to the Registrar of Companies through their lawyers, Kampala Associated Advocates, for change of name from St Balikuddembe Market, Stalls, Lockup Shops Owners Association Ltd to St Balikuddembe Market, Stalls, Space and Lockup Shops Owners’ Association Ltd.  A certificate of change of name dated 23rd April 2010 was issued. 

r) 	There was a resolution passed at a meeting of the Board of Directors of the company on 25 August 2010. The following were presented as the resolutions that were tabled, considered and unanimously passed:

    (i) That the company does accept a lease offer of 49 years granted to it by Kampala City Council over the property known as St Balikuddembe Market (formerly Owino).
    (ii) That the management of the company is hereby authorised to obtain a commercial loan facility of Shs 4,800,000,000  –(Interruption)

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. The committee did a wonderful job and like the chairperson said from the beginning, members have the report; actually, she even jumped to the methodology. So, I think that we would be proceeding very well if she went straight to the observations and recommendations. Otherwise, like you have seen, we are on page 11 and we are going up to page 24 and you know what that means. I need your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter is a bit intricate; there are a lot of problems involved. So, I think it may be necessary for Members to understand the chronology and what has been happening.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that guidance. 

(iii) That as security for the loan, the company shall pledge/mortgage to DFCU Bank Ltd the lease granted by Kampala City Council together with the property described below as security for the facility:
    • Plots 24B, 24C, M582 and M585 situated at St Balikuddembe Market; and
    • Block 12 plots 1339, 1081 and 388 all at Mengo Kisenyi respectively. 

(iv) That the four directors mentioned above are the appointed agents of the company, with full authority of the company to sign all documents, agreements and to conduct the business of the company in relation to the loan facility with DFCU Bank.

s) 	The Town Clerk then, after SSLOA’s payment, wrote to a KCC agent then in the market, M/s UMOT (U) Ltd, informing them of the developments and advised them to officially hand over market management to SSLOA. Therefore, SSLOA, effective 11 April 2011, started managing its property as lease holder from KCCA. 

t) 	When KCCA came into existence, it started meddling into the affairs of management of the market and SSLOA, with KCCA claiming that since March 2011, SSLOA has accumulated arrears in respect of market dues to the tune of Shs 1,261,250,000 as at the end of January 2012. They demanded payment of that money immediately and instructed SSLOA to stop collection of market dues at St Balikuddembe Market because it is only KCCA mandated to collect those dues.

u) St Balikuddembe Market Stalls, Space and Lockup Shops Owners Association Ltd tried to amicably resolve the matter in vain. Thereafter, they sought the intervention of both the Solicitor-General and the IGP who responded in their favour. 

v) 	The conduct of KCCA coupled with rival groups caused financial loss to SSLOA and the vendors in general. All the arrears on the loan and penalties were caused by the above factors. 

w) 	The loan had been projected on 10,000 property owners/beneficiaries at St Balikuddembe Market with each expected to contribute Shs 1 million for lease acquisition and other incidental costs at the time. To date, 8802 members have registered. However, out of this, only 20 per cent had fully fulfilled their obligations. 

Submission by the St Balikuddembe Market Youth Vendors Development Association

    1. There was a leadership vacuum in the market, with the last elections having been conducted 14 years ago. In 2012, there were attempts to carry out an election but the Police stopped the process indefinitely with those who had been elected being denied the chance to be sworn in.

    2. The constant runoffs between revenue collectors and vendors on some occasions became aggressive, with claims from some vendors getting molested, their merchandise being confiscated and some being imprisoned. The vendors were in disagreement with SSLOA’s continued collection of market dues, which was in contravention of KCCA’s directive stopping them from collecting the dues.

    3. At a meeting between the vendors and the Minister in charge of Economic Monitoring, the vendors were informed that all revenue collected from the market does not go to Government. He advised the vendors to devise ways on how to manage revenue collected, how much would be collected from each vendor and when. The committee was informed that this advice was not followed at all.

Submission by Owino Twegatte Development Association Ltd

During the meeting, the committee was informed as follows: 
1. 	Owino Twegatte Development Association Ltd was founded and was fully registered in 2006 with the objective of sensitizing vendors on how to eradicate poverty through savings and credit schemes, prevention of HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases. 

2. 	The association was based in St Balikuddembe Market comprising of more than 600 members.

3. 	Upon the President’s advice that all sitting tenants in the market be allowed to obtain lease offers, the former Mayor for Kampala, Al Hajj Ntege Ssebaggala, authorised two vendors’ companies – United Market Vendors headed by a one Geoffrey Kayongo, and Owino Twegatte Development Association Ltd to manage St Balikuddembe Market under KCC. This resulted in the formation of M/s UWOT Ltd with executive members being elected from both companies and with Mr Kayongo as the chairperson. 

4. 	Mr Geoffrey Kayongo – who is the Presidential Advisor on markets – individually formed SSLOA and applied for and was offered a lease through the same company without the involvement of members from Owino Twegatte Development Association Ltd.

5. 	In spite of a directive stopping SSLOA from collecting market dues from vendors, he continued to do so with the assistance of kanyamas who often beat up non-compliant vendors. 

6. 	Mr Kayongo was in leadership for more than 15 years because the executive had failed to organise elections.

Submission by the Minister in Charge of the Presidency/KCCA

1. 	Kampala City Council Authority has a statutory duty vested in it by the Markets Act Cap 94, the Markets (Kampala Markets) Byelaws Statutory Instrument No. 94-15, Kampala Capital City Act, 2010 and the Kampala City Council Approved Market Charges, 2005, to levy market dues and/or charges in all markets in Kampala Capital City.

2. 	Section 1 of the Market Act provides for the establishment and control of markets. It provides thus: “(1) No person or authority other than- 
(a) the administration of a district 
(b) a municipal council 
(c) a town council 
shall establish or maintain a market. 

(2) The administration of a district may establish and maintain markets within the area of its jurisdiction and shall control and manage such markets or shall vest their control and management in such person or authority as it may deem it.” 

“(4) The person or body managing or controlling a market shall be known as the market authority.”

From the foregoing statutory provisions, it follows that unless and until KCCA vests the control and management of Owino Market in another person or body, those powers and rights would reside in KCCA as the market authority.

3. 	In order to exercise the aforesaid mandate, it had become necessary for KCCA to reassert its control and management of markets within Kampala City including Nakasero and St Balikuddembe markets. This became imperative and necessary because the various vendors groups, associations and companies operating in the markets, in a bid to take over control of the KCCA revenue collection had engaged in breaching the peace and through their various leaders embezzling colossal sums of money from both their fellow vendors and KCCA.

4. 	On 19 January 2009, H.E the President of Uganda issued a directive to the effect that the management of markets, including Nakasero and St Balikuddembe, should be vested in the vendors operating in the said markets.

5. 	In compliance with the said directive, the then KCC through the Kampala District Contracts Committee awarded a sublease of the several plots on which Owino Market sits to St Balikuddembe Market Stalls and Lock-Up Shops Owners Association Ltd (SSLOA).

6. 	There were over 90,000 vendors in St Balikuddembe Market, though the St Balikuddembe Market Stalls and Lockup Shops Owners Association Ltd claims a membership of only 10,000.

7. 	In view of the large number of vendors in the market, the only viable business entity they can form to manage and safeguard their interests is a public limited liability company which would in time, unfortunately, wrest control of the market from the vendors since such a company can sell shares to the public. This would, thus, render the President’s directive nugatory, which was already happening since SSLOA claimed to be a public limited liability company and had many city businessmen who were not vendors in the markets as members. 

8. 	The St Balikuddembe Market Stalls, Space and   Lockup Owners Association owed accumulated arrears in respect of market dues to the tune of Shs 1,261,250,000 as at the end January 2012. The company had up to date been unable to clear the said arrears in spite of demands from KCCA for the same.

9. 	There were no signed lease agreements between SSLOA and KCCA and these transactions had not been approved by the Solicitor-General. There were, therefore, no legally binding leases between the parties. 

	In light of the Constitutional Court’s decision in the case of Nsimbe Estates Ltd v Attorney-General and Inspector-General of Government, constitutional petition No.2 of 2006, neither the market vendors’ companies nor KCCA owes any obligation towards each other and whatever arrangement was entered into by the parties shall be rendered null and void ab initio.

10. The conflicts as to who controls leadership and revenue collection in both markets (Nakasero and Owino) were a source of fights/breaches of the peace in the markets, which in turn led to insecurity in the city as a whole.  

11. The wrangles in the market dated back to 2001 when a group of vendors filed High Court Civil Suit No. 947 of 2001 – J.B Kivumbi and 11 others v KCC, SLOA and 10 others - to cause a judicial pronouncement in resolution of the persistent wrangles between the vendors and the various associations established within the market. A consent judgment was executed under the seal of the court on 19 February 2010 and it was collectively resolved as follows:

(a) 	That St Balikuddembe (Owino Market) Produce Traders and Vendors Cooperative Society Ltd and/or its individual members, merges with SLOA and a new company name be adopted.

(b) 	That SLOA calls a general meeting of the company to reflect the merger/admission of the new members.

(c) 	That a register of all individual persons operating a stall, lockup or registered space in St Balikuddembe Market be compiled and filed with the High court and KCC; and that the said individuals be admitted as members of the new company in (a) above.

(d) 	That KCC grants the sublease interest in the land to the new company.

Submission by the Uganda Registration Services Bureau 

The committee was informed that:
a) 	St Balikuddembe Market Stalls, Space and Lockup Shops Owners Association was a public company incorporated on 8 November 2006 and issued with the No. P.537. It was registered with a membership of 156 shareholders and 66 directors. The share capital of the company was valued at Shs 100,000,000. 

b) 	A resolution passed on 19 March 2010 and registered on 15 July 2010 shows that the company decided to admit all the registered members of the St Balikuddembe Market Produce Traders and Vendors Co-operative Society Ltd into the company and allot them shares respectively. 

c) 	St Balikuddembe Market Produce Traders and Vendors Co-operative Society Ltd was not registered with the Uganda Registration Services Bureau and therefore had no legal existence as a company. The committee learnt that there were, however, two other companies with similar names registered with the URSB; these are St Balikuddembe Market Traders Company Ltd registered as a company limited by shares on 1 July 2002, and St Balikuddembe Market Traders Ltd incorporated as a company limited by guarantee on 11 March 2002.

	The committee further learnt that with the exception of Nkata Yusuf who was a subscriber of the company limited by shares only, the rest of the subscribers for both companies were the same.  However, the committee was informed that both companies had been inactive since incorporation with no updates on their files. 

d) 	St Balikuddembe Market Stalls, Space and Lockup Shops Owners Association complied with the requirements for change from a private company limited by shares to a public company and it was issued with a certificate to that effect. 

Submission by dfcu Bank

During the meeting with the representatives of dfcu Bank the Committee was informed as follows:

a) 	The bank was approached by SSLOA after acquiring an offer to lease St Balikuddembe Market in 2010 from the then KCC. St Balikuddembe Market Stalls, Space and Lockup Shops Owners Association requested for a credit facility to enable it pay the assessed premium and initial ground rent, which was a prerequisite to actual obtainment of the lease to facilitate development of the market- “the project”.

b) 	The bank conducted due diligence to authenticate the KCC offer and SSLOA’s ability to repay the loan as requested for. 

c) 	The bank contacted KCC and the then Minister for Local Government to confirm Government’s no objection to the offer in issue and for KCC to confirm to the bank that it would actually process the title for the market upon receipt of the full lease payment. The bank further sought confirmation from court that the then on-going litigation involving different factions in the market had been resolved. The confirmation was given. The Solicitor-General issued an opinion confirming SSLOA’s mandate as the rightful beneficiary of the lease with its attendant rights and obligations including managing the market.

d) 	The bank subsequently agreed to finance the project for the following purposes:
(i) 	Payment for the lease (premium and ground rent);
(ii) 	Acquisition of the relocation land to be used during development of the market;
(iii)	Assistance in sourcing for development partners to avail the required funding for the project;
(iv) Support and avail mortgage financing to the vendors to enable them acquire condominiums in the market once complete, which is the ultimate project objective.

e) 	The bank initially offered a loan of Shs 4.8 billion for the purpose of payment of premium to KCC and incidental costs.

f) 	The bank later approved another loan of Shs 1.35 billion to SSLOA to acquire land to be used to relocate its members when the development commenced.

g) 	The bank was secured by the following securities on which it has registered a legal mortgage – You will read them later.

h) 	In line with its credit policy that requires that financial properties are held as collateral by the bank, the market title - subject to processing, which is the subject of the redevelopment - was to be availed to the bank once processed. If the development plans are to be carried through, this title would be the subject of the sub division, resulting in the condominium titles to be acquired by the vendors.  Its release by KCCA - successor to KCC - was thus crucial to the whole market development process. The title needed to be preserved for the benefit of the vendors. 

i) 	The title for the market was yet to be handed over to SSLOA by KCCA and hence was not included in the securities currently mortgaged to the bank listed above. 

j) 	The bank desired to fully recover the amounts rightfully due to it within the initially agreed methodology - market collections. The bank had been very accommodative of SSLOA whilst SSLOA continued to fend off various stakeholders’ challenges to its mandate over the market. This had led to poor performance of the loan. The outstanding principal was at Shs 6.12 billion.  The bank, however, remained confident that the project could still be brought to fruition hence its patience over the years. 

k) 	The bank was therefore keen to ensure the preservation of the market title deed, which was the core property that would ensure long lasting benefit to the vendors as they acquired their condominium titles when the property was finally developed. 

General Observations

MS TAAKA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. The issue we are tackling is very serious and it involves billions of shillings. I do not know whether it would not be procedurally right to mention the securities given to the bank for the acquisition as collateral for this loan.

THE SPEAKER: She wants her to read the addresses. Just read them out.

MS ABABIKU: The loan was secured by the following securities on which it has registered a legal mortgage:
(i)	Kyandondo Block 12, plot 1431 Mengo INO SSLOA (OMV Shs 2.53 billion, FSV Shs 1.65 billion)

(ii)	Kibuga Block 12, plot 1339 and 1081 Mengo INO SSLOA (1081 – OMV Shs 400 million, FSV Shs 260 million) (1339 – OMV Shs 2.85 billion, FSV Shs 1.85 billion)

(iii) Kibuga Block 12, plot 388 Mengo INO SSLOA
	(OMV Shs 1.65 billion, FSV Shs 1.1 billion)

The committee made the following general observations: 

1. 	There was an obvious leadership struggle in the management of the market. Notable still was the lack of transparency in the management of the market. The current leaders, SSLOA, were not recognised by many vendors, with most associations within the market disassociating themselves from the leadership.  

	The leadership problem was noted to be the main cause of chaos and conflicts in the market.  The committee further observed that without proper leadership, this would lead or was leading to gross mismanagement of market funds since there were no checks and balances. 

2. St Balikuddembe Market has gone through a tumultuous history. There have been many associations and groups formed in management of the market. From June 2006 onwards, the management issues of the company apparently became streamlined by the formation of, initially, a private company known as St Balikuddembe Market Stalls, Space and Lockup Shops Owners Association Ltd (SSLOA) which later in November 2006 became a public limited company. 

	The primary objective of this company was to acquire a lease of St Balikuddembe Market land and then redevelop it into a modern shopping complex. Following KCC’s alleged refusal to grant a lease to the vendors, the leaders approached H.E the President who on the 19 of January 2009 directed the Minister of Local Government to liaise with the Attorney-General to ensure that SSLOA is a proper legal entity and a lease be offered to them. Accordingly, Kampala City Council, as it was then, made a lease offer to SSLOA. 

	Following the petition by a group of market vendors for a lease over the market they operate in to H.E the President, the President issued a directive to the effect that sitting vendors develop their markets. According to the President, it is the NRM policy to support the underprivileged. 

	In a nutshell, the committee observes that KCC made the lease offer entirely following a directive of the President that sitting vendors should be given a chance to develop their own markets.

3. 	The committee observed that the award of the sublease was upon the terms, among others, that SLOA pays a premium of Shs 4 billion and an annual ground rent of Shs 200 million. The committee noted that the premium was paid but the ground rent for the year 2012 remains unpaid to date. 

4. 	The sublease granted to SSLOA by the then KCC was in respect of interests in land which the then city council of Kampala had powers to sublease to any person or authority. It should be noted that where a sublease exists, it follows that there is a lease. The sublease was awarded subject to the conditions cited in (3) above, which imposed obligations to SSLOA. 

	The committee observed that SSLOA duly paid the premium and ground rent by March 2010. Therefore, SSLOA is entitled to exclusive possession of the land. 

5. 	The committee noted with concern that the vendors had failed to resolve their disputes through the organs of the company. The wrangles in the market had persisted in spite of a ruling of the High Court after a group of vendors filed High Court Civil Suit No. 947 of 2001 – J.B Kivumbi and 11 others v. KCC, SLOA and 10 others - to cause a judicial pronouncement in resolution of the persistent wrangles between the vendors and the various associations established within the market. 

6. 	The presidential directive of giving markets to vendors though popular was not in line with the existing law governing markets. The Minister for Local Government tried to manoeuvre the way for the President’s directive without due regard to the law. Section 1 of the Market Act places the establishment and control of markets to the administration of a district, a municipal council or a town council. The Market Act strictly forbids any person or authority to establish, control or maintain a market within a district or within the then city council of Kampala.

	Furthermore, after the coming into force of the KCCA Act, Section 85 of the Act vested all rights, assets, liabilities and obligations of any entity existing in the capital city area immediately before commencement of this Act to KCCA or the corresponding entity under the Act. This means that the power to establish, control, manage and maintain the markets which had hitherto been vested in the then city council of Kampala were vested in KCCA at the commencement of the Act. 

7. 	There were various categories of vendors, that is, the original owners who had sublet to other vendors who also sublet. It is, therefore, difficult to know the actual owners/vendors.

8. 	St Balikuddembe Market Stalls, Space & Lockup Shops Owners Association Ltd (SSLOA) is not representative of all vendors in St Balikuddembe Market and has thus not complied with the President’s directive. 

9. 	The committee observed that in a bid to resolve the market wrangles, the Minister for Economic Monitoring advised that all vendors should unite under one company. The vendors were ready and willing to join the company, however when some vendors wanted to buy shares to become part of the company, they were required to first pay Shs 1 million as premium, Shs 50,000 as membership fee and Shs 10,000 for one share after payment of the above fees. 

	The committee noted that the vendors were not informed about how the Shs 1 million was arrived at, especially since the vendors had not been registered. 

10.	There is need for caution when government intervenes in the management of the market. Government can intervene through an agreed procedure. 

Committee Recommendations

1. 	The authenticity of all vendors should be verified to ascertain if they were all vendors by displaying the register of all the vendors; thereafter, the association leaders should call for a meeting of all members. If the register is not up to date, the committee recommends that fresh registration of all individuals operating in the market be carried out within two months after presenting this report.

2. 	Elections should be carried out as soon as possible. The elections should be conducted after ascertaining the membership of all vendors in the market. The register of all individuals operating in the market should be the basis on which elections and membership fees are determined. All vendors should be allowed to take part in the decisions concerning the operation of the market.

	Furthermore, the committee recommends that there should be a clear leadership structure with democratically elected leaders who should ensure that there is proper communication between the leaders and vendors. They should also ensure that there is transparency in the management and running of the market, and involvement of vendors in decision making and accountability of the market funds.

3. 	St Balikuddembe Market Stalls, Space & Lockup Shops Owners Association Ltd should discharge its obligation and pay the outstanding ground rent for 2012, which remained unpaid to avoid any adverse consequences resulting from breach on its part.

4. 	Ministers should from time to time always guide and advise the President on matters of law before issuing/implementing directives which may be contrary to the law, as was in this case. Whenever a minister is given popular directives from the President, they should first carry out due diligence;

5. 	From the terms of the consent judgment, it was noted that KCCA had not yet prepared and executed the formal documents conveying the sublease interest to the vendors company. The committee urges KCCA to expedite the process.

6. 	The Ministry of Lands should expedite processing the amalgamation of the several plots of Owino Market land into a single certificate of title, which title deed should be handed over to KCCA to enable a lease agreement be prepared and forwarded to the Solicitor-General for clearance as is required by law. Only thereafter will it be executed by the parties.

7. 	As regards matters concerning SSLOA as a company, the accountability of its executive to its members is governed by company law; therefore, the executive of SSLOA should hold company meetings to resolve such matters.

8. 	The Police should stop taking sides when handling wrangles in the market and carry out its mandate as stipulated by law.

9. 	Mr Kayongo Geoffrey’s actions should be investigated with a view of establishing his role in beating vendors and bribing the Police. Thereafter, appropriate action should be recommended. 

Conclusion

It is the desire and prayer of the committee that the recommendations will finally bring to conclusion the leadership wrangles in the market.  

I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker and colleagues. I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of our proceedings in the course of handling our business. Thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank the Committee on Presidential Affairs for that very comprehensive report. I thank the hon. Ababiku for standing in ably for the chairperson. Thank you very much. (Applause) 

MR PATRICK AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Is it on this?

MR AMURIAT: No, Madam Speaker. It is on a matter that we considered before and I think it is urgent. It is an important matter. I wish to seek the indulgence of the House for us to revisit a matter that we considered earlier under item 3(b) of the Order Paper, and this is to do with a new tax on tourism. I understand that there was a ruling, but I would like to seek the indulgence of members – (Interjections)– Just listen to me for a minute. 

Madam Speaker, the Minister for Finance stated here that we will consider this matter while considering the ministerial policy statements and the budget and while we are supplying. My fear is that whereas this is a tax, it does not apply in the same way as the other taxes. It will affect foreigners who intend to come into this country. What do we do in the meantime? 

I have information, Madam Speaker, that tourists have shunned Uganda as a destination and therefore –(Interruption)

MRS SSENINDE: Madam Speaker, there are concerns my brother is raising right now on the Floor of Parliament, but we should also not forget that all issues being debated in Parliament are equally important. I do appreciate the fact that the issue of the tax he is raising is very important. However, we must also not forget that the issue for which we have just listened to a report is also important because it is the taxpayers who give these taxes. 

Madam Speaker, is it in order for my honourable brother, who I respect so much, to divert this House, which is moving on well and yet you had earlier on indicated that the report about the matter concerning the taxes will also be considered at an appropriate time? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought that we had agreed that we will consider this matter when considering the Finance Bill because it is probably one of the proposals for revenue. If we consider tourism, what will I do with VAT, what will I do with the fuel levy or the water levy? That is the problem I see. Shall we address this tax before we read the Finance Bill? Honourable member, let us look at it when we discuss the Finance Bill. 

MRS SSENINDE: Madam Speaker, I presented the petition and I have supplementary issues.

THE SPEAKER: You were with the petitioners; why don’t you allow the members to comment? Honourable members, let us use 30 minutes.

5.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ECONOMIC MONITORING, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (Mr Henry Banyenzaki): Madam Speaker, as a ministry in charge of KCCA –(Interjections)- I am in charge. (Laughter)  Madam Speaker, we absolutely have no problem with these recommendations, which have been put down here. We are ready to implement the recommendations that have been – (Interjections) – I was only asking –

THE SPEAKER: This is simplifying our work. (Laughter)

MR BANYENZAKI: I seek your indulgence. In view of the fact that we, the ministry in charge of this docket, have no problem with all the recommendations in this report and in view of the fact that, - 

THE SPEAKER: I think this is the first time that Government is accepting all our recommendations. So, we have no problem. Honourable members, the minister has said he accepts everything that has been recommended.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister holding the portfolio for Kampala Capital City Authority, hon. Banyenzaki, has made history. This is a man who I have known for a long time, even before I came to Parliament. We were together with him in the Seventh Parliament and we are now in the Ninth Parliament. 

Thank you very much, hon. Banyenzaki, for making history. It is very unprecedented that a committee submits a report and even before it is debated, the line minster comes up and owns the recommendations without knowing what is therein. Having said that -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, one of the reasons I insisted that hon. Ababiku reads everything page by page was to ensure that everything was captured. You are not fair to say that the minister did not understand what is in the report. It was read here.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, it is not in that spirit that I have said so. I really made that statement well knowing that when a recommendation is made in this nature, it has to be digested. There are a number of policy issues which will come out. It will, therefore, take an unprecedented move by hon. Banyenzaki that we just allow it go and then we will not be able to do justice and assist the Executive in future so that they are able to know where these recommendations have emanated from. 

Madam Speaker, as debate ensues on this matter, I am sure we will make amendments. We may even come out with new recommendations. So, how do we just take the words of our senior brother, hon. Banyenzaki, that we stifle debate and just not pronounce ourselves on this without giving us an opportunity to add and to subtract to what the committee has submitted to us for digestion. I just beg and seek your indulgence as to whether we should leave it like this or we debate this issue. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you feel that there is something you are going to amend, you can say so, but if you are just going to agree, then it would be wasting time because we are delaying those people who are sitting there. They have been waiting for this petition for a long time; they need this just now. Okay, let us have 30 minutes’ debate. Hon. Wadri, you have three minutes.

5.40
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Maracha): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I formally want to thank the committee for the very good work done - (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. An undertaking was made in this Parliament that because of the holy month of Ramadan, we will be breaking off at 6.00p.m. That undertaking was made in this House because Parliament does not provide Iftar.

Madam Speaker, this is a very important report; some of us will very soon excuse ourselves from Parliament but would be interested in making proposals - (Interjections) - I can see hon. Banyenzaki is in a hurry but we are here to correct mistakes that were made as a result of leaders hurrying processes. I do not know whether he wants us to congratulate him for proposing that we should hurry and forget that it is actually them the report is talking about.

But, Madam Speaker, I am seeking your indulgence whether it would not be important for us to receive this report, go and read it this evening, internalise the recommendations and then come back tomorrow to debate and make recommendations that will provide lasting solutions, but also in view of the undertaking that was made in this Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, taking into account the intricate nature of this report, the diverse contents on the law, on organisation and on land issues, I will allow you to internalise it tonight and then we shall set time for debate so that we can make the necessary policy recommendations. So we shall give you time to internalise it. Can we now go back to the issue of the accounting officers; I think the papers are ready. And we shall try to ensure that there is Iftar. (Laughter)

5.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, this is a statement from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the issue of the appointment of accounting officers for the financial year 2013/2014. 

Madam Speaker, during the discussion on the Vote-on-Account for financial year 2013/2014, Parliament made recommendations that the following Permanent Secretaries should not be appointed as accounting officers due to the alleged misappropriation of funds under their charge either now or previously:
    1. Mr Pius   Secretary, Ministry of Internal Affairs.

After that directive by this Parliament, my ministry sought a legal opinion from the Solicitor-General –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I had the benefit to be in this House when this matter was raised; the Speaker ruled that the Minister should furnish this House with names of people who have been appointed as accounting officers. The minister deliberately tried to raise the issue of the legality of the appointment of new accounting officers, but the Speaker overruled the minister, saying there is nothing legal about this matter.

I have addressed my mind to Rules 78 and 79 of our Rules of Procedure, which are to the effect that once the Speaker has ruled on a matter, the decision of the Speaker is not open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House except upon a substantive motion made by notice. The Minister of Finance intends to indirectly appeal or review the Speaker’s decision. 

Madam Speaker, you are the custodian of these Rules of Procedure, not the Minister of Finance. Is it procedurally right for the minister to deviate and undermine the Speaker’s ruling – instead of producing the list of names – to engage us in another debate yet we already debated on that issue for a long time? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if you undertook to bring the names of the new accounting officers, I think that is what is expected of you. (Applause)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I would also like to seek guidance from your chair. If we took a decision here, as Parliament of Uganda and then we subsequently found out that it conflicts with the law, do we carry it on or do we revive it?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I have not seen any opinion in what you are presenting; where is the actual opinion you are talking about?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Well, Madam Speaker, if I were allowed to continue, I would even lay on this Table a legal opinion from the Solicitor-General, who has guided us and has quoted the laws, saying if we continued the way we had decided, we would be breaking the law. 

5.49
MR JACOB OBOTH (NRM, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought it was the duty of the Minister of Finance to do what was agreed, jointly with the Minister of Public Service concerning bringing the names. However, the Minister of Finance is referring to the Solicitor-General’s opinion, which he is intending to lay on Table and the operating Articles that are being cited – unless the Solicitor-General used other Articles of the Constitution and other laws, this mere reliance on Article 164 is not going to help the Minister of Finance run away from the commitment he made. 

In any case, the same law quoted gives a provision of having a permanent secretary or accounting officer. Who appoints accounting officers? The appointment of a permanent secretary is actually by the President but the designation of an accounting officer is under Section 8 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act; it is by the Secretary to the Treasury. I would be interested to see that very famous legal opinion from the Solicitor-General that would either contradict with Article 164 and actually I would have referred you to other laws like Article 174. 

Madam Speaker, this is going to derail us for no good reason. It is not an extraordinary practice, it happens. Accounting officers can be designated from any of the public offices within that office - (Interruption)

MR WAIRA MAJEGERE: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I was here in this House and we agreed with the minister that he is going to send us new names - that we leave the permanent secretaries to be permanent secretaries and he gives us new names to work as accounting officers. In light of this, the minister is doing work, which is very different from what we told him to do.

THE SPEAKER: I think we need to decide whether the matters he has brought are properly before us. That is what we are trying to establish.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I wish to thank hon. Oboth for accepting this information. My 20 years in civil service saw a number of occasions when accounting officers were changed even within the financial year and it came from the Secretary to the Treasury and nobody else. So there is nothing that can inhibit the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance/ Secretary to the Treasury from stopping any person appointed or disappointing a person whom he has appointed and appointing a new accounting officer anytime in the course of the financial year. That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR SABIITI: Thank you very much for giving way so that I give this information. If you look at the Public Finance and Accountability Act, Section 8, designation and duties of accounting officers, it states, “The Secretary to the Treasury shall, with prior approval of the minister, designate an accounting officer by name and in writing.” That is part one.

Part two says, “An accounting officer shall control and be personally accountable to Parliament”. I want this to be understood. So for the hon. Minister to come and try to cover up – an accounting officer is accountable to this Parliament and I would request that unless he comes with further legal requirements that can make this Parliament understand, then we might as well ignore what the minister is talking about. He should adhere to what was directed and not try and cover up on this matter. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if the minister did not respond to what we directed him to do, it means there is nothing to debate. Hon. Minister, I don’t know why you are making things so difficult. No one is interfering with the work of the PS. All the Members are asking is; can we have other accounting officers? It is not an innovation, it has happened in this very institution. We had the Clerk of Parliament who is a permanent secretary but he was not the accounting officer and it has happened in other ministries. You need Parliament to help you with your budget. You need Parliament to support you in all your work.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker and colleagues, can I seek your indulgence and you allow me to read – (Hon. Members rose_) - Madam Speaker, can I be guided on whether I cannot come here and read a legal opinion of a government official recognised by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us hear what he has to say and we can decide whether it is relevant or not.

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker and colleagues, this is a letter from the Solicitor-General – (Interjections) - just listen to it. It is written to the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

“Appointment of accounting officers for Financial Year 2013/2014. Reference is made to your letter dated 3 July 2013 on the above subject in which you sought our opinion on the appointment of the following accounting officers.” I will not repeat the names because we have already heard them. “You stated in your letter that Parliament had made a recommendation that the above cited permanent secretaries should be stripped of their accounting powers due to the alleged misappropriation of funds under their current or previous ministries.

We have studied the relevant laws and the Hansard and noted as hereunder. Accounting officers are designated by the Secretary to the Treasury with the prior approval of the Minister of Finance in accordance with Section 8, Part 1 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003.

Article 164 (1) of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides thus: “The Permanent Secretary or the accounting officer in charge of a ministry of a department shall be accountable to Parliament for the funds in that ministry of department.” Clause 2 of the same Article states thus: “Any person holding a political or public office who directs or concurs in the abuse of public funds contrary to the existing instructions shall be accountable for any loss arising from that use or shall be required to make good the loss even if he/she has ceased to hold that office.”

The foregoing provision is reiterated in Section 282 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act and that it provides as follows: “An accounting officer shall control and be personally accountable to Parliament for the regularity and propriety of expenditure of money applied by an expenditure vote or any other provisions of the ministry, department, fund, agency and so forth, wholly funded through the Consolidated Fund …”

The above provision is interpreted to mean that accounting officers are responsible and answerable for the funds appropriated to them by Parliament. In case of any losses, they are personally answerable.

Parliamentary resolutions are motions that formally express the sense with or action of the legislative body. By making the recommendation for the removal of the above cited accounting officers, Parliament acted within its powers. 

Parliament appropriates funds to ministries, departments and agencies, in accordance with Article 155 of the Constitution and requires the accountability of those funds under Article 164 of the Constitution and Section 8, Part II of the Public Finance and Accountability Act.

However, although Parliament recommends the rejection of any of the named accounting officers, its recommendation is only advisory to the appointing authority. The Constitutional Court has ruled on the limitation of Parliament’s powers. In a recent case, the Constitutional Court ruled that Parliament is not vested with the powers under the Constitution to order the removal of certain persons from office whose vacation of office was provided for under the Constitution.

The powers to appoint and remove a permanent secretary are provided for in an Act of Parliament. It is on the basis of that law that they can be stripped of their accounting powers. Section 2 of the Interpretation Act, Cap 3 stipulates that he, who has the powers to appoint, also has powers to remove. It reads thus: “Where in an Act of Parliament, the power to make any appointment is conferred; the authority having power to make the appointment shall also have power, subject to any limitation or qualification, which affects the power of appointment, to remove, suspend, reappoint or reinstate any person in the exercise of the power.”

Further, Article 29, Part 3 (b) provides that every person who has been charged with a criminal offence shall be presumed innocent until proven guilty or until such a person pleads guilty. 

The permanent secretaries referred to above have not been arraigned before any court and found guilty. Parliament cannot therefore – (Interjections) – listen to me – act on the basis of unsubstantiated allegations.

In conclusion, we advise as follows: the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, taking cognisance of the role of Parliament and the recommendation by them, cannot remove the accounting powers – and this is underlined – from the permanent secretaries without due processes regarding the allegations.” 

Signed by C Gashabirake, Ag.Solicitor-General. Copies were sent to: the Rt hon. Prime Minister, the Minister of Finance and Head of Public Service and Secretary to Cabinet.

Madam Speaker that is the conclusion of the letter from the Solicitor General. May I, Madam Speaker, now lay this letter on Table. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from hon. Gen. Tumwine before we get to hon. Emmanuel Dombo.

6.06
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are three stages of a patient. Stage one is suspicion that that person is sick. Stage two is about the open symptoms that the person is not only shivering but has a very high temperature –(Applause)– and stage three could be death and four could be the post-mortem.

Madam Speaker, the journey from stealing to being found guilty is a very long one as we have seen from the experience of the few who have so far been undergoing trials.

Much of the anti-corruption agencies are more concentrated on post-mortem rather than prevention. Article 1 of the Constitution gives all power to the people. (Applause) We are in this Parliament to represent the power of the people. (Applause) To this Parliament, H.E, the President said the remaining war is now about the fight against corruption and that all the other wars had been fought. (Applause) He called upon each of us to deliberately and personally get involved in the fight against corruption; and the NRM policy is zero tolerance to corruption.

Madam Speaker, once somebody is in charge of funds for the public and those funds are mismanaged even by his junior officers or other, much as those people are under their control, that person is shivering with sickness. (Applause) There are symptoms to show that that person –

THE SPEAKER: Order in the House, Members.

GEN. TUMWINE: There are symptoms to show that that person is very sick. Now when billions and billions of shillings under the same ministry and permanent secretary – there is a reason to take that person to the hospital so they are checked to see whether they have real malaria or typhoid before they are treated or left to die from there.

Madam Speaker, isn’t it in the interest of the public or of fighting corruption and scaring anybody who may want to continue stealing money rather than protect them, for us to say whoever is found – (Applause)– wanting or suspected, get aside until – when investigations exonerate you, you retain your office? (Applause) When you are found dirty, we take you in. (Applause)

6.09
MR EMANNUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What are the ministers trying to prove? I would ordinarily hate a situation where Parliament is unnecessarily drawn into collision or apparent collision with the Executive where it does not exist. What did Parliament have as an alternative? Because the power of the purse belongs to Parliament, the alternative would have been Parliament to withhold the votes of those ministries. The understanding, when I read the Hansard - I was not here when that decision was taken but I had the privilege of seeing the Speaker last week arguing with the minister and the minister making a commitment before Parliament. Why should Parliament be fooled by a minister coming to make a commitment that we are bringing names and you come back with different information? Why are the ministers drawing Members of Parliament into making a decision that will even be harder when this was a compromised position based on mutual understanding? 

I strongly urge my colleagues on the Front Bench that it is in the interest of good governance and when you make commitments to an august institution like this House, people should respect them. I kindly call upon them, irrespective of the provisions of the letter from the Solicitor-General, that it is good governance and good management for everybody to make a proposal that is respected. That is what we are all looking for - that a minister comes before the House, makes a commitment, the Speaker gives a directive and Members of Parliament make a decision. That is when all of us shall be participants in the management of the affairs of this country.  

But if we are unnecessarily drawn into being ridiculed as Members - that we come here and make decisions and tomorrow those decisions are reversed to make us appear useless in this country - it is not in the interest of anybody. 

I, therefore, call upon the Front Bench that in the interest of us finding an amicable solution - nobody has condemned those accounting officers who have been mentioned but if you drive Parliament, at the time of the budget process, to say we should make no appropriation for those ministries, that would be the extreme and it is not in the interest of anybody. So, I wish to call upon the Attorney-General and the Minister for Finance that be a man and live by the statements that you made. That is when we shall be leaders that will be respected by everybody. (Applause)

6.13
MS SARAH NETALISIRE KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I believe that the recommendation we came up with was in good faith and we are all joining hands and efforts in trying to fight corruption. What is coming here today is making us think otherwise. 

What is lacking in my country Uganda is the political will to fight corruption, and this lack of political will is coming from my President. He must take his stand and get rid of these Ugandans who are stealing money; who are misappropriating funds; who are mismanaging offices; and he sets them aside. Let him get new cadres to take us through.

When you go to these neighbouring countries - look at a state like Rwanda, if you are a Permanent Secretary and allegations are made against you, you are told to step aside; they get a new accounting officer; investigations are carried out and if you are found innocent, you are recalled. If you are found guilty you are penalised for that.  

What do we do here? Allegations are made against a PS, we dilly-dally; we protect him; we transfer him from the ministry we think has a lot of money and take him to a minor ministry but still he is managing the funds of Ugandans. 

It is my humble appeal - the recommendation we made did not say that these permanent secretaries should be sent away or kicked out of their offices. We said, “In the meantime, let us get another accounting officer to manage these funds. Let him remain the PS; after the investigation, if he is found clean, we shall recall him. If he is found guilty let him be penalised but let his signature not be appended on appropriating these funds. We do not want to see these things again.”

Madam Speaker, I kindly appeal to my minister - what is so hard for you to speak to my President? I am going to appeal to the Front Bench. Talk to my President and tell him to walk the talk. (Member timed out.)

6.16
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The point has been well made by hon. Dombo. But I will say this; a serious reading of Article 164 leads to one conclusion: that all accounting officers of government ministries and departments are accountable to Parliament. The point that has been made by this House is that the three gentlemen that have been holding those positions have fallen far below the standard required of them by us to whom they are supposed to be accountable. Do we now sit and say it is business as usual and we appropriate money to these officers? Will we be performing our function under Article 164? Of course note that the Executive has one option: it may keep their Permanent Secretary but as hon. Dombo rightly puts it, the authority to disburse funds to be accounted for lies with this House. 

Madam Speaker, you were not in the chair that time but if I do remember very well, this is what the Speaker said: “If you want to feel the full weight of this particular Speaker, do not bring those names next time.” That is what he said and this is the time for hon. Kasaija to feel the full weight, not only of the Speaker but of this House. (Applause)

There is a culture developing in this country that whenever somebody is in trouble, he runs to some office on Parliamentary Avenue and comes up with some funny opinion. We now have a problem in believing the legal opinion coming from the Attorney-General’s Chambers. What is going on in these Chambers? People have started doing politics in an otherwise professional office. Nobody is asking you to dismiss your permanent secretaries; keep them because they serve your role. But as far as Parliament is concerned we cannot release funds to people who are sick. It is not about the temperatures; actually it is a running stomach. (Laughter) The option we have, Madam Speaker, is that they either appoint other accounting officers and we shall do business with them as Parliament or they keep their permanent secretaries irrespective of the record and we deal with other ministries which have got accounting officers whom we think are to our standard. We are not going to look at it as business as usual; it is not possible. My view of the letter written by Solicitor-General is that I think he is having a problem –(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you, senior counsel. I want to give information which I gave last week when the Deputy Speaker was in the chair and I offered myself to lay it on Table. The Police have written a letter of which I have a copy asking that about 64 public officers be relieved of their duties so that they do not interfere with Police investigation and fourth on the list is PS Bigirimana. 

The second information I want to give is PS Bigirimana and Madam Waduwa Flavia up to now have refused to record any statements before Police not even a charge and caution. Who is the minister deceiving? These people are not even being investigated because even a mere charge and caution statement, they have gone to Police but they have sat there and refused to record a statement; so are they above the law. For how long should we wait for them to be called to record a statement? At an appropriate time, I will lay that paper which shows the 64 public officers that were requested by CID to leave office. So for this Parliament to ignore that, it means that we are making the work of the Police more difficult.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, last week when the Leader of the Opposition was making his alternative State of the Nation Address, hon. Odonga-Otto stood up and said that Government had switched off UBC and there was no power in Gulu because the LOP was making his presentation. We verified and it was not true. He was not cautioned by anybody but now he is repeating a similar mistake of talking about a document which he can’t even produce and lay on Table. Is he in order? And are we right to allow Members to continue making statements without substantiating and without producing evidence?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you produce the document?

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, she is just throwing the tortoise in the water now. You are making my life even easier. Madam Speaker, I undertake to produce and lay the document before this Parliament tomorrow and even lay other documents which implicate ministers who are not even mentioned in the entire report. So I will do that tomorrow.

MR KATUNTU: We should not be diverted from the point. I wish to remind the hon. Minister of Finance that one, even on the list he brought to Parliament, Mr Kabagambe Kalisa, PS Energy is not the accounting officer of the ministry. There is some other person, even Finance, of course the PS is not the accounting officer. The Speaker has also given an example of this particular institution at the time of the former Clerk, Mr Tandekwire. It can happen and it has happened in Government that you can have a permanent secretary who actually is not the accounting officer. It is not about reinventing the wheel.

Lastly, we have one option - we seem to be having somebody who is obstinate and that is the Ministry of Finance. It values people who have questionable integrity and they want us to entrust public funds with these people. My honest appeal is that the only option we do have for this House is to pronounce ourselves that as long as the named gentlemen, Mr Bigirimana, Dr Lukwago –(Interruption)

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Thank you, hon. Katuntu, for giving way and allowing this information. I would like to confirm that indeed the Ministry of Finance and the Government trusts people with a character that this Parliament has condemned. I want to give you information that this Parliament in 2010 discussed and adopted a forensic audit report in the ICT ministry and we recommended for the interdiction of the permanent secretary and one engineer called Kibuka and up to today, they are still handling affairs of the ministry. We have talked about it in the committee; we have asked the minister but no action, no investigation, nothing has been done.

As I talk now, Mr Bigirimana, who was transferred has already identified a source of Shs 160 billion; he has copied and pasted the NUSAF project, duplicated it into a youth livelihood project. We cannot trust Mr Bigirimana with that money. So I would like to inform you that the Government and the ministry deliberately encourage people to mishandle our finances and as Parliament, we must stick to our resolutions and our recommendations and fight the corrupt.

MR KATUNTU: I think from that point of information, I do not have much to add but Madam Speaker, I will later move that this House directs the relevant sessional committee not to deal with the budgets of those ministries unless those gentlemen have been replaced by different accounting officers.

MR MATIA KASSAIJA: Colleagues, let nobody have the idea that we are trying to protect the thieves. All we want is to do things according to the law so that tomorrow we are not taken to court and we look fools.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My reading of rule 78(2) which is to the effect that, “The decision of the Speaker or chairperson upon any point shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed except upon a substantive motion made after notice.” 

Madam Speaker, my understanding of this rule is that if the minister wants the House to vacate the ruling of the Speaker, it can only be done on a substantive motion on notice. Is the minister in order to try to allude to the fact that by us implementing the ruling of the Speaker, we would be acting illegally without him moving a substantive motion?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if you want to us to review the ruling or decision we took here, you have to come and move a motion and justify why you want us to alter what we decided but not by way of response as you are attempting to do.

6.30
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister citing the opinion of the Solicitor-General, cited the issue of the court ruling that limited the powers of Parliament in respect to vacation of office, if I heard correctly. What we are dealing with is not the question of vacation of office of the Permanent Secretary but it is in relation to the function of accountability in the three ministries. So, I would want the Attorney-General seated here to clarify for us whether re-assigning a function of accountability to another office is tantamount or amounts to vacation of office because that Solicitor-General’s opinion relates to the issue of vacation of office and when we made a resolution here in respect to the ministers, it related to leaving their offices as ministers –(Interjections)– yes.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Betty Amongi, for giving way. The information I would love to share with you is that the opinion of the Solicitor-General - and for the record, I worked there for several years - was answering a letter which letter the minister did not bring. Probably it is that letter that misled the –(Laughter)

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you very much, my colleague. In that vein, I would now request that through your chair, Madam Speaker, you direct the minister to lay before Parliament the letter from the ministry to which the Solicitor-General responded so that we understand whether you correctly communicated what this Parliament had resolved. (Applause)

Number two, Madam Speaker, the minister also says in the opinion of the Solicitor-General, that the Solicitor-General is stating that the appointment can be done with the permission of the minister and the minister who is here is the one who sat through the Parliament debate last week when this resolution was made.

I now want to ask the minister that is it you that is refusing because the Public Finance Bill says re-assignment of the accounting officer is also with the permission of the minister? So we only need two people; the Secretary to the Treasury and the Minister for Finance and you are here as the Minister for Finance. So can you tell us whether you agree with Parliament or not?

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I wish to thank the honourable Betty Amongi for giving way to receive this information. The information I want to share with this House is that last week, when Parliament directed the minister to bring new lists for the accounting officers for those three votes, the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury was already out of the country and he is coming back on the 22 July 2013. He is in Rome negotiating loans for this country. So he was not around at that time for him to consult. So it would be very interesting for us to know who authored that letter.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you very much. I really want to appeal to the minister because for me as someone who comes from the greater North, the torment that the people of the greater North have undergone – some of us have been in constant engagement with the donors when this matter happened trying to beg the donors not to pull out and we know all the conditions that donors have given you and the reason why Bigirimana is not in that Office of the Prime Minister. Personally, I know because I always engage with the donors and I am leader from the greater North.

We know the reason why donors have withheld money and why they have redirected the money for PRDP not to go through the budget but directly. Why do you want people to suffer because of one individual? Why? Why should the whole country suffer because you are protecting one person? It is unfortunate that people sit and know what is happening and then people are being protected and yet it is Ugandans who are suffering.

I want to appeal to the minister that you know what I know and you know why at the moment donors held money and why they are redirecting money. I want to appeal that for this sake, go with Parliament’s decision as it is the right decision not only here but in the public. Usually in issues of corruption and crime, there is the court of public opinion and the court of law. What is the court of the public opinion? If you are to go through the greater North, what would be the court of the public opinion -

THE SPEAKER: Wind up.

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you very much honourable for giving way. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I have sat here and listened to the Minister for Finance and every other time we make recommendations here, they run to the great Severino Twinobusingye’s ruling that Parliament can never make a decision of such a kind.

I just want to inform this House that if we continue like this, this Parliament shall be rendered useless and we shall never do anything here because they will have now known the way. I am a member of the Public Accounts Committee and the only way that accounting officers can fear is to know that there are repercussions, but for you to know that even when you have made mistakes you have protection from above, it will render this Parliament useless; it will render the committee useless; it will even render accountability functions very useless for this Parliament.

I beg that this honourable House recommends that these accounting officers be removed and we get new accounting officers otherwise this Parliament will be rendered useless.

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up and then I will have hon. John Mulimba.

MS BETTY AMONGI: As I wind up, I want to inform the minister that there are administrative functions and the court of law. So what we are doing is administrative and does not prevent courts of law from investigating the accounting officers and proceed with the criminal investigations. But now that they are being investigated, we want to have administrative functions to protect the money of this republic. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. John Mulimba, hon. Otada and then the Attorney-General. Three minutes.

6.39
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. All of us are at pains especially at this moment when we seem to have registered tremendous progress in our economy but what is eating the progress is corruption. All of us are at serious pains to see the volumes of monies going down the drain. 

In my submission, I also want to seek guidance from you, because in my opinion, I think we are now at crossroads. At one point in time, we sat here in this Parliament in October and November 2011 and passed resolutions to the extent that some ministers needed to step aside. The opinion of the Auditor-General came into play, he disagreed with us and somebody by the name Severino moved under Article 137 of the Constitution and sought court redress. The repercussions are more than what we intended to cure at that time. Severino has been awarded Shs 13 billion. 

Madam Speaker, I want to agree with hon. Tumwine who said the framers of the Constitution vested powers in the people but also Article 2 of the Constitution gives supremacy to the Constitution in respect to all our roles. Article 119 of the Constitution mandates the Attorney-General to be the chief advisor to Government and represent Government in any case of litigation. I am afraid that even in the circumstances, when we want to cure what we are going to cure and somebody moves under Article 173 of the Constitution - a public officer who feels offended can move under Article 173 of the Constitution – as it happened in the matter of Severino, the counsel to Government who is the Attorney-General, who does not seem to agree with us will again concede and we shall lose money – (Laughter). Madam Speaker, allow me to raise this point first. Colleagues giving information, first hold on. 

If in the circumstances, like in the case of Severino, court tries to examine what was contained in resolution 9(c), and this resolution was to the effect of stepping aside. The learned judges tried to explore what it means by stepping aside and they failed in their ruling. There is no difference between stepping aside, interdiction, giving way or being redeemed and I have the judgment here. 

Madam Speaker, in the apparent circumstances, we seem to be going back to the very resolution of stepping aside –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not want you to create the impression that the judges were necessarily right. The judges listened to one side and that was the side that conceded. Parliament was not allowed to present its case. If Parliament had been allowed to speak for itself, we would have presented our case but they listened to the Attorney-General, who conceded and took sides with the petitioner. Do not ever forget that the Attorney-General abandoned Parliament and sided with our oppressors. You have one minute to complete.

MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, I respect that direction you are giving us very much but in the event that Article 119 still persists, I have a fear. In fact, right now I think that Parliament should probably move to amend Article 119; more so, the Attorney-General representing the interests of Parliament. But in the circumstances, we are still going the same way and as long as the Attorney-General is the one supposed to represent Government, we shall again lose. I rest my case. 

THE SPEAKER: I had asked hon. Otada and then the Attorney-General. 

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, there is something developing in this country and if we do not become very fortunate, we, Members of Parliament, will give it a blessing because if a Member of Parliament can ask whether again the Attorney-General will concede - he seems to acknowledge that the Attorney-General performed an illegality and he acknowledges and wishes to imply that this House should continue keeping quiet in anticipation of Article 119, which makes the Attorney-General the legal advisor to Government. 

Under the circumstances, what are the options open to this House? The options include, if this House is convinced beyond reasonable doubt - that is why the framers of the Constitution gave the powers to appoint to a President but the powers to approve to this House. It progressively becomes evident that the Attorney-General connived, because connivance is definitely a corruptible offence and there is no way this Parliament can condone such a thing and it goes on our Hansard, by an honourable member saying that anticipation of the Attorney-General conceding should prevent this House from taking a legitimate and a rightful decision. So, Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for Members of Parliament to be prevented from making current good decisions in anticipation of the Attorney-General conceding to an illegality in conspiracy against the House?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the hon. Member is worried that we are still caught up in a situation where the Attorney-General must represent us. He is worried of how we can get out of the hands of the Attorney-General. That is his worry. 

6.46
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my colleagues who have spoken to this issue and I want to register my thanks to colleagues. It is coming to 7.00 O’clock and looking at both sides of the House, we are fully constituted. This is a good thing. Why am I saying this? 

It was on a day like today and an hour such as this one that we actually discussed which accounting officers should be brought back to the House. The minister actually conceded that I will bring a list of new accounting officers and it was I, who moved that our issue is not with all the 164 accounting officers. We zeroed down and I said our issue actually was with the three. So, the resolution that was passed was for the three. 

So, I want to thank hon. Members for making a water-tight approach because if we had not done that and zeroed down on the particular three, today we would be grappling with another long list which was not specified and the minister would have his way. We should continue doing that.

Secondly, we have seen accounting officers being told to step aside. I once found a junior officer in local government, a gentleman called Yasin, in the issue of bicycles. He was told to step aside and he was actually cleared and he is back to that same office and that was a practice that was meted on him. So, what I do not like is this selective treatment which Government exercises when it comes to fighting the one singular vice, corruption, to which I thought we should use the same approach because the vice is the same and we should not use a selective approach in that regard. 

Hon. Minister, I want you to understand our frustration. If we have – (Interruption) – I will take the information. 

MR BESISIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. The former Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Local Government, Kashaka, was interdicted after we, as Parliament, found him to have failed in delivering the bicycles. Okay, he has ended up in court but we have also found some of these wanting in many instances. I, therefore, do not see any reason for us to speak to them. You, brothers of mine on the Front Bench, to whom are you answerable? Is it the people or the PS? Wait, you will see. (Laughter)

MR OTADA: Thank you, honourable colleague for that good information. I think I should wind up, Madam Speaker. Minister, I was appealing to you that you should understand our frustration and the frustration of Ugandans when it comes to a situation where we allow something to go on – like you are trying to say that until the final disposal of a certain case of an allegation happens, then we should take action. I want to agree with Gen. Tumwine who talked of prevention – and in our own wisdom, we are able and capable, hon. Minister, of prescribing preventive measures. And I think you agree with that. 

And from the same, we are not asking for too much. If we have a situation where somebody was left to do his thing and at the end of the day convicted and sentenced to five years and he goes to Luzira smiling, how is that supposed to make us feel? This is personal to us and that is how we feel about it.

So, I want to conclude by saying that we reached a compromise here, hon. Minister – you were seated exactly where you are seated right now; the Minister of state for Public Service was there and she promised to bring the new list. Now, we thought that was a decision which was reached by people who call themselves “honourable colleagues”. Therefore, the actions – and I want to thank hon. Amongi for what she said – that the buck stops at two desks; the Secretary to the Treasury and the Minister, occasioning the action that this Parliament wants. So for you to again go and seek the Solicitor-General’s opinion, it is actually an act of backstabbing because the buck stops at the Secretary to the Treasury and the Minister. And as long as these two are willing parties to do what Parliament believes is a right thing - a preventive approach – and then you go behind us to seek a legal opinion which you want to read here, is very disappointing. Thank you.

6.52
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I thank my colleagues for what they have said because I am coming to 70 years. What I want to inform Members is that the former Permanent Secretary at the Ministry of Local Government was charged in court. After he was charged, the letter was taken to the head of Public Service who then interdicted him. (Interjection) Yes, the process of interdicting someone exists; you do not need to dispute it and call for its revision –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Our Rules of Procedure, in one of the annexes – I think it should be F – provides that members of Parliament shall not present themselves in a manner that shows conflict of interest. Is it in order for the Member holding the Floor to submit on this very issue yet it is public information that he, as the area MP, personally benefited from supplies that were taken to his constituency by one of the three accused Permanent Secretaries? Is it in order for him to submit when he knows that he has conflict of interest in this particular matter? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not think we have that information – at least I do not have it. So I cannot rule him out of order because I do not have that information.

MR KWIZERA: Madam Speaker, the honourable member was speaking based on his knowledge; so there is no harm. Madam Speaker, we know that the Public Accounts Committee conducted hearings and the report is with your office – (Interjections) - yes, the Public Accounts Committee presented its report and much of the information is with you. I am disappointed that much of the information which is actually misrepresented is also before the House. And it is going to bias Members, which is wrong. So is it good to debate a committee’s report in piecemeal because they are going to render this committee of Parliament irrelevant. We have a Public Accounts Committee report and we – 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, I have ruled that I do not have that information; so do not proceed along that line. Nobody is touching that report because it is not here.

MR KWIZERA: Madam Speaker, an honourable member said that 64 people were recommended for interdiction; that is a part of our report. And I am a member of that committee – unless you are telling us that we can now divulge whatever is there.

THE SPEAKER: But what is wrong with giving the names; is there a problem?

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, our rules are very clear on anticipation; they prevent this House from proceeding on a matter, anticipating what will come to the House in future because it is not yet before us. We do not have the details; we do not know what has been provided and we do not have the background. If a Member has a specific document he wishes to lay – which may also be part of a different report, that is another issue. Is the honourable member in order to anticipate a report, which is not yet before this House, and proceed as though we were already considering the report?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have said that I have not seen that report; it has not yet been presented before this House and so we do not know the contents. So do not stop people from – because I do not know what they are going to bring. The honourable member says he has got 64 names while the Government Chief Whip says she wants to know who those 64 are and wants their names. I do not know where he comes from because I have not seen it. Let us hear from the Attorney-General. 

6.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to make comments on one or two things. One, if all these words spoken here against the office of the Attorney-General were bullets, I do not know whether I would still be alive - (Laughter) - but there is also a saying that when people throw stones at you do not get scared; collect those stones and use them to build a strong foundation of a strong house. So these observations strengthen my character. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

I am only happy because the observations I have heard show that we are on the same page. Yes, we are on the same page that we should fight corruption with all our might, with all our strength and with all we have. (Applause) 

I want to follow up on the comments made by the General and some other colleagues like hon. Amongi and hon. Oboth. If you heard carefully, the thrust of the General’s observations – actually he was talking beyond these recommendations. Actually, he was talking about stepping aside entirely – if I heard him correctly. In Public Service, we call it “interdiction” and that is under due process; investigate – 

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, he did not talk about interdiction; he just said you should diagnose the sickness at different stages and take action. That is what he talked about. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, yes, I heard that too. What I was saying is that he even went beyond that – 

THE SPEAKER: Information from Gen. Tumwine.

GEN. TUMWINE: Madam Speaker, I thank the Attorney-General for giving way because he should not speak for me when I am here and when I can give information. I said when someone is suspected of sickness, he is taken to hospital. That does not mean that he does not continue to stay in his house; that he does not continue to earn his income or continue to be who he is.

When he goes to hospital, he is checked and examined. If he has bacteria or malaria or whatever sickness, it is established and he is treated, in this case either by interdicting him, by sending him to prison or he may even die as I said because somebody can die of what he is suspected of if he has not known it. We have had examples before so I was saying, sending him to hospital is the example. Whatever words you want to use, the idea was, there is need to send these people for checking when they are not occupied as they may continue to infect others with their possible bacteria.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, now you can see that we are on the same page. I read the legal opinion given by the Solicitor-General and I want to give you the mind of the Solicitor-General and then give you mine. I talked to him and his mind was this. Of course he cited so many provisions of the law, granted and at the end he said, it may not be prudent to take this decision without undergoing the due process of the law. 

My understanding is that he who has powers to appoint has powers to disappoint but his mind is, even when you are disappointing, you must have good reasons for doing so. I think that is where the problem could be –(Interjections)– let me complete. That is where hon. Oboth’s position comes in; that we could have even looked at the letter written to the Solicitor-General but that is a long story. To cut the story short –(Interjections)– please let me first finish –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, the Uganda Government Standing Orders are very clear on interdiction. Once you are arraigned in court, you are automatically interdicted. This goes without saying. There are many senior civil servants in this House and they know it. In this particular case, one of the three mentioned accounting officers is already in the courts of law. He is in the Anti-Corruption Court and he is still holding an office. What action are you taking? He is in the Anti-Corruption Court but you have never interdicted him. He is there sitting comfortably and you are re-appointing him. What notes are you following?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, let me say one thing. (Hon. Odonga-Otto rose_)– hon. Odonga-Otto, let me first respond to this one and then you can give me information. Please just cool down. Precisely, in fact you are actually pre-empting my speech because what you are saying is what I would have moved for; to ask the Minister of Public Service why he has not taken this action. Why are you taking softer action by saying you remain a PS but you are not an accounting officer? Ask the Minister of Public Service and this is what I was actually running after. Why do you want to give these people legal basis for counter claims? These people will actually stand aside - actually they rejoice in your action. They say okay, we shall put in a counter claim. 

The PS/ST has got powers to appoint and disappoint but on what basis did he do this or that? Why do we want to stand that particular predicament? My view is, let us take the line of the hon. Kassiano Wadri. Let the Minister of Public Service, Minister of Internal Affairs and even the Attorney-General’s Office come here, inform and update the House on the progress of court matters against these officers.

If you want to take this action and in addition add another recommendation, that is up to you but understand the situation as it is –[HON. MEMBER: “Clarification”]- Clarification about what? I have finished. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the legal arguments and moral arguments have been made and we have a ruling and a commitment from the minister. I think it is up to you to decide what signals you are sending to this country in the performance of your work. We shall leave it to your conscience. Hon. Members, the House is adjourned to tomorrow 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.06 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 17 July 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 

