
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Official Report of The Proceedings of Parliament

FIFTH SESSION – 26TH SITTING - FIRST MEETING

________________________


Wednesday, 20 July 2005

(Parliament met at 10.30 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Members, you are welcome. I want to adjust the Order Paper to allow hon. Dora Byamukama to make a presentation.  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE ROBINAH ERINA KAYAGA KIYINGI

10.33
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Mr Speaker, I rise to move that the House considers the following motion without notice under Rule 41(b). Honourable members, this Motion is for resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to Robinah Erina Kayaga Kiyingi.

“WHEREAS Robinah Kiyingi was 
	1.	A human rights activist; 
	2.	An Anti-corruption crusader; 
	3.	A zealous fighter for good governance; 
	4.	A renown senior advocate of the High Court and Courts of Judicature of Uganda; 
	5.	A committed public servant having served on various boards and commissions of the Government of Uganda; and 

	6.	A devout Christian woman. 

NOW this Parliament 

1.	Pays tribute to the late Robinah Kiyingi for the noble and meritus achievements in all her public service to the nation;

2.	Commends the Police Department on the speedy apprehension of the culprits or suspected murderers of the late Robinah Kiyingi;

3.	Calls upon Government authorities to investigate and bring to book all unresolved gender based violence culprits;

4.	Calls upon Government to immediately enact specific laws dealing with domestic relations and domestic violence so that all Ugandans easily access justice.”

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move.

MRS LOYCE BIIRA BWAMBALE: Seconded. 

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, the death of Robinah Kiyingi has shocked the nation, the region as well as the world. I would like to highlight some aspects of Robinah Kiyingi’s life to justify this resolution.  

Robinah Kiyingi was born on 1st August 1950, was married and had four children. She studied at Gayaza Junior School, Gayaza High School and Makerere University. She had a diploma in legal practice from the Law Development Centre and also a certificate in legal practice from the College Of Law based in Sydney, Australia. Also, Robinah had a Master’s degree in dispute resolution, which she got from the University of Technology based in Sydney, Australia.

Robinah Kiyingi was an advocate of the High Court and a barrister of the Supreme Court of New South Wales, Australia. She was a Solicitor, an Attorney and Proctor of the Supreme Court of New South Wales, Australia as well as a Solicitor of the High Court of Australia. She worked with Obola Ochola and Company Advocates in Kampala, lectured at the Law Development Centre, was a Government prosecutor, State Attorney in the Director of Public Prosecutions in Penrith, North South West Australia, and at the time of her death was one of the few women lawyers who run her own firm under the name of Kiyingi and Company Advocates.  

She was a member of several professional bodies including the Uganda law Society, the Law Society of New South Wales, Australia, the Women Lawyers’ Association of New South Wales, Australia and the Australian Institute of Professional Councillors. Robinah Kiyingi had outstanding appointments and directorships to several Boards and Entities. 

At the time of her death, she was a Board member of the Electricity Regulatory Authority, an eminent member of Divestiture and Reform Implementation Committee, Lead Consultant of Uganda Law Reports which was a project under Uganda and the World Bank, was a member of women’s desk Namirembe Diocese Church of Uganda, a board member of Gayaza High School and Vice Chairperson of Human Rights Network, Uganda.  

Formerly, she was Chairperson of the Laity at Katuuso Church of Uganda, a Diocese Representative of Church of Uganda Provincial Assembly, a member of Provincial Assembly Standing Committee of Uganda, Vice Chancellor of Namirembe Diocese Church of Uganda, Board Chairperson, Foundation for Human Rights Initiative and Board member for Buloba College of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, all this clearly shows that Robinah Kiyingi was a very distinguished person in our community and therefore, she deserves Parliament’s recognition as such. It is very difficult to express the concern and sorrow that we feel at the death of Robinah Kiyingi and most especially for us who knew her personally.   

Mr Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Police Department under the leadership of hon. Dr. Ruhakana Rugunda whom I see here, as well as the Chief of CID Madam Kutesa who has, within a record time of less than a week, been able to make headway in apprehending the culprits as well as following up this case to the point where it is now. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I had opportunity to reflect on the other murder cases and in the Bukedde newspaper, it was written that since the year begun, we have had over 150 murder cases. As you read the newspapers every day, you find that there are numerous reported cases of women and men who have been murdered. Therefore, the gender violence associated with these cases needs to be addressed expeditiously. 

What we see in the papers is only a small fraction and I believe that each of us is aware of what is happening in our community. It is in this regard that we call upon Government to immediately enact specific laws dealing with domestic relations and domestic violence so that justice is easily accessed by all Ugandans.

Mr Speaker, a lot has been said about the Domestic Relations law but I would like to highlight the fact that once Ugandans are aware that in a marriage when one makes a contribution they are entitled to that contribution in case of divorce, we will not have the kind of shock or reaction that we get when people realize that they have to share their property.  

Mr Speaker, a lot has been said about the issue of domestic violence. However when we talk about it, people do not look at the person talking. I would like to say that all of us are potential victims and we should take the issue of domestic violence very seriously. Most times when cases of domestic violence are reported to the police, they are not given the due attention that they deserve and this is very sad. I would like to urge Government and my colleagues in Parliament to consider the speedy enactment of the Domestic Relations Bill and a specific law on domestic violence in order to ensure that we live in harmony and that justice is accessed by all Ugandans.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude by condemning all those who took part in this heinous murder of such a distinguished woman. Uganda has lost a very industrious woman, her children have lost a loving mother and we of the legal profession have lost a senior colleague who served as a role model to us and to many of our children. I would like to rest my case by expressing my sincere sympathies to the family, to Uganda as well as the legal profession. I thank you.

10.47
MRS BIIRA BWAMBALE LOYCE (Woman Representative, Kasese):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand up to second the Motion although my name does not appear on the paper. I associate myself with this Motion and appeal to Parliament to support this Motion which is about the loss of a very distinguished civil servant in this country. I want to thank Dora Byamukama and all the women and men who associate themselves with this Resolution. At this material time, there is a lot of fear and apprehension in the minds of those of us who knew Robinah and hon. Dora Byamukama has ably described her. 

There is much more to Robinah Kiyingi than we are able to describe. I first knew her at Makerere University when I joined in 1974 and I knew her to be very hard working, exemplary in her academic performance and a highly disciplined student and graduate. I know that the country has lost a distinguished person.

Mr Speaker, as I read the stories in the newspapers, I have been asking myself whether her life could have been saved in one way or another. Is there anything that was not done that could have saved Robinah’s life?  My answer is “Yes”. Many things could have been done. However, there is something called destiny and Robinah has met her fate. That is why I am grateful to the press for being keen in exposing information and knowledge, which we hope is true and will led us to the culprits who murdered this distinguished Ugandan. I praise the press for that and hope that they will continue to do this regarding many other things.

Mr Speaker, Dora Byamukama has talked about murder cases being exposed in the newspapers but that is only as far as the information that reaches the media. There are many more people, especially women and children, who are being murdered and this is not reported anywhere. Therefore, the situation is more serious than what is reported in the press. It indicates that something is, socially, wrong in our society and that although our nation is a signatory to many international, regional and national human rights instruments, a lot has yet to be done before these atrocities of murder in cold blood can be reduced.  

Mr Speaker, today as I was reading one of the newspapers, I saw a picture of two children who had been brutally beaten and mutilated by their parents. Everyday we see this kind of violence and wonder what is wrong with our society and what we can do as legislators and as women. In this Resolution No. 4, hon. Byamukama called upon Government to immediately enact specific laws dealing with domestic relations and domestic violence. However, violence is not limited to domestic relations but cuts across borders.  

Mr Speaker, for the last 20 years children and women continue to be murdered during armed conflict. If one may go by press reports, it is very saddening that this woman lived, only to have her life rudely interrupted. As I conclude, it is my appeal that this 7th Parliament considers the issue of passing the Domestic Relations Bill very seriously. Secondly, I request Government to come up with a policy not necessarily on domestic violence but on violence in general and to also continue reduction of poverty. 

This is because if we may go by the press, the murder of Robinah could have involved exchange of money. Also, we have important personalities being murdered for little money yet once life is lost it is lost and cannot be regained. We must all fight very hard to end poverty and perhaps bring consolation to people’s minds. Also, these murderous acts could stop. Sometime back, a newspaper stated that over 50 percent of Ugandans have some form of mental defect. 

I would like to associate the murder of my sister Robinah Kiyingi to people with mental deficiency because I do not see how such a progressive and committed Christian could have deserved such a disastrous death, especially this lady who served in all these capacities. I appeal to all of us, while we are still alive, and pray that God may give us the grace to use the talents He has given us to help the society in which we live. I also want to thank God for having given Robinah talents that she effectively utilized and this leaves a challenge to all of us.  

Let me conclude by delivering my sympathies and condolences to the bereaved family where she was married, to her parents, sisters, brothers, relatives, all the women in this country and the world over who interacted with Robinah in one way or another. May her soul rest in eternal peace.  Thank you.

10.57
MRS LYDIA BALEMEZI (Woman Representative, Mukono):  I thank you, Mr Speaker. I also wish to second the Motion and thank hon. Byamukama for it up. Robinah Erina Kayaga Kiyingi was known to me right from her childhood. She joined Gayaza in the early 60s in primary one and that is the school she attended all through her educational career up to ‘A’ level. I had the advantage and the privilege of sharing with Robinah most of the time because I was also in that school.  We shared the same dormentry and the same classroom and Robinah was one of the most selfless girls at school.  

Robinah came from a very renown family of Mr And Mrs Kasirye who, at that time, were one of the well off families. In fact I think it was the only family which could afford to take all eight girls to Gayaza High Schools and this was a very rare occurence. 

Robinah was the fourth born in that family and she was much loved by her sisters. Because of her selflessness, she was very kind especially to those of us who, at one time or another, were disadvantaged economically. Robinah would always stretch her hand toward us and share with us whatever her family or her sisters would give her. Robinah grew up as a very devoted Christian and she used to counsel us in the Christian way, young as we were and much as we were schoolgirls. 

Robinah was very devoted and would interpret the Bible to us in a more understandable way which was very helpful  because Gayaza at that time was a very religious school and we were required to understand the Bible. 

Robinah was respected by most of us and she carried her Christianity with her throughout her life. I remember when she was the Legal Advisor to Namirembe Diocese, she did a lot in formulating the Mothers Union rules and she was the one who advised Namirembe Diocese to enrol women into the Mothers Union. Before then it was taken for granted that once you are married you automatically became a member of Mothers Union. 

From their home on Gaba Road, Robinah continued to be a Christian and participated very ably in their church at Katuuso. She used to invite a number of us to share with them and she used to show the Christians of that area how connected she was to a number of us. Robinah was a very quiet mother but very good at moulding and shaping her children. I would say that she was one of those unheard voices of women who do a lot of work for society but are unseen. Many of us tend not to know that they are doing a lot in improving the status in the society.  

Robinah suffered quietly and very few people knew of it but all this has come up and her suffering has climaxed in her death. Although a lot has been happening behind the curtains, Robinah being who she was did not want anybody to know about it. She confined herself in the law and the church and we were told by her house girl that she had committed herself to fasting and meditating so that her marriage would come back to normal. The night she died she had asked her house girl to share with her in seven days of meditation.

Robinah tried to inform a few of her colleagues that she felt would assist her but disappointingly and as usual, the police let her down. It is very unfortunate that most women go through a lot of suffering and yet the Government and the law are there to protect them. Actually, we discovered that Robinah reported to different police stations four times about her fear and suspicions of being hunted and murdered and files were opened. But always she was told that those were domestic affairs and that she was simply being jealousy. It is unfortunate that even when women confide in people they think will protect them, they are let down. 

However, I would like to thank the police for coming up and trying to work on this matter expeditiously although it has come a little too late. Let us hope that all will be done to bring justice to this affair. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I hope that as this Parliament tries to bring the Domestic Relations Bill in place, we as women and members of civil society will be ready to accept some of the contentious Clauses and maybe revisit or improve them so that as Uganda we can come up with a law on domestic relations. This way people will know that there is a law in place and our officials will get a way of handling some of these contentious matters.  

Mr Speaker, I want to thank everybody in this House and the public for sharing in the loss of a great Lady, Robinah Kayaga Kiyingi. I thank those who have come out to comfort the family and I hope and pray that we shall continue to console these bereaved people while thanking God for enabling Robinah to do all that she did for the good of this country. I thank you and may her soul rest in eternal peace.

11.06
MS MARY RUTAMWEBWA MUGYENYI (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara): Thank you Mr Speaker for giving me an opportunity to contribute to this Motion. I would like to support the Motion and take this opportunity to thank hon. Byamukama for bringing this Motion to the House so that as women and leaders in this country, we can have an opportunity to pay tribute to this distinguished woman of Uganda. As we strive to build the calibre of women leaders in the governance of this country, it is very disheartening and indeed touching to lose a woman like Mrs Kiyingi at this particular moment in time. 

I thank those who know her very well and who have been able to speak for her and let the Nation know. I would like to take this opportunity and convey a message to her family that as they grieve, the Nation grieves with them and many mothers in this county are touched. As a matter of fact, I feel lucky that I did not know Mrs Kiyingi well. This is because if I am so touched when I did not know her personally, I believe that I would be deeply in pain if I had known her. It is very disheartening to know that one could even think of taking the life of the mother of his children if indeed this is true as the papers have reported. 

Mr Speaker, I want to briefly comment on the impact of domestic violence on the Nation, the family, on individuals and on the children that we bring into this world. It is very clear that a violent family is likely to produce children that are also violent. As leaders in the different institutions that we are entrusted with, we need to condemn violence and fight it. I appeal to religious institutions, institutions of governance and institutions of law and order to ensure that we do what we can to rid this country of the kind of extreme violence that has caused this kind of pain to the Kiyingi family.

I have heard many people comment about the death of Mrs Robinah Kiyingi and some of them were actually saying that she pushed her husband so much that she deserved what happened. I find that kind of comment really sad! It is high time that we -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should talk about this motion without going into the evidence that is yet to go to court. Proceed honourable member.

MRS MUGYENYI: Thank you Mr Speaker for your guidance. The point I am trying to make is that we should not condone violence and justify it to the extent of saying she deserved it because of the way she behaved. This kind of reasoning of explaining the death of an individual away in relation to family matters is typical of male dominance. In fact I think that greed that leads individuals to either bribe or kill is very extreme. I see this as a form of corruption and insatiable greed that makes us do things that are out of this world to the extent of killing and this is very unacceptable. We need to condemn violence in all its forms and learn to debate, negotiate and discuss rather than plotting violence and death.

I want to end by sending a message to her family that the entire country is with them. We mourn with them as more news appears in papers. It is a very touching issue but all I can say is that I know she is with God since she trusted God so much. I am even told that the last words she said were “Yesu, Yesu” which means she was a God fearing person and she is with God where there is no more torment or murder and hopefully, she is resting in peace. I thank you Mr Speaker.

11.14
MR CHRISTOPHER MBALIBULHA (Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much Mr Speaker and honourable members. I thank hon. Byamukama for bringing this issue so that we can have a chance to comment on it. I am calling for speedy justice for Robinah. I did not know Robinah but her death has given some of us sleepless nights. Three years ago, a woman was gunned down in Ntinda. She was pregnant and the assailant killed her and her child who was on the bed. I hear the killers were condemned but we do not know what actually is going on. Similarly two years ago, Mr Kasoma killed his wife and his whole family and today, we are debating and discussing Robinah’s brutal murder.  

Mr Speaker, all of these cases are about the institution of marriage. Some of us are beginning to ask ourselves whether society can continue with the institution of marriage the way it is. This institution has gone ahead to infringe on individual human rights to the extent that even now, we are still calling Robinah by the name of her alleged killer Dr. Kiyingi. This is a sad story.

As I conclude, can we find a means of revolutionalising the institution of marriage, relaxing the rules, traditions and cultures that are involved so that we can modernize it and people do not have to own others to an extent of them being able to take away their lives. (Applause) The most disturbing thing for me is that the institution of marriage, which we should respect so much is causing people to lose their lives and -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said you can contribute to the Motion without trying to go into the evidence, which is still subject to assessment by the courts. Do not prejudge this evidence, only talk about the person.

MR MBALIBULHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As I conclude, I call upon the Ugandan society to think seriously about this institution of marriage so that we can have an institution where people enjoy their freedom and fundamental human rights. I thank you for the opportunity.

11.17
MRS CECILIA ATIM OGWAL (Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you very much Mr Speaker for giving me an opportunity to contribute on this subject. You and members of this House should be congratulated for being sensitive about women issues. It is extremely important that such a crime does not pass our attention and that we state a position on it. Therefore, I want to congratulate you and the House for allowing us to speak on this subject.  

Mr Speaker, I do not know Robinah Kiyingi and I did not have the opportunity of knowing her personally but from her profile, she seemed to be a woman who had achieved much, a woman of dignity and integrity and therefore she deserves to be respected not only by this Nation but even by her family and her husband. We are saddened that a woman of such high standing should end her days in such a brutal manner.

Mr Speaker before I go into the substance of this, I would like us to reflect on what happened a few months ago when this country was treated to a horrific story of a man who brutally chopped up his children one by one as each watched what was happening to the other. Later we were treated to another story of an Asian who connived with others to kill his wife. There are many stories like this which have not been captured by the press.

Mr Speaker, my concern is what has happened to these cases.  We want to know the end of the story of Kooky’s case and what justice has been done for that honourable lady. The abuse of women coupled with pervasive cultural violence is ultimately responsible for the suffering that women are experiencing today. I would like this House to put aside whatever reasons we have for delaying the debate on the Domestic Relations Bill and give it attention. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I sincerely believe that if there is a law in place it will restrain the excesses of our spouses. In this case we are not only talking about the women but also the children. I have already sighted a case where – [Members: “Even men”] - the men are saying that they are also brutalized by their wives. Well, it is extremely important that we have a law in place -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you looked at yesterday’s Bukedde, there was a story of a man who was found dead on his bed and the information was that he was battered by his wife. (Applause)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker I thank you for that information. Unfortunately I have not yet learnt Luganda well enough to read Bukedde so my attention was not drawn to that story.  I will try my best to learn Luganda so that I can keep up to date with that kind of information.

The point I am driving at is that this House needs to take a step and needs to take it now. It would be very sad if another incident happened after we have discussed this issue because we would not know on what to base our argument. This death has occurred because there is no law yet we are well aware that we have been sitting on the Domestic Relations Bill for many years while atrocities have continued to be committed against women, children and some men.

Mr Speaker while we talk about crimes against women and children, I would also like to focus on some murders that have taken place in this country but have not been effectively addressed. We know that Kayira died a few years ago under similar circumstances but Parliament has not received any report since. Edward Mugalu also died a couple of years ago but we have not received a report either. Murder is murder, whether it is the murder of a woman, a man or a child and we need to address it with seriousness.  

I would like to send my condolences to the family of Kiyingi particularly the children. I normally do not normally read The Red Pepper, but yesterday when I saw the pictures of those children, I could not hold back my tears.  I do not know what will happen to those children after discovering that it is their father who is responsible for the murder. It is a deep scar and a very deep wound in the hearts of these children and I can only comfort them by saying that we received a story that Robinah had been to a prayer meeting so I believe that the Almighty God has recorded her prayers and especially those for her children.  I believe that Robinah has even forgiven her husband but I believe that the law should not forgive him. May God bless you all.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are getting a problem here. As I told you, at this juncture we do not need to point out or name the murderer. This is causing me some easiness. So please restrain yourselves from mentioning anybody because this is a court matter. Somebody has died so let us just say something about it.

MRS MARY KAROORO OKURUT (Woman representative, Bushenyi): Thank you Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank Hon. Byamukama and those who have brought the motion. Indeed, my sister, hon. Betty Amongi and I, we were going to bring a similar motion.  

I stand here, Mr Speaker, to commiserate with the family of the late, especially with the children. I want to thank the press for its vigilance, for its having brought out all this information; for having kept this grisly murder on the front page since poor Robinah was murdered, because it has helped a lot. But I also want to appeal to the press that we must have an African identity when we are dealing with some of these issues. I personally felt so aggrieved. I said “Now poor Robinah is gone”; but when you get the photograph of poor Robinah, brains scattered, breasts bare, and she is on the front page, what does that do to her relatives? What does that do to her family?

So even though these things may happen in the west, I am appealing to my media friends, that let us build our own African identity. Because in Africa, when you find a dead body, you cover it. You do not leave it bare because the dead have rights.

Mr Speaker, I want to add on to the issue of domestic violence. The culture of silence that is embedded in our people; Robinah reported, and not much was done; but there are so many other women who die because they keep quiet; and because these things are embedded in our so called cultural values where you find proverbs like “Ebyamaka nibimanywa embeba”, that, “things of the home should be known by a rat. Therefore, you should talk.”  We have to break this culture of silence.  As my colleagues have said, the Domestic Relations Bill has got to come out, because the question of property and property rights is a big issue in some of these murders that we are seeing.

Mr Speaker, I am not going to say much.  I just want to pass my condolences to the family, especially the children who are trapped in a rather classical tragedy, in Greek Times, they would call this a classical tragedy because it does not affect only the family; it has affected the entire community.  

May God rest Robinah’s soul in eternal peace.

MR MIKE SEBALU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to add my name to those –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members let us be very brief because we have a lot to do today.

MR SEBALU MIKE: I would like to add my name to those that are mourning this distinguished Ugandan lady, who was murdered in cold blood. I would like to condemn that barbaric act of terminating a life of a very useful and very progressive member of our society.

I would like to thank honourable Dora Byamukama for bring this motion and all those that have contributed to this motion. In the same vain, on behalf of Wakiso District, where she was a very senior and respected part of the Wakiso fraternity, having been born there and was a very committed person in terms of contributing to the developments of the district, I want to say that we have lost a very useful person.

I did not know her very closely as a person. But I knew her from her works, because whenever we would be at the district, people from Nangabo area would always talk about the development initiatives and the assistance she had always rendered to that area.  

I got to meet and know Robinah when we were invited for a workshop at the American Embassy. It was to do with the challenges of women in the legal profession and I know hon. Dora and some other ladies were there.  She gave a very moving testimony of the challenges that she was going through as a female lawyer.  But she gave words of encouragement to women facing challenges in the profession where women are discriminated against, in terms of getting high profile cases to handle, with a view that they are not strong enough to handle matters that are intricate.  

She put it clear that the women lawyers of this country should not lose heart, but they should be steady first in pursuing their ethics in the profession.  Her view was that the male lawyers tend to get some of these cases because of their ability to circumvent and do some fixing here and there.  She said that that is not the way to go. They should take heart and be able to build a strong, legal fraternity of female lawyers; and this was really taken very seriously by members who were in that meeting.  

In that meeting, she cut that image of a high professional ethical standard, a lady of integrity, a hard working lady, because I had a colleague who was working in her chambers. But she was always strict in terms of beating deadlines and all her employees were always mindful of the fact that if you have got an assignment, you must work to beat the deadline.  So she was that kind of lady and she was indeed a committed and devoted Christian.  So the only way of mourning her is to emulate her good example and also to ensure that we promote those very sound principles for which she stood.  

I would like to thank Parliament for having recognized her in this manner and I think this is a sense of encouragement to all the eminent ladies of Uganda who have been able to contribute to the development of society and I think we have done her justice by recognizing her works.  Thank you.

MS TIPERU NUSURA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I also want to thank my Colleague hon. Dora Byamukama for moving this motion and hon. Bwambale for seconding it.  

Mr Speaker, as the Secretary General of the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association, I would like to join my Colleagues in sending a word of condolences to the family, and in particular I feel sorry for the children and the mother of Robinah, Mr Speaker.

Mr Speaker, as you all know, it is very difficult to bring up a woman with characters or quality like Robinah in Uganda today. She is woman who has been an activist crusader against corruption and a lawyer.  Those are all attributes that every Ugandan mother would like her daughter or son to achieve.  So I really feel sorry for her.  

I want to congratulate the Press for the work they have done.  I am very sceptical especially as far as Red Pepper is concerned, because I am aware of how they can collect news from men.  

But when New Vision and Monitor continuously published information on this death, I took interest, and Mr Speaker, on that note; allow me to thank the media, the Police and all Ugandans for their vigilance.  

Since Robinah died, it is the story being discussed all over the land.  When you move in town, people have been discussing that death.  That indicates that the Press has done its best in ensuring that people have access to the situation.  

I want to thank Ugandans for willingly providing information.  That is an indication that this House really needs to consider the issue of funding the Police.  Many times, Police complains of under-funding and more so the Investigation Department.  For instance, the earlier the Police get the crime scene and collect the information, the more credible that information is considered.  In this case, the Police have shown us how serious they are.  So I would like to urge Government to actually increase funding as far as Police is concerned, more so the Investigation Department.

Mr Speaker, allow me also to salute Maj. Gen. Katumba Wamala for the work that he is doing.  Because a lot is happening and we hope that the death of Robinah is going to be used as a symbol to many more acts that are happening.  

As you know, Mr Speaker, I can give you an example of cases in Yumbe.  We had a situation whereby a man was terminally ill and he knew he was going to die.  So what he did was to stab his wife because he did not want to imagine that when he died, another man would take her on. So what he did was to kill her. 

So many cases are happening in this country.  We have had situations of women torturing fellow women and of women chopping off their men’s private parts.  We have also had situation of men abusing women, even cases as far as this Parliament is concerned.  

So I hope that her death is going to be used as an eye opener to many families in this country.  Mr Speaker, I have heard of cases where you are invited to attend weddings and when the priest says, “till death do us part”, you find people giggling, which mean the issue of “till death do us part” is becoming a mess.  That is an indication that there is a very big problem in our society.

I want to call upon religious leaders to intensify on their preaching as far as love in homes is concerned, because there is a situation that is mushrooming in the country, the fact that people want to revenge.  I believe that if love is taught, more especially in our Christian and Moslem institutions, a lot will be done.

I want to conclude by saluting the Police and encouraging them to leave no stone unturned, so that justice can be done.  Thank you very much.

MR MOSES KIZIGE (Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Mr Speaker, honourable colleagues, I met the late Robinah Kiyingi in March 1998 at an international conference on conflict resolution, which was jointly organized by the Centre for International Civil and Human Rights and the Craig International Institute, for Peace and Conflict Resolution, both were at the University of Rotterdam in Indiana, United States of America (USA).  

The late Robinah Kiyingi was invited as a guest speaker, as a specialist in the area of conflict resolution, and she was to give a perspective of the African Continent in this area.  I was proud because she was Ugandan and her presentation was fascinating.  

In 2002 the late Robinah Kiyingi was appointed by the President of the University of Rotterdam to be a standing member of the committee coordinating this annual conference; and last year she successfully convinced the organizers to have this conference held here in Uganda, given the conflicts Uganda has been going through, especially in Northern Uganda.  In March last year at the Nile Resort Hotel the conference was held in Jinja, and hon. Prof. Kagonyera was privileged to give the keynote address.

In 2002 I also had the privilege to be appointed Resident Representative for the University of Rotterdam for Eastern and Southern Africa.  The University of Rotterdam is owned and run by the Holy Cross Fathers. So it is basically a Roman Catholic University.  For somebody who is not a Roman Catholic like myself and like the late Robinah Kiyingi to be given assignments at that level in such a University was such a great privilege to Uganda.  

The late Robinah Kiyingi was able to negotiate with the Craig Institute of International Peace Studies and Conflict Resolution to organize exchange programmes for some Ugandans.  The first lot from Uganda Martyrs University, Nkonzi, to benefit from this programme will be travelling this fall to the University of Rotterdam.  Her death has robbed the Rotterdam community in this country and in Eastern and Southern Africa a partner, and colleague; of somebody that was working to promote the inspirations of the great University of Rotterdam.  We shall miss her. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Bakoko Bakoru): Mr Speaker, honourable colleagues, I stand to support this Motion.  But as the Minister in charge of gender, my heart bleeds with the women of this country because of the loss of Robinah Erina Kiyingi.  

I knew Robinah through Mrs Jessica Nkuuhe and hon. Syda Bbumba.  She was a woman of integrity and honesty, and she worked very hard for the women’s movement, especially from the legal perspective.

Mr Speaker, issues of violence transcend gender.  Last year in December, my bodyguard was murdered – actually cut with an axe by his wife. This to me shows the level of psychosocial problems that we have in this country.  While we relate this to the institution of marriage, we have violence among the people where many people are being showered with acid in this country.  I think time is coming when we will have to reflect on what has happened to our society and the impact that our past is having on our people.

I want to congratulate the press for bringing out this issue very clearly. But I also want to appeal to the press, that some of the issues, which are being raised- Robinah cannot defend herself now but it will affect the children; I think these are very sensitive issues.  

We have a saying in my language that, when you die you cannot stand up to defend yourself –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Can you say it in your language and then tell us?

MRS BAKOKO BAKORU: The saying goes like this, Mr Speaker, “Kesi ndavo,” which means that the dead person cannot defend himself or herself. 

Therefore, they are always the victims in the situation of a case.  So, Mr Speaker, my appeal to the media is that, for the sake of the children, let some of the issues that are being reported, be restrained, let the press restrain themselves because the children have suffered the loss of their mother, they have suffered the circumstances under which she died; and so we cannot subject them to more suffering.

Mr Speaker, having told you about my bodyguard and Robinah, I believe the Domestic Relations Bill should then appeal to all of us, not just because it affects the women alone.  So I want to appeal to our male colleagues that the next time this Bill comes to Parliament, you support the women on this so that we can have a collective responsibility. Mr Speaker, this is a big loss to the family and the women’s movement, and I want this to go on record. 

Finally, I send my condolences to the family and to the women’s movement. May God bless her soul and rest it in peace.  Thank you.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apollo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament, being the last speaker, I have been in many ways pre-empted, and normally, I do not want to repeat what other people have said.  But let me on behalf of Government convey our condolences to the bereaved family.  We are particularly saddened by the plight of the children and the parents.  

The late Mrs Kiyingi was a crusader against corruption using international organizations to fight corruption, and as you know the issue of corruption is extremely intricate. Some people try to detect it through perception but we must also have empirical indicators of corruption if you have to cure it. I agree that she was a distinguished lawyer and amongst the board she served was the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation. 

It is important that many people have criticized Government that many inquiries have taken place alas there are no results.  Let me point out that it is our duty also to give evidence and hard evidence at that so that those who are guilty maybe declared guilty by courts of law. It is very important to avoid making statements which –(Interjections) I do not think we need information on this occasion. I suggest that we avoid information because this is another matter; it is a very sad occasion. 

Therefore, the issue of giving correct and hard information is extremely important and I want to thank the public for having given information to the Police. Too often we criticise the Police, but the Police has done its best and I want to thank them –(Applause). May the almighty sustain the bereaved.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I put a question on the motion moved by hon. Dora Byamukama to pay tribute to Robinah Erina Kayaga Kiyingi. 

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) (NO. 3) BILL, 2005

Clause 96

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, clause 96 proposes to amend the second schedule to the Constitution to change the name from Zaire to the Democratic Republic of Congo; the committee approves the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, let us call the role call; this is to change Zaire to DRC.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Mr Chairman, I am so terribly confused. You might probably be of assistance to me.  What has the name “Democratic Republic of Congo” have to do with Uganda? Are we supposed to dictate which name it should be called?

THE CHAIRMAN: Because it is in the Constitution- it is part of our Constitution. We might have made a mistake but the fact is that it is there and we are trying to adjust the name because the name was changed. 

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Chairman, I wanted to be clarified on what happened to Clause 95; because when we broke off, we were on Clause 95 and we did not finish it.

THE CHAIRMAN: What is the position honourable Minister?

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, from what I learnt yesterday, consultations were going on, for clause 95 and it was stood over like some of the earlier ones and it will be considered at the same time when those are being considered.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, clause 95 was stood over. 

Clause 96

(Question put.)

AYES:

1.	Aachilla John Roberts Rex 
2.	Aanimu Angupale
3.	Abura Pirir Samuel 
4.	Ael Ark Lodou 
5.	Agard Didi
6.	Aidah Mehangye 
7.	Akaki Ayumu
8.	Akech Okullo Betty 
9.	Akello Dinah Grace 
10.	Alaso Asianut Alice 
11.	Ali Moses
12.	Alonga Othman Haruna 
13.	Amama Mbabazi
14.	Amongi Betty
15.	Amongin Aporu Hellen Christine 
16.	Anang-Odur Lakana Tomson 
17.	Anyolo Samuel 
18.	Apuun Patrick 
19.	Arapkissa Yekko
20.	Arumadri John Drazu 
21.	Asupassa Isiko
22.	Atim Ogwal Cecilia 
23.	Awongo Ahmed 
24.	Baba Diri Margaret
25.	Bagalana Tom Samson
26.	Bakaluba Mukasa 
27.	Bakkabulindi Charles 
28.	Bakoko Bakoru 
29.	Balemezi Nalubega 
30.	Balikuddembe
31.	Bamwanga Steven 
32.	Banyenzaki Henry 
33.	Basajjabalaba Nassar 
34.	Basaliza Araali Henry
35.	Bazana Kabwegyere
36.	Bbumba Syda 
37.	Bintu Jalia
38.	Bizarre Byaruhanga 
39.	Bulamu Richard
40.	Bwerere Kasole 
41.	Byabagambi John 
42.	Byamukama Dora 
43.	Byamukama Nulu 
44.	Byanyima Nathan 
45.	Chebrot Michael
46.	Chelangat Kulany 
47.	D’ujanga Giw 
48.	Dombo Emmanuel 
49.	Ekanya Geofrey 
50.	Epetait Francis 
51.	Eriyo Jessica
52.	Esele John 
53.	ETONU BENEDICT 
54.	Hyuha Samali 
55.	Imumet Isaiah 
56.	Isanga Nakadama 
57.	Kabareebe Muzoora Amon 
58.	Kafabusa Werikhe 
59.	Kagaba Harriet
60.	Kagimu Kiwanuka
61.	Kagonyera Mondo 
62.	Kajura Henry 
63.	Kakoko Sebagereka 
64.	Kakooza James 
65.	Kalule Ssengo
66.	Kamana Wesonga 
67.	Kapkwomu Ndiwa 
68.	Kasule Lumumba 
69.	Katuramu Hood 
70.	Kawanga John 
71.	Kawoya Bangirana 
72.	Kayongo Tom
73.	Kezimbira Miyingo 
74.	Kibirige Sebunya 
75.	Kigyagi Arimpa John 
76.	Kinobe James 
77.	Kiraso Beatrice 
78.	Kityo Henry 
79.	Kiwagama William 
80.	Kiwalabye Musoke 
81.	Kizige Moses 
82.	Koluo Charles
83.	Kubeketerya James
84.	Kule Muranga
85.	Kyahurwenda Abwooli
86.	Lokeris Peter Aimat 
87.	Lolem Micah 
88.	Lubowa Moses Paul 
89.	Lukyamuzi John Ken 
90.	Lyomoki Sam 
91.	Maate Rogers
92.	Madada Kyebakoze Sulaiman 
93.	Magoola Zirabamuzale 
94.	Makubuya Khiddu Edward 
95.	Malinga Johnson 
96.	Malinga Stephen Oscar 
97.	Masiko Komuhangi Winfred 
98.	Matovu Byatike 
99.	Mbabazi Kabushenga
100.	Mindra Joyo Eugenia 
101.	Mugambe Kifomusana Joseph 
102.	Mukasa Anthony Harris 
103.	Mukasa Muruli Wilson
104.	Mukula Richard
105.	Mukwaya Balunzi Janat 
106.	Mulengani Bernard 
107.	Munyira Wabwire Omusolo Rose 
108.	Musumba Isaac Isanga 
109.	Mwaka Nakiboneka Victoria 
110.	Mwandha James Eliezer 
111.	Mwesigye Adolf 
112.	Mwesigye Ruhindi Hope 
113.	Nabeta Nasani 
114.	Nabwiso Bulima Wilberforce 
115.	Namayanja Rose 
116.	Namirembe Bitamazire
117.	Namuyangu Kacha Jenipher 
118.	Nansubuga Sarah Nyombi 
119.	Nantume Eron Janet 
120.	Nasasira John 
121.	Nayiga Florence Sekabira 
122.	Ndawula Ali Sekyanzi
123.	Nduhuura Richard
124.	Nsaba Buturo
125.	Nshimye Sebutulo Augustine 
126.	Nsubuga William 
127.	Ntacyotugira Phillip Mary 
128.	Nuwagaba Herbert Muntuyera 
129.	Nyanzi Vincent 
130.	Nyendwoha Mutiti Jonathan 
131.	Obbo Henry Joseph 
132.	Oboi Patrick Amuriat
133.	Ochieng Peter Patrick 
134.	Odit John 
135.	Ogola Akisoferi Michael 
136.	Ogwel Loote Sammy 
137.	Okot Ogong Felix 
138.	Okullo Epak Yefusa 
139.	Okurut Karooro Busingye Mary 
140.	Olum Zachary  
141.	Omodi Okot 
142.	Omodi Okot
143.	Onek Obaloker Hilary 
144.	Opange Louis
145.	Orech David Martin 
146.	Oryem Henry Okello 
147.	Oulanyah Jacob 
148.	Pajobo Bruno 
149.	Rainer Kafire Juliet 
150.	Rutamwebwa Mugyenyi Mary 
151.	Rwakimari Beatrice 
152.	Rwamirama Kanyontole Bright 
153.	Saidi Okuti Nasur 
154.	Sebaggala Latif 
155.	Sebalu Mike Kennedy 
156.	Sekikubo Theodore 
157.	Sekitoleko Juliet Kabonesa 
158.	Sinabulya Namabidde Sylvia 
159.	Sitenda Sebalu
160.	Ssempangi Kefa Frederick 
161.	Ssentongo Nabulya Teopista 
162.	Thembo Nyombi George William 
163.	Tibarimbasa Avitus 
164.	Tubbo Nakwang Christine 
165.	Tubwita Bagaya Grace 
166.	Twarebireho Tungwako 
167.	Wabudeya Mukaye Beatrice 
168.	Wacha Ben 
169.	Wadri Kassiano Ezati 
170.	Wagonda Muguli John Wilson 
171.	Wakikona Wandendeya David 
172.	Wambuzi Gagawala Nelson 
173.	Wananzofu Simon Peter  
174.	Wandera Martin 
175.	Wanjusi Wasieba Sylvester 
176.	Wopuwa George William 
177.	Yeri Ofwono Apollo 
178.	Yiga Anthony 

THE CHAIRMAN: The position on Clause 96 is:  Abstentions - 0, Noes - 0, Ayes – 178. The Ayes have it. 

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 96 agreed to.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Mr Chairman, this is the first time I am hearing about people called Aliba – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t you wait for me to call out the Clause?  

Clause 97

MR OULANYAH: Mr chairman, Clause 97 proposes to amend the 3rd schedule to the Constitution, on the indigenous communities in Uganda. The Committee approves what is proposed in the Bill in Clause 97 but wishes to make an amendment that immediately after “Aliba” we insert, “Banyaruguru”.

The justification is that upon a presentation by hon. Twarebireho Tungwako on the recognition of the Banyaruruguru as an indigenous community in Uganda, the Committee forwarded the matter to the Ministry of Internal Affairs for verification.  The Ministry has now verified that fact and we recommend that the Banyaruruguru be included.  We propose.

MR KALULE SSENGO: Mr Chairman, we are hearing these tribes for the first time.  I wonder why the Indians were not considered since they have been here for ages and they are still here. Where will you categorise them? Are they not Ugandans?  They are also a group and they are in big numbers, which are growing bigger everyday.  Therefore, could the chairman tell me what he intends to do with Indians?

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I have an amendment from the Committee. Let us dispose of that, and then if you have any other amendment, we can handle it.  The amendment is on inserting “the Banyaruruguru”.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: The position on the amendment to insert “Banyaruguru” is, Abstention - 0, Against	-0, For	- 111. The motion is carried.

(Question agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, before we proceed, there was in inquiry by hon. Nsubuga Nsambu concerning the Aliba.  Maybe this could be used as a learning exercise – (Interruption)

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: It is not my intention to deny them a right of citizenship. I would like to know the background of these people. For years, we have not known them!

THE CHAIRMAN: Could whoever knows tell us where the Aliba, the Gimala, the Leli and Shana communities are?

MRS MINDRA: Mr Chairman, Aliba is my mother’s tribe, so I know them very well. They are in Aliba Sub County. Leli and Gimara, where I come from, are in Gimara Sub County in Moyo District. Gimara are over 15,000.  In fact, they speak the same language but they need their own identity.  

MR WANANZOFU: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I want to confirm to this House that the Shana tribe is a community in Bulambuli County, Sironko District.  They have stayed in Sironko for more than 100 years and they are a Bantu-speaking people. Originally, we used to think they came from Nakasongola, and speak the same language as the Baruli, but there are a clear distinction now.  They are more than 12,000 Bantu people and are Ugandans like you and I. I appeal to members of this House to accept this community.  During CA, they were forgotten but they are Ugandans.  

MRS MINDRA: Mr Chairman, the Leli and the Gimara speak a language similar to the Kakwa.

THE CHAIRMAN: What, then is the difference?

MRS MINDRA: They have their own entity so they would like to be recognised in the Constitution.  I said they speak a language similar to the Kakwa – (Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us be orderly, let her finish and others will be given chance.

MR MWANDHA: I want to get clarification from her.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let her finish before you seek the clarification.

MRS MINDRA: The Aliba speak a language very similar to the Lugbara but it is not quite Lugbara.  I invite people to go and verify.

MR MWANDHA: Mr chairman, we are getting closer to naming clans to be tribes. I would like to request the minister and whoever is proposing to include a tribe in the Constitution to tell us how many clans are in that tribe. For instance, if you talked of Busoga I would tell you the types of clans that we have there. It is possible that some of these people are mere clans; and if that is the case, we may as well have all our clans embedded in the Constitution. This is one of the major concerns and I hope whoever –(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Culturally, not every group has clans. Scientifically, some groups have clans, some societies recognise clans and some societies recognise age groups as an identity.  Therefore, the Basoga and Baganda may have clans, while other people have different arrangements.

MS ERIYO:  Mr Chairman, I would like to confirm that the Gimola, the Leri and the Ariba are known tribes in Moyo district.  They do not speak Madi, but a language similar to Kakwa, but with a remarkable difference. It is like Japadola, Acholi, Alulu and Lango who all speak similar languages but with differences.  You straightaway know that one is a Leri-speaking or Gimola-speaking. They have been demanding to be recognised for a very long time. I pray that this Parliament recognises these tribes.  

DR OKULO EPAK:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Honestly, the honourable Minister of Agriculture should have given us a more scientific basis for her argument. What research shows that there are tribes in this country, which have no clans? Is it not a mere allegation? On what study is it based?  All the tribes are represented here; ask us to put our hands up and see if there is any tribe that does not have clans. This would provide the best research information.  I wonder who will lift up his hand to say they do not have clans in their tribe. 

Secondly, we have been holding census for years and there are normally questions on tribes. Do we have evidence that, these tribes were reflected as tribes in the last census? Let us not start creating tribes like we are going to create districts.  

If we do this, next year I will also come and say, “We speak a language similar to Langi but we are a different tribe”, and the question is, what is the benefit, what do we gain from this tribalisation?  [Honourable members: “Identity”] Identity? When we have not had before?  How have you been existing if you did not have identity? 

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Chairman, I agree with the information given to me by hon. Okulo Epak. I would like to see one Ugandan in this Chamber who does not have a clan to support hon. Mukwaya’s argument. The information given to me by hon.Eriyo, has not answered my question.  She only told me these speak like this, those speak like that- I fear that when we act based on unresearched information on the Floor, we shall create a problem for the future of this country.

The second point is about Barundi. I think if we include Barundi in this Constitution, we would be making a bad precedent.  If people from other countries become Ugandans, and they are named after their country, then you will end up having Senegalese and Indians as a tribe. I would like to beg this House to be cautious in amending this particular schedule.

THE CHAIRMAN: Can’t an Indian be called an Indian where there is a country called India?

MR KAWANGA:  No, no, -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  I am just giving an example.

MR KAWANGA:  I will give the reason -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Are you confusing ‘nationality’ with ‘tribe’?

MR KAWANGA:  No.

MR MWANDHA: That is the kind of problem we would run into. If an Indian became a Ugandan, and yet in India they have different tribes after which they are named.  I think we shall be wrong to call this person ‘Indian’ here in Uganda as a tribe. I am sure that in Burundi, there must be different tribes.  Why do we name people who migrated from Burundi after the name of their country?  I think this is a mistake. 

MR MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Honourable members, to answer hon. Okulo Epak and hon. Mwandha, i should refer you to Article 10 of the Constitution. This Article is as it was in our Independence Constitution and it has been consistent. Those who were here as at February 1 1926 qualify to be citizens by birth. The Barundi is a community; it is a tribe, as we all know.  The Banyarwanda are a tribe; they are already in the Constitution.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way.   The information I want to give, and at an appropriate time I will move that we delete, concerns the Batutsi or Bahutu because they are tribes. Banyarwanda, are people of Rwanda and we know that there are also Ugandans in Rwanda. Do they have a Ugandan community in their Constitution?

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I will seek guidance later, but I want to inform him that there are two things, ‘ethnicity’ and ‘tribe’.  I want to request the professor of Sociology, Prof. Kabwegyere, to assist us in differentiating between ‘ethnicity’ and a ‘tribe’.

MR KULE MURANGA:  Mr Chairman, could someone tell me why when the Banyarwanda are in their own country, they are Bahutu or Batutsi, and when in Uganda, they want to be Banyarwanda. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, a tribe, a nation, a clan, are all concepts. You can have a small nation, a big nation, a small tribe, a big tribe, which turns, into a nation.  The origin of the word ‘tribe’ according to Lucy Mayor was supposed to describe primitive people who have a common culture and who live in a given territory.  So those who are proud of being a tribe should know the origin and the meaning of the word ‘tribe’ as used in Anthropology.  

What were regarded as tribes before the British came here, would have been regarded as nations.  Some were bigger than nations, where they were politically controlled from, like the Igbo, Kikuyu and Luo.  However, they were called tribes just because they were described as primitive people.

The word ‘tribe’ had been cleaned of all that.  After using the word ‘tribe’, then a seemingly neutral word was “ethnic group” so that you could talk of ‘ethnicity’ rather than ‘tribalism’.  Because the moment you use ‘tribalism’ it has a negative connotation. ‘Ethnicity’ was supposed to be more neutral because it did not have that negative origin to mean ‘a primitive group of people’.

What I would want to talk about in this context is, if a group has a language and a culture and lives in reasonable homogenate in a similar territory and want to be called a tribe, as in the case of Banyaruguru, we should not hesitate to recognise them.  However, to talk of the Banyarwanda who come here and still want to continue to be called Banyarwanda, is not acceptable.  If you look at the boundaries of our countries, which part would not have been in another country especially along the borders?  You can see the Marogori on the other side –(Interruption)

MR NTACYOTUGIRA: Mr Chairman, I will give an example of Kisoro District.  This demarcation of borders during the Colonial period brought Banyarwanda in Kisoro, into Uganda.  When genocide came in, the Banyarwanda of Kisoro did not want to be associated with the Banyarwanda who committed genocide.  Therefore, this is why some of us prefer calling ourselves, Bafumbira; otherwise, we are Banyarwanda.  That word ‘Bafumbira’ is to differentiate ourselves from Banyarwanda, who committed genocide.  

We have Banyarwanda in Kisoro and they do not like to be referred to as Bafumbira.  We also have Banyarwanda in DRC who call themselves, Banyarwanda.  Therefore, I can assure you, honourable members that when you remove this word, Banyarwanda, you are offending some individuals.  

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I do agree with what he is saying, but it would be misinformation to say the people of Bufumbira call themselves Bafumbira before they do not want to be associated with genocide.  Genocide is as recent as 1994 and Bafumbira are called so because of Bufumbira Mountains. (Interruption)

MR BITANGARO: I would like to thank the professor for giving way. I would like to clarify and regrettably disagree with hon. Ntacyotugira. The Bafumbira adopted that name in 1990 and yet the genocide in Rwanda was later in 1994. I want to make it very clear that when the boundaries were made in 1911, Uganda found Bafumbira where they are.  We did not come from anywhere else, we have always been where we are.  I agree with the Professor.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I intend to put the question and let you decide, as you understand.  I put the question that clause 97 as amended stand part of the Bill.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  There are two issues, which have not been sufficiently discussed. The first concerns the mentioned new tribes. Many members believe that these could be clans other than tribes. We would be making a mistake to put clans in the Constitution.

THE CHAIRMAN: If you think like that, then you should vote ‘No’

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, the idea is that we should be persuaded.  Those of us who have doubts about it should have sufficient time to be persuaded by members who know that these are tribes, which exist. 

Another issue concerns people who come into this country and we name them after their countries of origin as if they are tribes.  These are very fundamental issues, which I think we need to sort out before we vote.

THE CHAIRMAN: For instance, in Buganda we have ‘Abakopi’ and ‘Abami’, I do not see how the ‘Abakopi’ could turn into a tribe. Are they not of the same tribe, be it ‘Abalangira’ and ‘Abakopi’? Don’t you think the ‘Abalangira’ and the ‘Abakopi’ are of the same tribe, Baganda?  

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, that is a different classification.  It is a classification based on royalty and non-royalty, but here we are talking about tribes. I beg that we are conscious about the kind of tribes we put in the Constitution.

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to remind hon. Mwandha that there were enough submissions. If we were to stand over the Clause, the minister would go back to the ministry and find submissions from the District Councils about the new tribes to include in the Constitution. These people have been around except they were never recognised. They have now been mobilised and sensitised, to find that they need their identity to be part of the Constitution. I submit that members pass these groups as communities in Uganda.

MR MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, as I said, the word ‘tribe’ is the creation, not of the Constitution, but of members of this House who are speaking now.  The word ‘tribe’ has never been used in any of our Constitutions. This Article concerns citizenship. It reads:

"The following persons shall be citizens of Uganda by birth: a) every person born in Uganda, one of whose parents or grandparents is or was a member of any of the indigenous communities existing and residing within the borders of Uganda as at the first day of February 1926”. 

The attempt is to amend that Schedule to include what people think were communities that were omitted from that list. This word ‘tribe’ is your creation; we are talking about ‘a community’.  Some people are saying – (Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: ‘Indigenous communities’ is another way of describing tribes –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: When you stand up, somebody holding the Floor has to permit you to give information or clarification.

MR WACHA: I thank you, honourable minister for giving way. I really do not have any problem with the number of communities, which are proposed here, but I think the question that we need to ask ourselves following the comment made by the honourable Minister of Defence is as to whether the Barundi were an indigenous community as at February 1 1926.  That is what we need to ask ourselves, and maybe the minister could convince us as to whether they were an indigenous community. (Hon Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Please, when you stand up, you will be identified and I will give you time to say what you want to say.  He is still on the Floor and you should give him an opportunity to conclude.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Please let us concentrate on the fact that there are communities in Uganda, which are entitled to claim citizenship by birth; and the only way you can claim it is by being listed under Article 10 of the Constitution in the third Schedule. Therefore, those communities, who are not included in this Schedule, have a right to demand that they are included so that they qualify as citizens by birth.

Regarding Banyarwanda and Barundi, I want to assure honourable members that one of the biggest tribes in Africa is Bakiga. There is a good number in Uganda, 50 percent of of the population in Rwanda are Bakiga, in Congo, in 1964, there were 200,000 Bakiga in North Western Tanzania and today there are two Members of Parliament who are Bakiga in the Tanzanian Parliament. 

The point is that the Bakiga, just to use Bakiga as an example, are a community in Uganda.  In 1926, they were in Uganda as a community just as they were, in Congo. Therefore, Barundi, Banyarwanda – in fact, there is a community in my constituency called Banyabutumbi, who are a distinct community. They have a distinct language and I think the Chairman, hon. Oulanyah should have included them; I hope he will next time.  If Barundi are people in Uganda who were here by 1926, then they qualify to be listed in the Constitution.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, do you need a seminar to decide one way or the other? Why don’t you decide on whether you want a seminar then we can –(Interjection)

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, I have listened carefully to honourable members contributing on this Clause. I have only one regret that in the record of the general debate on this Bill, these issues were not raised.  Therefore, Government proceeded on the assumption that in principle, the substance was acceptable. Now that we have come to a stage where we should be approving this provision,arguments, which should have been made in the general debate are coming up now. (Interruption)

MS NAMUSOKE: Mr Chairman, I do not want to interfere with the honourable Attorney General, but is he in order to give this House and the public the impression that the honourable members are sneaking in ideas, when he knows very well that during the general debate, the Speaker, Mr Chairman now, said that we could raise some of these issues because none of us could handle the matters that we wanted to comment on? Is he in order to give the impression that honourable members are just all over the place with no plan at all?

THE CHAIRMAN: What I said during the debate on the Motion for Second Reading zeroed on two or three Clauses in the Bill.  I must say, it is only hon. Awori and I told him when he started the debate that he had entered inter-land.  But most of you were at Mombasa Port and never considered the inter-land of the Bill. You did not see these issues then. Here you are, turning this Committee Stage into a general debate.  But if you are not prepared maybe, as I have said, we need a seminar to talk about these issues so that we decide. We are now wasting a lot of time.  Let us stand this provision –(Interruption)

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, I was laying a foundation for a recommendation when hon. Sarah Kiyingi, interrupted me. The short point I wanted to make is that honourable colleagues are raising important issues about this Clause.  I will not take them to task for having not raised these points at the appropriate time but in National interest, I propose that we stand over this Clause.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, when we examined these proposals as a Committee, we asked the ministers what proof there was that these qualify as communities. We were given information that there is a standard procedure that is followed.  If a community asks for recognition, the Ministry of Internal Affairs carries out verification of the facts.  It goes to the field, interviews people and comes out with the report to the effect that such a community exists. 

Mr Chairman, that is what we did even for the Banyaruguru, when we received a petition from hon. Twarebireho. We made the request to the Minister of Justice and wrote to the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Even hon. Twarebireho himself wrote to them.  They carried out the verification and wrote to the Committee. They said, “We have now carried out verification and confirm that the Banyaruguru is an indigenous community in Uganda.”  It went through a process and you should not make it look as if it is just beginning. I think we are not being fair. The learned Attorney General and the Minister of Internal affairs are not being fair. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, roll call– (Interruption)

MR NTACYOTUGIRA: Mr Chairman, how are we voting on this? Are we voting tribe-by-tribe or ethnic group by ethnic group or community-by-community?  For us to vote on this as a Clause is like omnibus in nature and I find a problem with voting on it.

THE CHAIRMAN: The Constitutional Court has ruled that it is valid to have an omnibus Bill.

MR NTACYOTUGIRA: Mr Chairman, I am not challenging your ruling sir, but supposing I am not in favour of one of these ethnic communities, how do I vote?  I might be in favour of one and not in favor of the rest.

THE CHAIRMAN: What you do when I call the Clause, you say, “I amend” and you delete the particular community you do not want. Otherwise, in our Rules of Procedure, each Clause is called and if you think there is a tribe you want or a community you want, you move an amendment so that we consider it, and then clean up the Clause. 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I move that we delete the Barundi from the schedule.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, in my view, since the minister has requested that we stand over this particular Clause and in view of the fact that there are other Clauses, which we have stood over. The minister may be in position to consult and come up with a position that is acceptable to most of the people.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

1:13
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume to enable the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1:14
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House considered clauses 95 and 96 of the Bill entitled “the Constitution (Amendment) (No. 3) Bill 2005” and took the following decisions. The Committee stood over clause 95 and the Committee passed clause 96 without amendment. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report, which I have just read out from the Committee of the Whole House, be adopted by this Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I indicated last week, we will be working up to today so that you are able to go to your constituencies to talk to your people about a programme, which is going on there but at the same time as I noticed from the order paper, there is another motion for the creation of districts. Many people I think apparently are interested in this particular subject and many have been coming to my office from various parts of the country about this issue. I consider it also as an important issue and therefore, I am going to suspend the proceedings so that you go for lunch and at 2.30 p.m. you come back.  

When you come back, we shall first handle that issue of districts. (Applause) So, during lunch time, please, exchange views on the issue of districts. You might have received a copy of the motion by the minister. It has changed. You look at it so that you are able to - as far as this subject of constitutional matters is concerned, we shall continue with it when we come back after the referendum.

(The House was suspended at 1.15 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.46 p.m._)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER ARTICLE 179, CLAUSE 1, PARAGRAPH (B), PROVIDING FOR THE CREATION OF NEW DISTRICTS

2:47
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Mr Speaker, I wish to move a resolution of Parliament under Article 179(1) paragraph (b) of the Constitution providing for the creation of new districts. 

“WHEREAS Article 179 of the Constitution empowers Parliament to create new Districts

AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to create the districts specified hereunder for the effective administration of those areas and bring services closer to the people; having taken into account the spirit of Article 179 of the Constitution and the wishes of the people concerned:

AND WHEREAS the creation of the said new Districts is supported by a majority of all the Members of Parliament:

NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED BY PARLIAMENT
	1.	That the following new districts be created in Uganda and their headquarters be as indicated herein; 

(i)	Ibanda District, consisting of Ibanda County in the present Mbarara 		District, having its headquarters at  Ibanda. (Applause).
(ii)	Kabingo District, consisting of  Isingiro and Bukanga counties in the present Mbarara District, having its headquarters at Kabingo. (Applause).
(iii)	Kiruhura District, consisting of Kazo and Nyabushozi counties in the present Mbarara District, having its headquarters at Kiruhura. (Applause).
(iv)	Kaabong District, consisting of Dodoth county in the present Kotido District, having its headquarters at Kaabong. (Applause).
(v)	Kaliro District consisting of Bulamogi County in the present Kamuli District, having its headquarters at Kaliro. (Applause).
(vi)	Koboko District consisting of Koboko County in the present Arua District, having its headquarters at Koboko. (Applause).
(vii)	Butaleja District, consisting of Bunyole County in the present Tororo District, having its headquarters at Butaleja. (Applause)
(viii)	Nakaseke District, consisting of Nakaseke County, in the present Luweero District, having its headquarters at Nakaseke. (Applause).
(ix)	Budaka District consisting of Budaka County, Kakoro, Kabwangansi, Kirika and Kadama sub-county in the present Pallisa District, having its headquarters at Budaka. (Applause).
(x)	Amuria District consisting of Amuria and Kapelebyong counties in the present Katakwi District, having its headquarters at Amuria. (Applause). 
(xi)	Mityana District consisting of Mityana and Busujju in the present Mubende District, having its headquarters at Mityana. (Applause).
(xi)	Manafwa district consisting of Bubulo and Manjiya counties in the present district of Mbale with the headquarters to be agreed upon.
(xii)	Amuratali District consisting of Kyoga County in the present Lira District having its headquarters at Amuratali.
(xiii)	Buko District consisting of Kongasis County in the present Kapchworwa District, having its headquarters at Buko.

2. That the effective date of the new districts mentioned above be the 1st of July 2005. 

3. That be it further resolved that the following eight new districts be established with effect from 1 July 2006.  
i.	Tororo District consisting of Tororo County as is presently represented in Parliament with its headquarters yet to be agreed upon after which it will be named.
ii.	A new district consisting of Maracha and Terego counties to be created out of Arua District, with its headquarters yet to be agreed upon after which it will be named.
iii.	A new district consisting of Kilak and Nwoya counties to be created out of Gulu District, with its headquarters yet to be agreed upon, after which it will be named.
iv.	Oyam District consisting of Oyam County in the present Apac District, having its headquarters at Oyam.
v.	Abim District consisting of Labwo County in the present Kotido District having its headquarters at Abim.
vi.	Busiki District consisting of Busiki in the present Iganga District with its headquarters to be agreed upon after which it will be named.
vii.	Dokolo District consisting of Dokolo County in the present Lira District with its headquarters to be agreed upon after which it will be named.
viii.	Bulisa District consisting of Bulisa County in the present Masindi District with its headquarters to be agreed upon after which it will be named.  

4. 	That the headquarters of each new district shall become a Town Council in accordance with the provisions of the Local Governments Act.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Minister, but before they start debating, I see on those districts coming effective 1 July, there is this one of Manafwa. When you look at the pattern of the names of districts, they take the name of the headquarters of a district, what about this Manafwa, what will happen? Are you going to change the name when the headquarters are known?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, it is not only in the case of Manafwa; it applies to many cases in a situation where the district headquarters have not been agreed upon. We are presenting the matter as it is. In the case of Manafwa there have been proposals of where the headquarters should be but there is need for consultation. The district will be named after the headquarters.  

THE SPEAKER: Exactly. The reason why I wanted this one is that members are assisted that in the second category you said new districts without giving it a name but Manafwa you may give it a name without the headquarters being stated. Will it not create a problem? 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, the way No. 12 represented Manafwa District consisting of Bubulo and Manjiya counties with the headquarters to be agreed upon, and I should make an amendment. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. His Excellency the Vice-President has asked me to inform you that he is carrying out official duties in Kalangala so he is not able to be here.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, I also table clearance of financial implications for the creation of new districts. I beg to present the clearance.  

I am here to present this resolution and I would like to thank the honourable members who have consulted very extensively on many of these proposals. I would also like to appreciate those whose proposals may not have appeared on the list. I have been approached and told by colleagues here and outside Parliament that probably this is the largest list of districts created at a go. There are reasons for this.

One should recognise in the first place the success of decentralization. The demand for creating districts is primarily a manifestation of the peoples; awareness that to access service the source should be near to them. The Constitution of 1995 put in place machinery that we have followed all along and Article 179(1), which is referred to in the resolution, says:

“Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may –
(a)	Alter the boundaries of districts; and 
(b)	Create new districts.
(2)	Any measure to alter the boundary of a district or to create a new district shall be supported by the majority of all the Members of Parliament” - which this resolution is seeking; and 
(3)	Parliament shall by law empower district councils to alter boundaries of lower government units and to create new local government units within their districts.” 

The ministry receives very many proposals for creating new parishes. This is because the people down there are demanding that they have access to resources, particularly services. 

I would like to go to Article 179(4); “Any measure for the alteration of the boundaries of or the creation of districts or administrative units shall be based on the necessity for effective administration and the need to bring services closer to the people and it may take into account – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable minister, was your motion seconded by anybody? Okay, I notice that it is seconded.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Sir. I thought the entire House seconded the resolution with their acclamation. I was saying, “… bring services closer to the people and it may take into account the means of communication, geographical features, density of population, economic viability and the wishes of the people concerned.”

These are guidelines, which most of the submissions considered but I would like to put emphasis on one of them, which is yet to be realised, and that is economic viability. All the districts in Uganda - the best of them could only contribute a maximum of 15 percent of the budget they spend in the district and they are not many in that category. So, we are carrying the weight of districts, at the centre. A stage must come when the weight will fall on the shoulders of the districts themselves.  

For example, in Zimbabwe the local governments fund their programmes. If they borrow from the central government they pay back. This is the stage that I would want us to see at some point and certainly, we must work for it.

The Local Governments Act obviously translated that Article 179 into Article 1 of the Local Government Act declaring clearly the objectives of this Act:

“To give full effect to the decentralization functions, powers, responsibilities and services at all levels of local government.  

To ensure democratic participation in and control of decision making by the people concerned.

To establish a democratic political and gender sensitive administrative set-up in local governments.

To ensure sources of revenue and financial accountability and 

To provide for election of local government.”

These again have stimulated our population to being participants not only in democracy but also in wishing to make decisions that affect their welfare, including social services.

Therefore, I am not surprised that there is mounting pressure that people access resources. But at the same time I want this House to realize that if there is one egg on the table and thousands want to access that egg, the more that come to that table will not improve on the size of the egg. Therefore, the objective initially of decentralization has been to deliver services but the sustainability of those services will depend on the productivity of the districts and the economic transformation of the districts. The district is a unit of planning and the sub-county must be a unit of development and the village the unit of transformation, in that order. If that is the case, we shall move.  

I want specifically to refer to number 9, “The district of Budaka consisting of Budaka county, Kakoro, Kabwangasi, Kirika and Kadama sub-counties in the present Pallisa District, having headquarters at Budaka”.  I want to inform this House that there have been very extensive discussions, consultations and this formula was arrived at after all the minds were opened and all the ears listening and this is what we have.

We bear in mind that the changing of the boundaries of the constituencies will be handled by the Electoral Commission. The Electoral Commission has already been informed of this proposal and in their review of the constituencies the necessary amendments of the boundaries will be made.  

The list we have here –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Again, Mr Minister you need to help the members follow up this Budaka thing. You said Budaka County - these are having four sub-counties?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, four sub-counties in addition to Budaka County.

THE SPEAKER: Which county are they from?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: The first two are from Butebo County and the latter two are from Kibuku.  

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you think if you mentioned that, it would have been clear?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Yes, perfection is pursued. I would like to perfect that with your formula -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: There is a clarification sought.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I wish I were able to finish first.

THE SPEAKER: Allow him to make his statement before  you come in.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, I am not stopping my colleague hon. Steven Mallinga from talking, I am sure he will be given chance to talk. I would wish that I am allowed to finish my presentation and then clarification can be sought.  

Some of the proposed districts have arisen because the mother districts have in some way neglected them. I would like to pick an example of Bukanga and Isingiro in Mbarara District. You do not have to look for too much evidence to see that these two areas have not been catered for as much as would have been the case. It has been a big district and now the agreement that they can look after themselves better seems to make sense and hence this decision.

There are two proposals I want to mention, which are not in this resolution because I know the sentiments of the members of this House who have been associated with those proposals. There is the case of Okoro in Nebbi District. Nebbi District in the first place is quite a compact district, it is actually one of the unique ones and the headquarters seem to be equidistant to almost to all the parts. 

Okoro is one of the areas in Uganda today where you still have plagues and when people complain that really they have not been looked after. You consider it, you look at it and since we could not put this case in this resolution, I want to promise the citizens of Uganda from that area that the highest considerations will be made. The leadership from there will be given access to talk to the highest authorities so that we can understand why this has been the case.

Creating districts only for simple purposes of solving an area, which has been neglected, I think should be avoided because too many districts also where they are not needed can be a problem to us. I also want to mention the case of Bukedea in Kumi District. On that again the highest consideration has been made but it is also one of the areas where the leadership will be consulted up to the highest level to see whether it can be considered or if the problem that there is can actually be corrected because again Kumi is not that of a big district. The reasons why there should be such agitation should also be looked at thoroughly.

I would like to conclude by recognising the team from my ministry, headed by the Permanent Secretary with whom I work –(Applause)- not only that you have a burden of receiving demands for district creation but you also receive counties. There are people asking for municipalities and there are people asking for sub-counties. We had to write a circular arising from a request by the Electoral Commission that no new creations should be made because they will confuse the Electoral Commission with polling stations and so on. Therefore, the pressure is there and we caution ourselves by responding as much as possible.

We are involved in capacity building for districts. The ones we have announced will have to be addressed. The problem of capacity building - we capacity build one generation of politicians and the next election takes nearly three quarters of them in some cases. Therefore, we start all over again and we will continue to do that because services can only be delivered by people who know what to do. We do not only build capacity among the politicians but we also create capacity among civil servants.

I would also take this occasion to inform Members of Parliament that compensation for graduated tax is being processed so when you go back home assure your constituencies that the graduated tax will be replaced with money from the centre. However, what is important - and I want all members to be part of this - is that in the existing arrangement as of before July 1st, each sub-county was retaining a percentage of the collections of graduated tax and those collections would also go lower down to the parishes and to the villages and of course part of it would come to the district. 

Now all the money is coming from the centre. So we have got to be extremely careful that the money reaches the lowest level of the village in the way it has been happening and in this case we have to be extra vigilant. In the ministry we are already working out a formula of distribution using our own ministry and of course the statutory body of the Local Government Finance Commission, but we also need your support because if you do not follow up the irrigation, to use my Prime Minister’s expression, then the toes of the system down there will not keep alive.

With those remarks, I request Parliament that you support these proposals and we pass this resolution. I thank you whole-heartedly. (Applause)

3.15
DR STEVEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The honourable minister mentioned specifically No. 9, Budaka, and among other things that he mentioned was that Kakolo and Kabwangasi were included in the formation of this district. This morning I received a document of protest from the citizens of those two sub-counties, I brought it to the attention of the President and I think he communicated to the honourable minister that those two sub-counties were to revert to Butebo County. However, I was surprised that the minister at this stage included them in the formation of Budaka District. 

Therefore, I seek clarification. These two sub-counties are originally from Butebo and they do not want - I have a document signed by the citizens of those two sub-counties. This document is signed and written by the citizens of Kakolo and Kabwangasi. They reject to be moved to Budaka, they want to stay in Butebo and remain in Pallisa District. I lay it on the Table.

3.18
MS AANIMU ANGUPALE (Woman Representative, Arua): Mr Speaker, recognizing that the primary purpose of creation of a district is to bring services nearer to the people; aware that Terego and Maracha counties with a population size of about 400,000 people has a vast land surface of 16,812 kilometre squares, are desirous of becoming one district;

Further aware that Arua District is the second largest district in Uganda next to Mbarara with 36 sub-counties, recognizing that the people of Terego and Maracha counties held a joint meeting on 10th this month 2005 and resolved that Kubala be the headquarters of the new district to be created, I beg to amend the motion on the creation of districts. Item 3(ii) should become item 1(xv). I beg to move the amendment.

MS TIPERU NUSURA: Seconded.

MS ANGUPALE: Mr Speaker, Maracha and Terego counties consist of 14 sub-counties and are in one of the biggest districts. If it is created immediately it will leave the other district with over 25 sub-counties. If we are to create more districts to bring services closer to the people, I really want to inform my colleagues, Members of Parliament that Kubala District would have taken the first priority to become a district because services will be brought nearer to the people.  Instead of pushing it to 2006/2007 Financial Year, I believe that districts should take off now in this 2005/2006 financial year.  

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to be guided on whether or not the amendment introduced by hon. Aanimu Angupale does not offend Article 93(1) of the Constitution.  

THE SPEAKER: Well, the motion as moved by hon. Angupale as I heard it - she is saying that this 2(ii) on page 2 should become the first on page 1 so that if there are funds already earmarked for (1), let that district take it. That is the motion.  The motion is that already funds are there; it is only putting that it becomes No. 1 priority.

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, this amendment seeks to bring item 3(ii) as item 1(xv). Therefore, bringing it in this financial year will have financial implications on this year’s budget.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable minister, do you accept the amendment?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, in the Certificate of Financial Implications that brought, we are considering for this financial year only 14. There is no way on this Floor we can generate more money to cover the 15.

3.25
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Lira Municipality, Lira): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the minister for giving us 22 new districts and I believe that we as Ugandans would want to administer our districts with efficiency and effectiveness and to unite Ugandans. In Lango we have a saying that “Apok cinge eguna” which means that the one who dishes out always leaves something bigger for himself. I would like to draw the attention of the minister to the first category of the districts.  

Mbarara District alone has three in category one, that is (i), (ii), (iii). Under category (i) there are only two districts for the whole of Northern Uganda, that is, the district of Koboko and the district of Amolatal. You are all aware of the problems Northern Uganda has. We have all been burdened as Parliament by how we can facilitate development in Northern Uganda and we had even thought of affirmative action to enhance development in Northern Uganda. For us to walk out of this House having given Mbarara District alone three new districts in category 1 and to give only two for the whole of Northern Uganda, it does not portray a correct image. 

I, therefore, wish to plead with the honourable minister and with the Government generally that they should treat Northern Uganda with a lot of compassion. I would have wished that Northern Uganda be given the majority in category 1.

I also want to draw your attention to the Mamdani Report. Mamdani did report that Oyam County was always, from the colonial times, a sub-district. Moroto was from the colonial times a sub-district, and so was Kioga. What has happened to these? Are these ministers and their bureaucrats not reading reports, which are relevant to their sections? If they did, they would have made our work easy. Certainly, I am going to get out of this House very angry because Mbarara as a district has got three new districts and Northern Uganda has only got two, with all the pains and with all the suffering that we have. 

I beg to plead with the honourable minister and particularly the Minister of Finance - there are ways we normally save money in the process of administration and, therefore, I wish to plead that Maracha and Terego immediately be put under category 1 and that Oyam County should, before December, also be put under category 1 because of the unique problems of these districts. 

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I would like to clarify to members that Mbarara for quite a long time was opposed to splitting and Mbarara is the largest district in the country. The districts that have been created have been sub-districts since colonial times. The scenario of Kabingo District is the old Kikagati sub-district and Ibanda sub-district. When people got districts, we never complained. When they are trying to get districts, they should look at the viability of their districts but not shoot our viable districts down.

THE SPEAKER: Please, allow me to interrupt to introduce visitors who are in the public gallery this afternoon. They are students of St George High School located in Kabuusu, Lubaga constituency of hon. Ken Lukyamuzi. You are welcome. 

In addition, we have pupils and teachers of Rio Primary School also in Lubaga North. You are welcome. 

We also have the councilors and LC chairpersons or members from Busiki County, Iganga District. (Applause)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. A few minutes ago, while my honourable colleague was moving a motion to amend the minister’s motion, in other words to accommodate her new district, I learnt from the hon. Minister, Mrs Hope Mwesigye, and the hon. Minister for Local Government that there is no financial accommodation this year. How come my honourable minister is making a financial commitment about the new districts in the next year on a budget, which has yet to be approved by this August House? How come? 

When we talked about it he said, “No, there is no financial commitment”. MTN is not a budget, which has been approved by Parliament. Are we trying to mislead my honourable colleagues that they are going to get districts when next financial year there may be no money at all?  

THE SPEAKER: Is there an answer to that question?

MS TIPERU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like the Minister of Finance to give me clarification because if you see the motive of hon. Angupale Aanimu’s motion, it is to the effect that the demand for districts is actually a very serious demand and the minister has put it clear in his preamble that it brings services nearer to people. I have had the opportunity to traverse many of the districts in this country and when you go to most of these areas, the situation is bad, especially in Northern Uganda. We are suffering. 

I do not want to look like a regional chief to lobby for a particular region, but the North in particular has a problem - the issue of security. Kony almost takes over a district because of the vast nature of that particular district. When you look at districts that are in phase 2, the majority are all districts hailing from Northern Uganda. If we are talking about equitable distribution of services to our people whom we all love as Ugandans, is it possible for all the 22 districts to start at the same time or if possible maybe effective December? 

You are talking about effective 1 July 2005. I want clarification from hon. Kabwegyere and Ministers of Finance who are here, is it possible for all the 22 districts to start effective December instead of July that you are proposing so that all Ugandans feel good? Look at the situation of a district like Dokolo, a former Chairman of the Movement Caucus, his district is the other type.
  
THE SPEAKER: Could the minister clarify on that?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, I really would like to appeal to Members of this House to recognise that by the time one arrived at these numbers, a lot of haggling and counter-haggling with the Ministry of Finance took place. There is a limit to how much your budget, the one you are going to discuss, can be stretched. I want to tell you, honourable members that I did not want to present two lists. I would have been happy to present one list but after considering what the situation was, as you recall in the Budget we had only seven - when the Minister of Finance presented the Budget there were only seven, now we have 14. 

We have doubled the number again through pressure. We had planned for seven but now we have 14 and not only that, we are talking of seven and that is all. However, the numbers now - you can see we have eight in the second category. 

I did not want to bore the House by listing the many other cases, which are still being processed. So, please honourable members you know your country and one should be clear that creating a district does not clear the area of poverty automatically. There is no immediate relationship at all. Services may come but poverty is a bigger problem to fight.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members let us exhaust one issue and then come to the other. I think the issue of hon. Tiperu, which she wanted you to clear is that instead of starting some on 1st July, they should all start at the end of December so that they share – I think that is what she was saying.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Again, this is for information of members. This resolution and the Budget talks of “with effect from July 1st” but on July 1st or indeed after we pass this resolution, there will be no headquarters in Kabong. There will be no accounting officer there; there will be no councillors and no chairperson –(Interjections)- please, I am not accepting information. There is a process immediately after this resolution has been passed that you start putting those in place. For example, already the money for some of these districts has been sent but we have informed those districts that –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, my honourable colleague has moved a motion for a resolution of Parliament, which we would like to pass and once we pass this resolution, it is a commitment on the part of the Government to honour it. He has given us two lists; the No. 1 list is of the districts to come into effect this month, the second list in the next financial year. Is it in order for my honourable colleague to move a motion for a financial commitment to a budget, which has yet to be approved by this August House? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, the motion is that those districts, which he said would be effective next year, will be included in the Budget and the Government will present it to you. That is what it means. (Applause)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I was concluding my information that to get all these arrangements in place will actually take time. The officials of the new district will handle money and this will probably be around October. Therefore, if the number were to be increased, which is not possible, they will even have the greater task of putting in place the machinery for December. Therefore, it is not possible. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INDUSTRY (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I represent Pallisa County in this House. I want to confirm that what the Minister of Local Government reported to this House. We held consultations with all the stakeholders and the position in the resolution is the final position that the people of Pallisa are supporting -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hold on, please.

MS NAMUYANGU: Mr Speaker, my honourable colleague –(Interruption)

MR OPANGE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is not my intention to give a point of order to the honourable minister. I am saying let people of Pallisa County and Butebo County move to Mbale. Hon. Namuyangu was the representative of Budaka County and Kibuku County and hon. Mallinga was the representative of Pallisa County and Butebo County. We disagreed on these things as stipulated by the petition from Pallisa. Is she in order to confuse and mislead the House that the people of Pallisa have agreed on the position of the minister? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you substantiate what you have stated?

MS NAMUYANGU: Mr Speaker in that meeting we had hon. Wabudeya and Prof. Kabwegyere as witnesses. They will confirm that what is in the resolution today is what was agreed on. The first person to propose was Dr Mallinga and the second person was hon. Opange. I am surprised that today they are coming with a different position –(Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, is the honourable minister in order to mislead the House by telling lies? The business of creating districts and making boundaries of districts lies here in this House not outside Parliament. Consultations in Pallisa and Butebo were done by representatives of the Ministry of Local Government and they came up with a recommendation, which was presented here as a White Paper on the 6 July 2005. 

In the recommendation therein they wanted Pallisa divided along these lines: they wanted Pallisa divided into Butebo and Kibuku and this has a historical significance. Is the honourable minister in order to say that the people of Butebo and Pallisa were consulted when the people were not consulted? This was a meeting and a discussion among politicians who are not really – is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Let us move this way. Is it true that you had that meeting in Mbale and agreed as she has stated?

DR MALLINGA: We had that meeting but we were subject to the consultation of the people who had to make up their mind on which way they want to go.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker and honourable members, there are many wishes and I have never succeeded in getting what I wish. The reality is that the meeting in Mbale was a culmination of many consultations at the highest level. Even after Mbale there has been continuous consultations, including consultations we had this morning. Therefore, if hon. Mallinga has not got what he wanted, the circumstances are that he has to go along with the rest of Uganda. 

MR OMARA: Mr Speaker, it is very important for this House to take a decision on a very clear and well-informed position. What we have for these new districts in Pallisa is a situation in which three Members of Parliament coming from the same district are fundamentally disagreeing. We are now asking the House to create a new district. The creation of a new district may actually bring conflicts, disharmony and war. In view of this, Parliament should not take a decision on this matter. We should allow the Members of Parliament –(Interruption)

MRS RAINER: Last Sunday we met His Excellency the President. The delegation consisted of 150 citizens form Pallisa District. Among those people were hon. Opange, hon. Mallinga, hon. Namuyangu, hon. Wabudeya, hon. Prof. Kabwegyere and hon. Ogola When we met His Excellency the President he had a map at the table. He looked at the map and he started without even saying anything. He said that Kabwangasi and Kakoro were very far away from Pallisa headquarters. He requested us to compromise in that meeting. He said that Kibale should remain with Pallisa District while Kabwangasi and Kakoro should go to Budaka. 

We are faced with a dilemma as people of Kibuku. We had not asked for a district but he had wanted some sub-counties from Kibuku to help in the formation of Budaka District. Therefore, he requested the people of Kibuku to give him Kadama, which is near to Budaka, as well as Kirika sub-county. We agreed; even hon. Mallinga agreed. I am very surprised that he is now disowning his own. The best evidence will be for His Excellency to come here -(Laughter). Since His Excellency cannot sit in here, I would request hon. Wabudeya who was there to testify on behalf of His Excellency. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Therefore, it means these four sub-counties from Butebo to Kibuku will form another county.

MRS RAINER: They are joining Budaka to form a new district.

THE SPEAKER: Two districts cannot share a county. Are they going to form a new county to join Budaka?

MRS RAINER: No, Sir, may be let the minister –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, in my presentation I referred to Article 63(5), which refers to the Electoral Commission’s review of boundaries. The Government and the Electoral Commission will undertake the necessary actions to make sure the new sub-counties joins Budaka.

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence. I think to be fair it maybe better for us to clear districts, which do not have any controversies -(Applause)- I would really urge that those districts that still have uncertainties and problems to be held back and consultations go on. 

MRS RAINER: I am rising on a point of order.  Honourable members coming from Teso region, can you listen to me, please? They have an agenda to take Pallisa as part of Teso region. It is in black and white. This is why they are trying to postpone everything. Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is imputing an improper motive. He was saying that there is a controversy on some of these districts. The minister was only saying that the way forward is to deal with those districts with no controversy. He was not talking about taking over Pallisa to Teso.
  
MS AMONGI: Procedure.

THE SPEAKER: No, it was hon. Omara Atubo who was contributing, but some people came in to make clarifications. Let him conclude.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, the purpose of creating new districts is not about bringing services nearer to the people, but to contain tribal sentiments and create jobs. You are creating districts by dividing a group of people who should be in one county and taking them to another county. Somebody will contest for leadership from there because he belongs to that ethnic group, this group is a minority. These are realities of politics in Uganda.  

Therefore, Members of Parliament from Pallisa have demonstrated very clearly that they have not fully agreed. They have agreed on the principle of creating new districts. The Government accepted the principle of creation of new districts, but the boundary continues to be a problem. Let us give them time to agree. You know that sometimes it is better in situations where people do not agree to give them time to move towards a well-settled and agreed position than to rush them through. 

I would, therefore, Mr Speaker, agree with hon. Mukula that we move ahead and put a question on district by district. I thought this was not going to be as serious as Article 105. I thought the atmosphere of Article 105 was finished. We are now on another Article all together but this seems to be even more serious than Article 105. Can I conclude, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER:  Yes, conclude.

MR ATUBO: It is very important for this House to resolve two issues. One, in the creation of new districts let us not create new problems in certain areas. We notice that there are problems; we can give them time to reconcile and come up with agreed position.  
 
The second one is that we have two categories of districts we are creating. One, which is going to take immediate constitutional effect this financial year and a second category, which is going to take effect next financial year. You know very well that the life of this Parliament is ending somewhere around March or April. I am just wondering whether by creating new districts, which is in words, it is going to bind the next Parliament and the next government. 

We should not do certain things in this Parliament, which will tie the hands of the next government. The next government will be embarrassed by saying, “It was the other government and the other Parliament, which passed it. We are not going to accept.”  

We must get a middle position and the middle position is this: if this government is serious in creating all these new districts and getting services nearer to the people, it must take a bit of time for them to be phased and to have bases. You are trying to have a child get out from its father’s house and get a new home. Surely, it takes a bit of time even to get a new house, cooking pots and other things. 

I think the wisdom of this Parliament dictates that all these new districts should be approved together. They should have an effect at an appropriate time before this Parliament expires. All of them should take effect at such a time that we do not tie the next government and embarrass the next government and the next Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: No, I think for that position we have the mandate to legislate as we deem fit. Otherwise, if you think in terms of your mandate ending there, we would say particular laws would be operating on particular governments. Therefore, we can even make regulation for districts to be effective next year.  If another Parliament comes and wants to change then it can use its mandate to do that. However, that should not worry you.

MS ANGUPALE: There was a motion on the Floor of this House and it is about to be taken up by events. I had moved an amendment –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The problem is that somebody read Article 93 that it was imposing a charge for which the Government had not planned. What I did was to ask the minister whether he could own it, because if he does then it solves the problem. This is the hurdle we still have. Otherwise, I asked the minister, “Do you want to own it so that one does not read to us that Article 93?”

MS ANGUPALE: Mr Speaker, I want to get clarification from the Minister of Finance as to whether he had ever conducted a financial implications survey of the new districts, which are created? I want to find out from the minister.

THE SPEAKER: No, we are jumping here and there. Unfortunately, nobody is moving a motion. I expected hon. Omara Atubo to move a motion. 

MS ANGUPALE: Mr Speaker, to be on the honest side, the Financial Implications Certificate laid on the Table by the minister was on the old seven districts but not on the new seven districts.

THE SPEAKER: This is not going to help your case. Your case is helped if he adopts your motion. We want to see how we can help you to have your motion accepted by the minister. When you want to make a contribution you stand and then the Chair will recognise you.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, I was rather reluctant to say this but let me say it: the programme that largely runs local governments and all the programmes we have in our constituencies are under the Local Government Development Programme II. This money, Shs 165 million, 100 of it is a grant from the World Bank. The previous one, the LGDP I, did so well and we were given a bonus of Shs 100 million and a loan of Shs 50 million. We have added Shs 15 million to make it Shs 165 million. This is what makes things move in our districts.

In the recent review of Local Government Development Programme, we were saying we are spending too much money on public administration. This was the complaint. The technique of handling this was that instead of having this large number coming in one year, tactically we thought we could have a new instalment and then consider another instalment next year. Therefore, this is not something that I had wanted for public consumption because we have to deal with our partners, and if our partners abandon us, then we have a problem. 

I have already negotiated for the next programme, which should be probably Shs 300 million. I argued that Uganda is hungrier now than it was three years ago. So, if we do not handle some of these niceties carefully, we could ask for districts we cannot run. I am making this plea to this House. 

Finally, I really want to plead with our friends from Pallisa. The districts that we are creating are not for the few individuals who are Members of Parliament. This should be understood. Our own objectives and our own aspirations are respected. In our negotiations, this has been part of our approach. Let us not jeopardise other interests and in this case have resolutions amended. We are talking about dealing with the whole of Uganda not with one area or a few individuals who may have their wishes not realised.  

THE SPEAKER: There is hon. Omara Atubo’s suggestion. Do you have any comment on that?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I have a comment, Mr Speaker. The Certificate of Financial Implications that I brought catered for 14 districts this financial year. Whatever we are going to prepare for in the July 2006 is going to be part of the normal administration. However, in terms of creating districts, trying to work for the town councils, the CAO’s, the RDC’s - all that it takes to administer a district. If we take in all of this, even if you start in January they are talking of 22 districts and that would not be easy to follow. Let us all realise that you may be hungry but if you take in too much, you can be suffocated.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere for giving way. I am really appreciating all the efforts you are making to make members understand. The problem is that there is no guarantee that the remaining districts will ever be operationalised when those ones from Mbarara are first on the list. So, who will push for the remaining ones?  

The clarification I am seeking is: Prof. Kabwegyere Tarsis, which criteria did you use that has put some districts ahead of others other than these local disagreements, which exist? Which formula did you use to put Mbarara first, second, third and others up to number 20?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, if we have lost hope in the future then we might as well do something else and leave Parliament. We are here making laws for the future. What evidence is there to show that the Speaker here will preside over this House and will pass resolutions that the next Parliament cannot implement? This is absolutely out of this world. Why are going to discuss the Budget then, and who is going to implement this budget? This budget is going to be appropriated between now and end of June. So, if you are not sure whether you will be paid your salary of next month, you better pack up and look for a different employment.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this appeared to have been a simple –(Interruption)

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of the district has first two issues. The first one is the category that is being contested. It would be right for this House to dispose of districts that have not yet resolved within themselves and are still having contemplations. I think that is very important.

The second issue is that there are districts that have not yet agreed on the headquarters. If you look at the first category, you find Manafa District has not yet agreed on the headquarters but the other two under phase II have agreed on the headquarters. Therefore, the criteria should be very clear. The districts that have agreed on the headquarters should be disposed of. Those that have not yet agreed on the headquarters can come under the second phase and we proceed.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us vote on each of these districts.  

4.11
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to move a motion for amendment of the resolution of Parliament for the division of Pallisa District.  

Basing on Article 179(4) of the Constitution, which says: “Any measure for the alteration of the boundaries of or the creation of the district or administrative units shall be based on the necessity for the effective administration and the need to bring services closer to the people and it may take into account the means of communication, geographical features, density of population, economic viability and the wishes of the people concerned”. That is the clause on which I am basing my amendment, whose motion reads as follows:   

“WHEREAS the District of Pallisa has been recommended for the splitting to create a new district called Budaka; 

AND WHEREAS the Cabinet brought a White Paper dated 6 July 2005 to serve as a note to move a motion for the resolution of Parliament under Article 179 of the Constitution to create new districts, which allowed the split of Pallisa District to create Budaka District consisting of Budaka and Kibuku county. This mode of division was acceptable to the people of Pallisa County and Butebo County.  

WHEREAS political leaders of Pallisa District met with the President at State lodge in Mbale and he suggested we bring the two counties together, the people of Pallisa and Butebo County as per the petition presented before you rejected the demarcation; 

WHEREAS the same White Paper was withdrawn and amended without clear reason; 

WE, THEREFORE, resolve that Pallisa District be split as per the White Paper, which was produced after comprehensive research by the technical officers from the Ministry of Local Government. 

The new District of Budaka be created to include the counties of Budaka and Kibuku, which fulfils Article 179 of the Constitution and is acceptable to the people of Pallisa and Butebo county.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the territory as marked by the minister in his resolution should be changed to be a territory comprising of Budaka and Kibuku.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, as I said at the beginning, there had been many consultations but it looks like these consultations did not come to a compromise. I beg to move an amendment by removing No. 9, Budaka District.  

MR EKANYA: Motion –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, I think we have to dispose of the first motion by hon. Opange Louis who was changing the territory and later we may move to yours. We cannot dispose of the two at the same time. When you moved the motion, his motion was there. Now you cannot pre-empt it by saying no. It is a problem. Maybe we should refer this matter to the appropriate committee. There are so many proposals.

MR EKANYA: Motion, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But we have not disposed of hon. Opange’s motion.

MR EKANYA: No, I wanted to move that the matter be referred to the appropriate committee.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there are so many proposals here and there.

MR EKANYA: Motion, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But we have not disposed of hon. Opange’s motion.

MR EKANYA: No, I want to move that the matter be referred to the appropriate committee.

HON. MEMBERS: No!

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members!

MAJ. KINOBE: Mr Speaker, this is not the first time Parliament is moving such a motion. There are precedents. I remember last Parliament we had a similar problem over Koboko. We only stayed Koboko, which had problem and it is appearing again. Since we have that precedent, why don’t we follow that precedent that where there are no problems we move ahead so that we do not hold -(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are wasting a lot of time on this issue. We vote on each one and leave -(Interjections)- I am putting a question on the district consisting of Ibanda County having its headquarters at Mbarara. That is the first proposal.  

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE SPEAKER: The position according to the Constitution is that the resolution must be carried by a-half of all members. This means they must be 148. The position as I have it is as follows: the abstentions are four; those for are 129 -(Interruption)

MRS AKWERO: Guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MRS AKWERO: Mr Speaker, as we wait for more Members of Parliament to come in, allow us to contribute to the motion.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I am aware that some of our colleagues who may not be in the Chamber are within the precincts of Parliament. I wish to propose that you suspend proceedings for some time as our colleagues find their way to the Chamber. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since the Constitution requires a specific majority, would it not be prudent to have a clear counting system because when you look at the numbers in the Chamber we seem to be much more than the numbers counted.  Would it not be better, therefore, to apply a more specific method of counting? That is what I propose.

THE SPEAKER: So you are suggesting there could be a fault in the counting? 

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, I seek for your guidance. We are going to finally pass a resolution where we would need 50 percent plus. I was hoping that for the purposes of assessing whether there is any controversy for any district you would get the numbers just to get the feel that that district has support. We shall need the 50 percent plus when we come to the final resolution.

THE SPEAKER: Instead of using roll call method, which we use in Constitution amendment, we can use the counting method. The roll call method is a bit complicated because you have to call a person who is not here.  

MR KAWANGA: Mr Speaker, I want to avoid a situation where we look like we have no trust in the systems we have established. We have done the counting - unless there is a feeling that the counting has some fault.  

THE SPEAKER: This is what he is saying.  

MR KAWANGA: We should repeat the counting rather than changing systems –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: How do we count?

MR KAWANGA: I suggest that let members on each row put up their hands, count them and then take the second row, the third row and the last row.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us do that.  

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I recall very well when the motion failed in Parliament a rescission took place. So, what is the position now as far as Ibanda District is concerned? 

THE SPEAKER: There is no position. I have not declared any side. However, somebody is saying that the counting has not been accurate. So, let us count again.   

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE SPEAKER: The position after this new counting is as follows: the abstentions are two; none against, and those for are 185. The ayes have it. (Applause).

(Question agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Kabingo -(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee of the district had agreed on a place called Kabingo. However, we found a better place, public land, which is called Isingiro. I beg to change it to Isingiro District. The resolution from the district is already with the minister and I have a copy.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I have information in the ministry that there was a decision to name the district Isingiro. I have no objection.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I put the question to Isingiro District.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE SPEAKER: The position is as follows: one abstention, none against, and those for are 175. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, we have 22 districts and apparently the controversy is surrounding only two, that is, Budaka and Tororo districts. I want to move that we pronounce ourselves once on the rest of the other districts and defer Tororo and Budaka. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is that okay?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, the next voting will be on all other districts, minus Budaka and Tororo. Let me read the names of the districts –(Interruption)

MR SEBAGGALA: There are some districts that petitioned your office, how are we going to handle their petitions?  

THE SPEAKER: I am going to read the districts: Kiruhura District, Kaabong District, Kaliro District, Koboko District, Butaleja District, Nakaseke District, Amuria District, Mityana District, Manafwa District, Amolatar District, Bukwa District; a new district of Maracha and Terego; a new district of Kilak and Nwoya, Oyam District, Abim District, Busiki District, Dokolo District, and Buliisa District. Let us again use the same method as I put the question to the listed districts.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members the decision of the House on the resolution to create the new districts, which were read other than Budaka and Tororo is as follows: the abstentions are five, none against, and those for are 181. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

4.40
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): I would like to thank the minister and the whole House for the process we have gone through. I am referring to Article 179, paragraph 2, which the minister in his motion duly quoted. Among other things it states that the creation of districts takes into consideration the aspirations and the wishes of the people. I beg to report that on the 4th of April 2005 a resolution, minute No. 92005 was unanimously passed in Kumi District to create Bukedea District and Ngora Town Council. That resolution was duly passed to the Ministry of Local Government on 23 May 2005.

I have just heard the hon. Minister of Local Government submitting that consultations are going on. Indeed there were a number of consultations and that is why the district council passed that resolution in Kumi, which I have quoted, unanimously. I am still disturbed. I want to seek clarification from the minister as to what is happening. What is the bottleneck for the creation of Bukedea District? I wish I could lay that resolution on the Table but it is with my colleague hon. John Peter Esele. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, hon. Epetait for giving way. The same reasons for which we have accorded several districts district status apply to Bukedea as a county. I would like to inform my colleague that in terms of administration, there is an expanse of land in Bukedea County that is deprived of effective administration. Therefore, I feel it is befitting of this Parliament to exercise the same standards that have been exercised in the creation of new districts that we have approved, to all the other deserving areas of this country. 

I would like to believe that reason is going to prevail beyond and above all other factors. Mr Speaker, the people of Bukedea have yearned for a district status for a long time and I feel it is only fitting for this Parliament to consider their plea.
  
THE SPEAKER: Why don’t we exhaust this Bukedea –(Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to move that the problems of Tororo and Pallisa be referred to the relevant Parliamentary committee.

THE SPEAKER: Well, the motion is that we refer matters affecting Budaka and Tororo to the committee because the minister has brought this matter to us. Therefore, the member is moving that our committee should examine the matters affecting Tororo and Budaka and then report to us for necessary action.

MRS RAINER: No, I would like to move a motion stating that Budaka District should be created as a new district consisting of Budaka County in the present Pallisa District with its headquarters in Budaka. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The reason we did not include Budaka and Tororo was the controversies that have been exhibited and we need to find a solution to them. So, for you to move another motion when other controversies have not been solved does not help us. Maybe we should refer this matter to our committee. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The issues of Tororo and Budaka are referred now to the Committee on Local Government to examine and report to us within – I think we should give them time. Within two weeks? However, you are going on recess.

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, as it might be necessary to visit the districts, I think we need one month.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, within one month.  The committee will report within one month. However, let us deal with Bukedea, the issue that came first. Honourable minister, do you have anything to say? 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In my presentation at the beginning I mentioned specifically two areas. One was Okoro and the other one was Bukedea. Again I said there are consultations and it looked like the two areas, that is, Nebbi District and Kumi, were of a size that could actually remain together and the decision was that the door is not closed. We can discuss the applications even in the course of next year or this year going to the next year. However, further consultations are made at the highest level. That is what I said at the beginning and the presentations on Bukedea on the Floor add to what consultations that can be made. I will call upon all those members who have spoken to give that information to the ministry and then we will consider these two cases in their own right. The door is not closed.

THE SPEAKER: No, let us dispose of the Bukedea thing. You have heard the response of the Minister -(Interruption)- let us finish this. The Bukedea thing is that you continue with consultations.

4.50
DR PETER ESELE (Bukedea County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I was a very excited person until 1 O’clock this afternoon. The position that the minister gave is quite different from the position I had known all along until the minister distributed his motion. The people of Bukedea have been requesting for a district since 1999 and the submission was made to the Ministry of Local Government with the proposed demarcations. Since 2001 the proposed demarcations have been in operation, they have been used both for administrative purposes and for elections. 

In 2003 Bukedea renewed their interest for a district status. Several meetings were held in 2004. All the sub-county councils in the county, actually passed resolutions for a district status, and this year Kumi District Local Council IV passed a resolution to allow Bukedea attain a district status and this was passed over to the Ministry of Local Government. Kumi has been a district since 1974, that is, 31 years. With an increase in the population there is a necessity for another district to be created. 

The position as I knew was that up to yesterday evening Bukedea was going to be on the list for consideration for the next financial year together with Busiki, Dokolo and Bulisa. At 10.00 O’clock this morning I spoke to His Excellency the President who assured me that Bukedea would be on the list for next financial year. When the minister distributed the motion, Bukedea was missing. You can understand my disappointment. So I would like an explanation, which the people of Bukedea can understand. Why has this happened?

THE SPEAKER: Why can’t we refer this issue also to the committee and the minister will work with the committee on this one and report within one month?

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, in accordance with rule 42 on amendment of motions, I beg to move that since Budaka District, which was under the first phase and has been deferred to the committee, the District of Oyam be moved in the place of Budaka District. I beg to move.

MR PAJOBO: Following the motion moved by hon. Betty Amongi, I would like to say that instead of Oyam District it should be Maracha, which is next to Tororo, to replace it. (Laughter) Thank you. 

4.53
MRS AKWERO ODWONG (Woman Representative, Kitgum): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand on the Floor of this Parliament with a heavy heart because I have to register the bitterest disappointment of the people in the proposed district of Lamwo. I say this in all fairness and honesty, because the proposed district of Lamwo has a running boundary with Southern Sudan of over 200 miles. It has over 5,000 square kilometers of land and a population of over 160,000 people. It is an area heavily infested by rebel activities and we believe that opening it up by creating a district would help tame the intrusion and insecurity, apart from service delivery for the people. 

The quest for Lamwo district has been long overdue since the Sixth Parliament when we petitioned the President and the Minister of Local Government. It is very unfair. Sometimes we think it is salt being rubbed into our wounds; the wounds of people in the camps whose cry and appeal is not listened to! 

I stand to once again appeal to this august House bearing in mind that the minister has made a commitment of negotiating for the next programme, which I believe will constitute the district of Lamwo county. I say this in all fairness and honesty. For God and my country and the people of Lamwo district.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, since the minister did not conclude these districts, I would suggest that all those with complaints concerning constituting districts should take them to the committee with all the background information. It maybe a bit difficult for us but when it reports back in one months’ time, it will have considered and addressed all your cases. 

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, there is a motion on the Floor, which was moved by hon. Betty Amongi -(Interjections)- hon. Betty Amongi moved a motion - no he was trying to spoil it, he was not amending. Please, this is a serious matter. It is not a joke. I think we should respect ourselves. We the people of Oyam want to thank the Government for having brought Oyam as a district to this Parliament. We also want to thank our colleagues, Members of Parliament, for expeditiously handling this matter and recognising the need of the people of Oyam for a district.  

Hon. Betty Amongi’s motion did not arise from nowhere. His Excellency the President promised the people of Oyam a district when he visited Oyam in 1998. The matter was brought to him because the issue had already been raised in another forum. We sent a resolution in 1999, unfortunately it got lost. We would not be talking about Oyam now; it would have been created as a district in the Sixth Parliament. 

Now that an opportunity has arisen for this wrong to be corrected, it is only proper for this House to handle this matter sympathetically and move to item 9 under 1. We know as a matter of fact that money has already been provided for. There is no district whatsoever with the people of Oyam as to the location, demarcation et cetera of the district. I beg you that this House handles this matter expeditiously and sympathetically so that Oyam becomes a full district as of 1st July this year. I pray.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is this House, with your guidance, that has a committee that is going to discuss the three cases arising out of the discussion we have had today. I have no doubt that a solution will be found for the case of Budaka and Tororo. So to assume that there is now a gap that one can take advantage of is not necessarily being too hopeful. I would rather accept the situation as it is until the time comes because I have four proposals not only for those already in the resolution but some new ones, which are saying they have found a room.

I would like to plead with my good friends hon. Amongi and hon. Wacha that this motion be withdrawn and that they know for sure that we share a few moments of discussion before we could get them on board. I wish that we maintained that harmony. Thank you.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I remember during the debate you guided the House that in view of the fact that some districts, which were put in category two need to be given due attention at this point in time, could there be a way of delaying operating the districts under category 1 so that they all start together in December? That way all the 22 districts will become operational by December. We are certainly not happy to see Mbarara categorised as No. 1, 2 and 3 while others of Oyam and Dokolo are all in category 2. It does not augur well with us. Can some compromise be made?

THE SPEAKER: What I would advise the honourable member is that this matter be followed up. We have done what we could but administratively the people concerned can meet the minister and reach a compromise. Once that is reached, we will be able to endorse it ourselves. The minister should be available to all honourable members who have raised complaints so that they can talk about the issues and find a solution.

MR OGOLA: I have followed very closely the decisions in the House but I am just asking for guidance. The issue of Tororo as a district received the attention of a commission of inquiry, which prepared a report that Cabinet and the Minister of Local Government, in particular, is aware of. Would this House know the outcome of the report before you assign the committee to once again investigate Tororo?

THE SPEAKER: What will happen? You are talking about a commission of inquiry, which was commissioned by the Executive. Apparently if they produced the report it was submitted to the Executive; it was not given to us because it was not our report. Now that we have referred this matter to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, they will be free to requisition for copies of the report and use them for making their recommendations to us.  

MR AMURIAT: From your ruling I realise that the case of Bukedea has also been referred to the committee, but what is lacking, Sir? The fact is that there is no commission of inquiry that went to Bukedea to carry out this kind of work that has been done on the other districts. So, I do not know whether the terms of reference of this committee will cover such aspects as the committee visiting the proposed districts to gather information and whether this is going to be possible within the given timeframe. In any case, the case of Bukedea is straightforward; there is no controversy. We in Kumi are not quarreling among ourselves on whether Bukedea should become a district or not. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, whatever has happened to Bukedea has been between the people concerned, and the Executive. We are now through with its problems. We have our mechanism of finding solutions to problems. I have no doubt that the committee to which this matter has been referred is competent enough to find the best way to reach a solution to the prevailing problem. Should it require visiting, we shall facilitate the committee to do so. Should it require the committee to sermon people, it will be done. If there has been any report on the issue to the Executive, we shall requisition for it so that we can use it and expeditiously deal with this matter.

MR OLUM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have heard what the Minister of Local Government has said regarding the commencement of the various districts that have been created. I rise on the question of Kilak and Nwoya counties’ district. The Minister of Defence and all the security people will bear me out that this is the homeland of Kony’s operations. Pakwach is eight miles from Gulu; we have hardly a presence of the Government in these particular areas of Kilak and Nwoya. I know it may be difficult but I would like to put it on record that if the district of Kilak and Nwoya counties were created at this particular moment, it would help us in trying to curb insecurity in the area.

With the district headquarters at Amuru, which is about 50 miles from Gulu, it will really help in trying to round up these people, and the presence of Government will be felt. I would pray that both the Ministers of Defence and that of Local Government find a solution to this problem. I am not doing it because it is my area but this has been the most difficult area in the whole of Uganda and many of the problems we face with the rebels emanate from Kilak and Nwoya counties. I would like to plead with the minister that when they are looking at the possibility of squeezing in one or two districts, Nwoya and Kilak counties should be taken as a priority because it will go a long way to solve the problem of insecurity.

I would like the Minister of Defence to make a comment on this because it has been our biggest problem and every time we talk about Kony we always say, “They go to Wicheri, they go to Kilak hills”. And these are the areas where we have that problem. The district headquarters would bring the presence of the Government closer and really help us in solving this problem. So, I would like to plead with the Minister of Local Government and the Government as a whole to look at this as a way of solving this perennial problem, which we have had for the last 18 to 19 years. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Zachary Olum has made a passionate appeal and I hope the Executive will be able to consider it and report their position as soon as possible.

MR OTADA: Thank you, Mr Speaker for the opportunity. This is the appropriate time for me on behalf of the people Kibanda County, to put on record the fact that we requested for a district status and all the documents are with the ministry.  Since all the other colleagues who stood up and spoke had the issues of their district referred to the appropriate committee, I would also wish to put on the record of this House that the issue of Kibanda acquiring a district status should also be officially referred to the appropriate committee. Thank you, Sir.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, I would like to respond very briefly to the honourable member’s contribution. I think the record is correct that the submission has been made to the ministry, only that it came this morning.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the matter will be examined.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to find out about the new districts, which you are referring to the committee. To the best of my knowledge when a district is being formed, the Minister of Local Government has to send his technical committee to the ground to assess whether it is viable. I would like to know whether Bukedea has been assessed and considered viable?  

Secondly, you have asked about three districts, which have problems to go to the committee. Can we now think of another one so that we can also go to the committee and be considered since many people are vying for districts? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I said that anybody who has a problem on this issue of districts should report to the committee, which will consider your case and make a report. 

MR ETONU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am under instructions from Amuria to thank you and the honourable members for granting them a district. As you recall when the delegation, which came from the proposed Amuria District was here, you advised them to go back and in case they get a district they should unite and ensure that their district prospers. I have been informed that they are already preparing to receive the district and I am under instructions to invite you and all the members to come to Amuria for the opening of the district. Thank you very much. 

MR DOMBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to make a general observation. When you look at our records of the local government accounts you will discover that there have been so many problems associated with the new districts that were created. I just want to take this opportunity to call upon the Ministry of Local Government that it is imperative on it to assist the new districts that are being formed to start and share the assets and liabilities in a manner that will help them make an effective start.  

This becomes more eminent especially in Tororo district where we have a domestic debt that has been carried over from the districts of Pallisa and Busia. Those debts have remained with the current districts and that is why partially the district is disintegrating against that heavy domestic debt. Therefore, on behalf of the people of Bunyole, I wish to thank this Parliament and you in particular for presiding over and granting them a district status.  

MS TIPERU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to join my colleagues in appreciating the Government. Getting 22 districts is not a simple matter, which means many more Women Members of Parliament and jobs for the unemployed. In particular I want to go on record as having thanked the Government for remembering people like the late hon. Ayume and Basoga Nsadhu. I was here in the Sixth Parliament, Nsadhu always talked about Busiki District for his people. Today we have approved Busiki district. I am very happy that the Government recognises the contribution Basoga Nsadhu made to this country. May their souls rest in peace.

As far as Koboko District is concerned, hon. Francis Ayume regardless of the fact that he was the Speaker, as a gentleman he agreed to the fact that Koboko by then was not given a district status and now even in his absence we have got Koboko District for the Kakwa speakers. We thank the Government very much. 

I also want to urge those who give advice to the Minister of Local Government that while considering district headquarters, please, consider the issue of security. As a Member of Parliament from Yumbe, if I were to give a speech on the benefits of a district, I would take the whole day. However, as far as security mobilisation is concerned, it has been so easy for me to traverse my district and mobilise. So I hope when you are giving considerations you do not forget districts that have security implications as far as taking the UPDF nearer to the people is concerned. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for the contribution. I am happy for the decisions you have made. As you remember, Kaliro has always been in our Hansard but now it is gone.  

The “weather” has changed today and you need time to go and plant.  

With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until next Monday, 1 August 2005. After the referendum we shall reconvene. I wish you successful mobilisation.  
(The House rose at 5.23 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 1 August 2005.)

