
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Thursday, 21 July 2022

Parliament met at 2.12 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I welcome you to today’s sitting. 

I am glad I received information that the loan for Karamoja health centres has been cleared. So, they are now ready to move. I think this is what it means by cooperation between the Legislature and the Executive and checking each other. We should take this as a positive because when we see such a thing and raise it, then, we are helping the Executive; we are not condemning it. We should always take it from that line. 

That was a loan of €10 million from the Italian Government, which was supposed to work on health centres in Karamoja subregion. We urge the Ministry of Health to ensure that they move very quickly to implement this project because it is long overdue – two years since we passed it. 

Honourable colleagues, you will recall that on 18 May 2022, this House passed the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2022. The Bill was duly transmitted for presidential assent, pursuant to Article 91 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

His Excellency, in a letter dated 5 July 2022, has returned the Bill for reconsideration of the House, pursuant to Article 91 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

As provided for under Rule 143 of the Rules of Procedure, I will proceed to read the President’s letter verbatim: 

“The Rt Hon. Anita Among, 
Parliament of Uganda,
Kampala.

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022

I have received the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2022 for my consideration and assent. I, however, have reservations and concerns regarding the contents of the said Bill. 

The reservation on the Bill is on account of the following observations and concerns: 

    1. The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2022 submitted by the Government, proposed to impose excise duty at a rate of 40 per cent or Shs 4,000 per kilogramme, whichever is higher, on sacks and bags of polymers of ethylene and other plastics under HS codes 3923.21.00 and 3923.29.00 except, vacuum packaging bags for food, juices, tea and coffee sacks and bags for direct use in the manufacture of sanitary pads. However, Parliament rejected the foregoing provision and it is thus, not included in the Bill. 

The decision by Parliament to reject the above proposal undermines the objectives Government intended to achieve through the Excise Duty (Amendment) Act, 2022, notably: 

    a) to streamline the provisions for taxation of plastic products as provided for in the Excise Duty (Amendment) Act, 2021, particularly, with a view to ensuring that the targeting of the excise duty is refocused away from sensitive sectors that utilise elements of plastics and also to address tax administration challenges associated with its implementation; and

    b)  to incentivise owners of plastic recycling plants to enhance their efforts towards cleaning up of the environment. To that end, rejecting Government’s proposal implies that manufacturers shall not have any incentive to invest in recycling plants for environmental conservation. As a result, there will be increased pollution by imported plastics and thus, Government will continue to incur the costs of cleaning and conservation of the environment. 

    2. Parliament reintroduced a new clause that provides for excise duty at 20 per cent on sugar confectionaries as reflected in the Bill. Excise duty on sugar confectionaries was first introduced in Financial Year 2014/2015 at 10 per cent and was later increased to 20 per cent in Financial Year 2018/2019. However, Government removed it in Financial Year 2019/2020, following complaints from manufacturers that their products were being outcompeted by cheaper smuggled imports. Parliament’s decision to reintroduce this tax has the following implications: 

    a) It goes against Government’s decision not to increase taxes in Financial Year 2022/2023, which was intended to support speedy economic recovery, especially given the general increase in prices of goods and services. The introduction of 20 per cent excise duty, if upheld, will exacerbate the already constrained economic circumstances and is likely to lead to an influx of smuggled imports originating from low production cost countries. 

    b) The decision will lead to a decline in local production of sugar confectionaries and thus, a decline in the use of local raw materials, especially sugar. 

Given the above observations and in accordance with Article 91(3)(b) and (c) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, I hereby;

    a) Recommit for Parliament’s reconsideration, clause 3(d) of the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2022, to impose excise duty at a rate of 40 per cent or Shs 4,000 per kilogramme, whichever is higher, on sacks and bags of polymers of ethylene and other plastics under HS codes 3923.21.00 and 3923.29.00 except, vacuum packaging bags for food, juices, tea and coffee sacks and bags for direct use in the manufacture of sanitary pads.

    b) Request that Parliament reconsiders its decision to impose excise duty at 20 per cent on sugar confectionaries. To that end, I recommend that this imposition should be deleted from the Bill.

Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, 
The President.”

Honourable colleagues, with this, I refer the returned Bill to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Please, report back within two weeks.

Honourable members, if you note we have some items on the Order Paper, which are for the interest of efficiency. I can see that we have issues that have been there for some time. So, I will be guiding the Clerk on which issues to go with. With that, is there any reaction to my communication? I think it is an outright communication. Yes, Hon. Kamara.

2.23
MR NICHOLAS KAMARA (FDC, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, LOP. Procedure takes precedence.

MR NICHOLAS KAMARA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to move a procedural issue. Two weeks ago, my email broke down. It got frozen. I went to the ICT Department. I was told it was because it was full. They worked on it. Today it has frozen again. When I went to the ICT Department, they told me it is because the server is down, and they have to reconfigure the server.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, can I help you? These are administrative issues. Administrative issues are not brought on the Floor of Parliament. I have been in the office since morning. I have seen over 30 MPs. The Clerk’s office is open. Please, administrative issues are not for our people in Bitereko, Kabale Municipality. Yes, LOP.

MR PAUL NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise under Rule 27, “The Order Paper to be sent in advance to Members”. Sub rule -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable member, those are matters you handle with the presiding officer. Administrative matters come to my office. They are not for your constituents and wasting national time. 

2.24
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern with your communication relates to the returned Excise Duty Bill, by the President. First of all, for all intents and purposes, it was supposed to serve the intentions of this financial year’s budget.
 
The request I would like to make, because I suppose the President reacts to the responses from the ministers concerned. It has been more than a month since we handled this business. You would expect that the ministers will debrief the President in earnest for Parliament and of course people who plan for taxes to plan better. Unlike other Bills that can delay in some cases inordinately, tax Bills are very particular and specific, Mr Speaker.

Would it be proper to ask of the Prime Minister that for Bills relating to taxation, such inordinate delay should not be visited? Because it will disorganise individuals and companies and of course the entirety of planning the whole financial year so that we do not have to wait after one and a half months to reconsider tax Bills.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, that is a very genuine concern. Prime Minister, I hope you have taken note. 

Matters of urgency, yes. On Communication from the Chair, I have already ruled by referring this matter to the committee; I have ruled. So, you cannot go back to that. It is the LOP and Prime Minister who have that privilege. Other colleagues, unfortunately, you do not.

2.27
MR ENOS ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance relating to the budget suppression by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

Mr Speaker, last year the Ministry of Finance suppressed budgets of various MDAs by 40 per cent without considering the Government projects in progress nor analysing the impacts on the ongoing projects in our critical sectors. Again this quarter, which is the first quarter of the financial year 22/23, they have suppressed the budget. Actually for some sectors they have gotten like five per cent of what they should have gotten in the first quarter without consideration of the critical sectors like roads and the health sectors. 

I have specific concerns, Mr Speaker, regarding the road sector. UNRA was making some renovations within my constituency on a road. The moment the ministry of finance announced that they are suppressing the budget, the team on ground had to stop because clearly they had no resources to complete the road.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your prayers, honourable member?

MR ENOS ASIIMWE: My prayers. Before I get to the prayers, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, we do not have much time. Please, your prayers.

MR ENOS ASIIMWE: My prayers first of all is for the Ministry of Finance to give us a comprehensive report on the impact of the first budget interventions.

Two, Ministry of Finance should review their interventions with the idea of resolving a crisis in the critical sectors, specifically the road and health sectors, because of their interventions.

Three, the Ministry of Finance should always brief Parliament before any of these interventions are implemented because at times they have a direct impact on our constituents. Without us knowing the target, we end up having nothing to explain to our constituents. Those are my prayers, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, your concern is very clear and urgent because you have talked about the road they were working on but which has stopped. Your prayers however are asking for long term solutions. When you talk of comprehensive - it becomes difficult.

On questions of urgent nature, in the prayers, you need answers of an urgent nature; immediate answers. Colleagues, I think we need to have this right. Here the minister can also escape. 

Honourable minister, before you come in, Hon. Samuel Acuti Opio of Kole North had raised something on the low releases for the Road Fund for quarter one of Financial Year 2022/2023. The Attorney-General gave guidance here in the last session in regards to the Road Fund from the motion, which had been raised by Hon. Sarah Opendi and made a commitment here that they would actualise the Road Fund. As a presiding officer, I know in the months of August and September, I am going to be handling very many issues to do with roads because it will be raining; we usually anticipate.
 
Honourable minister, that would mean these roads would have to be worked on in the first quarter for us to minimise on such complaints. 

2.31
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thanks for your indulgence, Mr Speaker. In regard to what the honourable member from Kabula has said, there is another issue on budgeting that I would like to seek your guidance on, and at an appropriate time I will produce evidence. I have received a number of letters written by the Clerk to Parliament to certain entities of Government with vote functions -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, let me first help some colleagues. Honourable members, if you have not come to my office to register a matter of national importance, please do not send me chits while we are here. Others come to my office but for you to wait to bring your matter here - I have been in the office since 8.00a.m. Please, if you have not - then I guided each one of you. Today is Prime Minister’s Time. By our Rules of Procedure, the Prime Minister will give us time for oral questions right away. 

So, wait until that time of the Prime Minister and I will give you chance but please do not send chits here for matters of national importance. Otherwise, I will be reading, “I have rejected a chit from Hon. Tayebwa; the next one was from Hon. Mpuuga.” When I start naming you -

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I was raising an issue where I was going to seek for your guidance and that of the minister. Of recent, I got a number of letters sent to me - and I will give you evidence at an opportune time - where the Clerk to Parliament was writing to entities. Let me be specific. I am a Member of the Committee on Education and the National Council of Sports. 

He wrote to them ring-fencing their budget even when the budget is not realised. However, there is no copy served to the Accountant-General and the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury or the ministers. 

I am seeking to find out from you whether it is correct that under the Public Finance Management Act, an entity’s budget can be ring-fenced and the letter comes from the Clerk to Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, we gave the National Council of Sports good money -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, you were guided-

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I am seeking for guidance from you because institutions were given letters ring-fencing their budgets yet that is the work of the accounting officer. Thank you, I will produce those letters to you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have made my work easy. You want me to guide when I have not seen letters? Kindly provide the letters then I will be able to guide.

MR SSEWUNGU: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. [Hon. Member rose_]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No one is on the Floor, Honourable. No please, information should be for a colleague holding fort. There is no colleague holding fort and information is not given by the Speaker. It is a colleague who allows information because information is for the purpose of enriching a colleague’s submission. So, read our Rules of Procedure very well; you will get all this.

2.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to respond to Hon. Enos Asiimwe’s question as follows -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, we have free sitting so you can sit anywhere.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, we have not suppressed any budget for this financial year. We have released 19 per cent of the total approved budget under items of recurrent expenditure. We have not released any funding under development budget and the reasons are two: One, we manage cash flows and we release what we receive. 
Two, you are aware that Bank of Uganda released the monetary policy statement and we are required on the fiscal side to do the same. We are cautious about the monies we release to the economy for spending. 

Mr Speaker, Hon. Ssewungu referred to some letters -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it was for me to guide. Do not touch my issue, honourable minister.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you for your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Committee on Finance, please get interested in this matter and keep looking at it. Hon. Sarah, you have not said on what point you are raising so Hon. Kaberuka, continue.

2.37
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of public importance in regard to the arrears of tea nursery bed operators in Ankole and Kigezi. You guided this Parliament and we passed a budget where these arrears amounting to Shs 12 billion had been captured.

The creditors that seek help in this Parliament supplied Government between 2014 and 2016 and since then, they went to court. The President of Uganda intervened and ordered for an out court settlement and a consent judgment was signed on 8 January 2021 between Government of Uganda represented by the Attorney-General, the Executive Director, National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) and the petitioners.

These farmers went to banks and got loans. Some have lost their properties; others are on the run and yet this Parliament allocated money amounting to Shs 12 billion to NAADS to clear the arrears.

The President guided, in April, that agencies and ministries should prioritise the arrears. The Permanent Secretary/ Secretary to Treasury (PS/ST) addressed the country the other day saying that he had given Shs 661 billion to clear all arrears by the ministries and agencies. 

I am seeking your guidance, Mr Speaker, because when I contacted NAADS, they told me that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had not released the arrears for tea. My concern is, why have they released money for all the other arrears and left out the tea nursery bed operators who have a consent judgment and they have already breached the contract?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you - You are still going on?

MR KABERUKA: I pray that the Minister of Finance tells us why the ministry has not released arrears for the tea nursery bed operators and also in the judgment they signed they said that they are going to handle 40 per cent of the loss. When is this economic loss going to be disposed of? The major concern is for this money to help these people and at least have their families settle. Many are waiting for the 40 per cent. I pray, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable Member. 

MR HENRY MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The case Hon. Kaberuka is referring to is a case which we are familiar with at the Ministry of Finance. Some time back, we made partial payment and I am here to commit that in this financial year, we shall make the final payment. 

With your indulgence, I forgot to mention that the first quarter release could have been bad but in the subsequent quarters, we shall improve on the releases and nearly all the approved budget will be financed. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Committees, please, it is now your time to do oversight over the budget you passed. So, Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, you have to look at the performance of the budget – the releases and all that. Not everything will be here because here, we do not go into the details. 

You have the powers to call the minister and the minister will give more details. Then, at any stage when you feel it is important to update this House, we shall give you space on the Order Paper – no, no, no. The minister is already off the Floor. Clarification can only happen when a Member is on the Floor. Hon. Sarah?

MS SARAH OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You did talk about the roads and in our First Session, I brought a motion on the Floor of this House, which was adopted and backed by the Attorney-General, who gave guidance to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development regarding the operationalisation of the Uganda Road Fund. 

Mr Speaker, we asked the minister to bring the regulations for operationalisation of the Uganda Road Fund on the Floor before close of June. 

Mr Speaker, July is ending. Can we know why - and the minister was here and he said, “Most obliged; we shall handle” – up to now, the regulations to operationalise the Road Fund have not been laid before this House?

Mr Speaker, you indicated that your roads are impassable; you cannot even go home and the rains are going to come back – Hon. Nathan Byanyima, as the grandfather of the road fund, I don't know if he can give -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not on procedure. Colleagues, not on procedure.

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for us to continue lamenting and talking about roads when we long passed a solution to the challenges of maintenance of our roads by having the road fund operationalised? Is it procedurally right for us to continue having the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development here, pushing for funds to bail out other institutions when we cannot have the regulations presented and our roads worked on? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before I guide on that, Hon. Sarah Opendi, let me allow Hon. Samuel Opio because he had the same matter and came to my office at 8.00 a.m. It is important that the Member raises the issue and then we guide on them.

2.45
MR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent, Kole North County, Kole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter is related to the low release of funds to the road sector. 

This week, on the 19th of July, a circular was issued by the Uganda Road Fund to all the administrative units in this country, copied to the Members of Parliament. In this circular, what was clearly stated was that there will be no releases of funds for maintenance of roads in the town councils and subcounties. So, they have received zero releases. 

We have more than 2,000 subcounties in this country. These are the community access roads. These are actually the parish development roads –(Applause)- but not a single shilling has been released. The minister said that they made 19 per cent of the releases; these subcounties and town councils have received zero. This country has a road network of over 160,000 kilometres; 50 per cent are the community access roads but we have not prioritised or even put a shilling on them.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, in this same communication, they allocated Shs 30 million to each district, each city and each municipality - only Shs 30 million. Most of the indicative planning figures for the financial year are between Shs 300 million to about Shs 1 billion. So, what has been released for the quarter is just about 10 per cent of the expected quarter release. 

Mr Speaker, my prayers are that, first, we should have funds released this quarter for these subcounties and town councils because when we fail to maintain the community access roads, they come to us, the Members of Parliament. When we fail to provide services, the Members of Parliament become the service providers. 

Lastly, we are also asking for increased releases or budgets for the district and urban roads. We have 20,000 kilometres of national roads with Shs 2.67 trillion but you have about 140,000 kilometres of roads with only Shs 487 billion. We should double this and have it, at least, at a minimum of Shs 1 trillion in the next financial year. However, for now, let us have releases of funds for those roads. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleague. Hon. Byanyima, you wanted to say something about the Road Fund.

2.47
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga North County, Isingiro): Yes. Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we were here on this Floor, Parliament pronounced itself on the Uganda Road Fund. We agreed but the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development went ahead to write a letter, which is dated 12th, replying to the Executive Director Uganda Road Fund that the issue of operations of Uganda Road Fund were not there.

It says, “The ministry is preparing a Cabinet memorandum to seek further guidance on the operationalisation of special funds. As you are aware, Government is undertaking the rationalisation of the agencies and Uganda Road Fund is one of those earmarked to be transferred to the line ministry of Ministry of Works and Transport”. 

When you say that we should respect each other – really, at my age, I had a committee of nine members. We went through the rationalisation of agencies. We reported to this House. It took us a bit of time. Really, courtesy demands that the ministers would say “let us compare notes” because this country belongs to all of us. 

Mr Speaker, I will hate to see ministers who never have a map of Uganda on their desk –(Applause)- to know that this place is worse off than another. For them, they are on personal, personal, personal - For example, I will put on the Table –(Interjections).

Mr Speaker, it took us a bit of time. We benchmarked all over Africa and America to have these reforms – national roads and Uganda Road Fund. These ministers here of public service and finance, if they took a trip to Kenya, Tanzania, Namibia and everywhere, they would have reforms.

This report I am talking about is a report on merging, mainstreaming and rationalisation of Government agencies under the Ministry of Works and Transport. The document is here – to Cabinet – without talking to us. Are we really the same people? Were we doing nothing in the committee?

This country belongs to all of us. Some of these people do not mind if we do not have roads – I can tell you. (Applause) As we talk, in Kenya, the Government borrows from Kenya Road Fund –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nathan, please, time.

MR BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, on Thursday –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank colleagues who made the rules of this House and included a rule on “point of order”. I listened to my long-term friend, Hon. Nathan Byanyima, who has made a lot of allegations and he is not substantiating.

The first allegation was that in the President’s Cabinet, there are ministers who do not have the map of Uganda, insinuating that they do not know what is happening around. He did not substantiate that. I belong to the Cabinet; I would like to know a minister who does not know what is happening in Uganda.

Secondly, he has alleged that there are ministers who do not care for this country. They are selfish and they do not care. 

My point of order, therefore, is whether the Hon. Nathan Byanyima, a senior Member of Parliament, is in order to make such allegations without substantiation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Colleagues, when we are conducting business here, it is not a matter of who has won or lost but being sensitive to each other by avoiding blanket judgement. Also we have mixed issues. 

Now, hon. Nathan Byanyima, I gave you enough time, which I no longer have. And my problem is that you mixed up issues. The issue of Road Fund is very critical. So, when you mix it up with the issues of the merger then they consider - because with mergers, whatever happens, they will report here. They are going to report to us. 

Therefore, I do not want to be diverted to mergers yet we have the issue of the Road Fund, which is very critical, Hon. Nathan Byanyima. We are watching the merger thing and we shall ensure that we follow up -

MR BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, you convened a meeting in your office with Hon. Mukasa Muruli. We agreed that on Thursday he would update Parliament about the progress. The merger and mainstreaming with the Road Fund and UNRA are the same; they are behind working hard to bring something here to compare notes on. 

I respect everybody here. I withdraw the issue of the - some of them are not selfish but if we are very genuine Ugandans, why don’t we compare notes and move together? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, Hon. Byanyima, have you challenged my ruling? (Laughter) 

MR BYANYIMA: I read the letter from the PS/ST telling the Road Fund not to talk about specialisation because we are going for a merger and the report from Works is in support of the merger, when they don't even have the capacity to handle the UNRA project. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. Honourable minister, take your seat. I don't want us to open this debate.  Rule 220 of our Rules of Procedure require that the relevant minister of Government must come here and give an action taken report on resolutions of Parliament.

When we passed the motion to do with the Road Fund, I remember he was the one chairing. Where we had contention, the minister requested that he needed to seek the guidance of the Attorney-General. The Attorney-General wrote a very clear letter and said that the Constitution directs and mandates that this Fund must be implemented. This was guidance from the Attorney-General and the minister came here and said they would do it.

Now, the minister is required to come in two weeks’ time and bring an action taken report on this matter. Clerk, in two weeks’ time, put the minister on the Order Paper. Two weeks is not a short time; you will have juggled it in the Cabinet and you will give us an action taken report, which we shall discuss on whether you have taken action or defied your own, because you are the ones who told us that you would do it. We asked and you committed to do it.

Secondly, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I don't want to tire you during the months of August and September. You are going to have a lot of questions here. I can anticipate because when I checked through the Hansard, I noted that the questions that would come around August and September relate to emergencies regarding roads. 

Town councils and subcounties have been given zero releases for roads to be motorable in August and September when it is raining; they ought to be worked on now in this quarter. So, I urge you to link up with the Minister of Finance and the ministers responsible and see how you handle this issue urgently because we are going to be in a crisis. 

Colleagues, we have to move on; time is not our best ally. 

2.58
MS ROBINAH RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Gomba West, allow me to inform you that the people Kyayi-Kifampa, Kabulasoke-Maddu rural and Maddu Town Council are facing very dry weather conditions. Water sources have dried up. We have water sources like River Katonga, River Nyamukazi and Lake Wamala that we have not taken advantage of. Crops have dried up in gardens and there is looming famine. People and animals are using the same poor water sources and cows are dying at very high rates. 

My prayer, Mr Speaker, is that the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Water, jointly discuss and avail us equipment for excavating dams, provide boreholes, construct dams and desilt the existing ones and also educate the populace on the best ways to avoid a similar situation by planting grass for hay and producing silage. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.59
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, today we had a meeting involving the Ministry of Water, the Ministry of Agriculture and the Minister of Finance; and we have been exactly talking about what my sister wants us to do.

Mr Speaker, I promise that I will implore the Minister of Water to bring here a comprehensive report because it is not only in Sembabule nor Gomba; it goes up to Lwengo and Rwampara. The problem is bigger than my sister has said and we are aware.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I am giving you space on the Order Paper for next Wednesday for the minister to bring the comprehensive statement on that issue. 

3.01
MR DENIS SEKABIRA (NUP, Katikamu County North, Luweero): I do not like pretence. When we are out we do not put on masks; now why do you want to pretend? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Take your seat, honourable member. Thank you.  Colleagues, let me tell you this: the moment you start responding to people around you, you are getting matters which are off record onto the record. 

Now, in future when your son gets to read your submission on the Hansard, they will ask: “What was dad doing? The things are not coordinated. How come he was responding to 10 issues at once?” I have warned you on this before to avoid responding to colleagues when they call on you because you are on record and they are not on record. You make our Hansard scattered and look dirty.

3.01
MR DAVID SSERUKENYA (NUP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, recently my people in Busabala were left homeless because their houses were broken down on the instructions of the area RDC.

I want to bring it to your attention that there is still a move to chase people from their land in Makindye-Ssabagabo which is very painful.

Mr Speaker, we all know that our nation has been hit by drought and we are going through a crisis. I know that the Office of the Prime Minister is fatigued with people who need help like those in Karamoja. 

My humble prayers are to halt the act of chasing people from their land until we come out of this crisis. Two, if they are chasing people, let it be non-discriminative because they are targeting the poor and leaving the rich. You will find them planting rice in one area but slashing it in another area. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable, your item is related to item 7(F) on the Order Paper where the minister is coming to give a comprehensive answer. Clerk, ensure this is captured so that we handle it. Honourable, raise your procedural matter.

MR SEKABIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 14 July 2022, while we were discussing the Nakawa-Naguru land saga, the committee found out that International Virginia something something company did not exist -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the Hansard cannot have “something something”. Please, if you do not know, you do not know. (Laughter)

MR SEKABIRA: International Virginia, Mr Speaker. You promised the House that you would consult the President and give feedback on the same. Wouldn't it be procedurally right to update us whether really International Virginia exists and was granted land by the President as purported by the minister in her letter dated 6th – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I am still in the process of consulting the President; I will update the House.

3.04
MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance about the highway that connects Pakwach to Moyo as well as Adjumani District.

Mr Speaker, the route that connects Pakwach District through Madi-Okollo, Obongi and Adjumani districts up to Paanzala in Dufile Subcounty in Moyo District has become completely cut off at a place called Balala in Laropi Town Council around Amua bridge as a result of heavy downpour thereby rendering the roads slippery and impassable. 

Mr Speaker, as I talk, more than 20 vehicles are stuck in that area and movement in this place has become completely difficult.

Our prayers are that one, repair works on the roads around Amua Bridge in Balala that also serves Adjumani District should commence immediately because this road serves as a security and tourist road stretching right from Pakwach up to Paanzala near the South Sudan border. 

Secondly, may the ministry fast track the procurement process for the bridge across the Nile at Laropi for faster movement and communication for development of the area. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Works -

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, unfortunately my colleague had not shared this with me. I would not want to give an off cuff answer here. However, permit me to go and check what is going on and direct action, particularly to make the road passable as we consider detailed work on the road. I will report to this House on what we have done. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister, if you are to report everything to this House, you will clog our Order Paper. That is why we have issues that never end. This is a very clear issue, honourable minister. Call a meeting of the MPs affected by that road, update them - You can even go and visit and when they are not satisfied, they will come back here. Otherwise, I want us to reduce on issues of reporting back here where we clog the Order Paper and we miss out on important items from Members.  Hon. Dan Kimosho, Hon. Judith Achan -

3.07
MS JUDITH ACHAN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I almost lost hope because I registered my matter of national importance on the 18th and to date - Thank you for giving me the opportunity. 

I want to bring to the attention of the House a matter of national importance about the cold blood killings along the borders of Murchison Falls National Park. 

Mr Speaker, on the fateful day of 11 July 2022, four of our young men were killed along the borders of the park. The names are Ojok Godwin, Ojok Geoffrey, Komakech Richard and Ocaya Bosco. 

Mr Speaker, the law states that those who are victimised or suspected of poaching are supposed to be arraigned in courts of law to face life imprisonment or pay Shs 20 million. 

Mr Speaker, every year we register killings by game rangers in the park. There are push and pull factors that send our young men along the park to search for food. Several times, we have brought it to the attention of the House, the massive destruction of food crops and human life by the elephants.

I requested the Minister for Tourism and we visited Nwoya District and assessed the magnitude of the problems. However, I want to bring it to your attention that we still have challenges of the elephants and every day, we register massive destruction. There is a looming shortage of food because of the long drought that we are facing. 

My prayers are that these rangers who are always killing people - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you can lower your microphone a little bit. 

MS ACHAN: The rangers who are killing people in the park should be investigated and face the law for taking the law into their hands. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Tourism, I hope you visited the area of Hon. Judith Achan as you had promised.

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Martin Mugarra): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank Hon. Achan Judith for raising the matter. It is true we visited Nwoya District with the entire leadership and discovered the challenges there. It is not only a challenge of Nwoya but all communities surrounding the national parks. 

We brought a budget before this House on what we need to do to put the issue to an end; that is fencing most of the protected areas. 

Luckily, in Nwoya, we have done some electric fencing but not for the entire place. This financial year, we shall be extending the fence by a few more kilometres, but not covering the entire area. Hopefully we shall extend the fence focusing on those areas that are affected the most. 

It is an important concern for all of us that we fund this project and we put this matter to rest.

On the issue of the killings, Mr Speaker, I am going to engage with her and investigate this matter. But of course, killing is bad; no ranger is allowed to kill anyone. Anyone got poaching in the park is supposed to go through the court process and be duly charged. We shall investigate the matter and put it to rest. 

3.12
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for according me this opportunity. This is in regard to your people who derive their livelihood from border trade. 

I have tried to move across the country to ascertain whether the borders are still closed as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. My discovery is that almost all borders – thank God, including the Rwanda–Uganda border that was closed – are now open.

Mpondwe-Lhubiriha Uganda-DRC border gives livelihood to about 250,000 people. Up to today, the Mpondwe-Lhubiriha border continues to be closed. 

As I speak, their only source of livelihood is shut down without an alternative source of livelihood. What the citizens of this country are doing is that they collect hunger-stricken kids and dump them at my office and I think they are right – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are your prayers, honourable? 

MR KATUSABE: My prayer is that the Government, specifically the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, commits to the opening of the Mpondwe-Lhubiriha Border as it has happened elsewhere. 

That border also has a fish market. I have tried to do some research – I have moved around markets across the country. It is sad that the fish that is allowed to be sold in other markets in this very country is prohibited or impounded in the same place. Prime Minister, you have been there and you have seen these hungry women crying before you. Madam Prime Minister - short-term - I think you might have to explore the possibility of serving or sending relief to this community. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, the Member specifically pointed at you – that they need the Mpondwe border market reopened and you allow the sale of fish in the market. The Prime Minister was used as a witness. 

3.15
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, it is true that I have been to Kasese. During the COVID-19 pandemic, like you are aware, COVID-19 restrictions were instituted across all borders in the country. 

Now, Mpondwe was not an exception. Other borders are all open. I request my brother to allow us, first of all, to organise a meeting in the Prime Minister’s Office and involve the ministries of health and trade. We shall definitely come up with a solution and it should be urgent; we can even hold that meeting tomorrow. 

Secondly, we had a meeting and yesterday you watched the President’s address to the nation. We continue to have low uptake of vaccines in the country. That is why all other countries, which have attained the uptake above 70 per cent, no longer put on masks. I request colleagues that we mobilise our communities to go and get vaccinated so that we can also leave these masks alone. However, your issue is different from what I am talking about. Thank you so much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. On the issue of fish, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you will discuss it there – it will be handled in that meeting.  

The Prime Minister has made a very noble call. Let us go to communities and mobilise our people for vaccination. The minister should partner up with us – and the people are willing; but we should do a lot, as leaders, because we are listened to. 

Hon. Wakikona rarely requests for time. There is a point of clarification that our elder wants to make. Let me allow him. 

3.17
MR DAVID WAKIKONA (NRM, Bushigai County, Bududa): Thank you, sir. Yesterday, there was a paper laid there, expressing an emergency – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Laid on the Table. (Laughter)

MR WAKIKONA: It was laid on the Table, yes – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It cannot be “there.” That can be in a corner. (Laughter)

MR WAKIKONA: I would like to make a few clarifications on that paper. It was like a terrible emergency then. We have handled the cracks on Mount Elgon for now 15 years. At that time, the minister in charge of disaster was Hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere and the deputy was Hon. Ecweru –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Were you a minister of state for trade or industry?  

MR WAKIKONA: I was a minister in charge of northern Uganda and became the minister for trade later. 

However, Cabinet gave them that assignment – even Maj. Gen. Julius Oketta was put in charge of that crack area. They were to make reports to Parliament later on. They even imported experts from Europe - they said Vienna or whatever. They said those would trace the cracks on Mount Elgon and we would know whether it was dangerous or not. 

Yesterday, it sounded as if it was a very critical emergency. We have had it for some time and Maj. Gen. Julius Oketta was based in the Prime Minister's Office. Hon. Ecweru was also based in the Prime Minister's Office – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, your story is becoming long.  

MR WAKIKONA: So, it is better that we now have that report because I saw a heap of photographs by Maj. Gen. Oketta; we should use that to see where that situation of Mount Elgon is, other than it being an emergency for a quick run. Thank you, sir. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is noted by the presiding officer and the Clerk. We shall ensure that, indeed, it is followed up. 

MR ALOYSIUS MUKASA: Thank you very much for the opportunity, Mr Speaker. There is an unnoticed tendency within Parliament here – because rule 231 is very clear; there is nothing like a statement of selective broadcasting of Parliament proceedings. 

The date, specifically, that needs to be brought to our attention is 6 July 2022 when Hon. Sarah Opendi raised a matter of public importance related to the alleged discriminatory recruitment by the UPDF. At the beginning of her submission, the live transmission of parliamentary proceedings, was switched off. So, Mr Speaker, the electorate represented by Hon. Sarah Opendi and Hon. Gilbert Olanya were denied the opportunity to be witnesses to the submissions of their legislators. 

Has this ever come to your attention, Mr Speaker, and are we proceeding right as Parliament by selectively broadcasting proceedings of Parliament? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. Colleagues, the people and the world are watching us. When you are submitting, you need to be cautious about what you submit, because in the future, someone will refer to your submission. 

Now, I was here as a presiding officer. Did you expect me to go out and watch TV? No, broadcasting of things outside the Chamber does not have anything to do with proceedings here. Because the procedure is to do with what is happening inside here; that’s it. 

However, that is a valid question you should have asked the Prime Minister. Okay? Or you should have asked it as a question for oral answer. So, I will request the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance to investigate that matter and come and answer you, honourable colleagues. 

Otherwise, someone may tell you that it was a technical glitch. But colleagues, we need to move. Shadow minister? 

3.23
MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA (NUP, Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker, Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not want to be hard in my conclusion. Otherwise, we need to see a way forward.

MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA: Mr Speaker, we have heard a lot about advocating for our people to get vaccinated. And about the recovery wherein, apart from putting on the masks - the minister was here, but at least, we are at liberty to sit the way we are seated.

Mt Speaker, my point of procedure arose out of the fact that on the 29th of this month, the Law Development Centre (LDC) is going to hold a graduation ceremony and exorbitant fees, ranging from Shs 400,000, have been collected from various students. 

However, LDC has gone ahead to organise a virtual graduation ceremony. Despite the fact that people are poor, they have gone ahead to pay those exorbitant fees, but now they are going to hold a virtual graduation ceremony. 

Mr Speaker, given that background of people being poor and we are in the recovery process, can’t LDC be prevailed over to return the fees, which they collected from Ugandans?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, that is not a procedural matter. Next item.

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE STATUS OF ROAD SAFETY INTERVENTIONS IN UGANDA 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister of Works and Transport?

Prime Minister, take note of the colleague’s issue and during your time, you will talk to him. But colleagues, if you have masks, why do you wait to be reminded?

Can I request each one of us to put on their mask? If you do not have a mask, kindly get one because here, we use an air conditioner. If you are asthmatic, do not die from here, get out. Yes, you are going to get into trouble. 

Yes, honourable minister? 

3.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS)(Mr Musa Ecweru):  Mr Speaker, I am making a statement on the status of road safety in the country, as requested by this august House.

The statement is as follows. An efficient and integrated road transport infrastructure network is recognised as one of the key drivers of economic growth, constituting the largest component of the infrastructure of the transport sector in Uganda. 

The overall road network has grown close to an estimated 160,000 kilometres up from 7,900 kilometers in 1986. 

We are aware that the population, according to the Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS), is 41.6 million, in 2020. The vehicle fleet on our roads is also growing more rapidly and particularly motorcycles, Mr Speaker. 

Mobility, therefore, has increased across the country as a result of the growth in economic development and road network, and improved state of the infrastructure, relatively across the entire country. 

Road transport employs a huge part of our productive population. As such, ensuring the safety on roads and enabling sustainable mobility plays an important role in reducing poverty and inequities, increasing access to employment and education as well as mitigating the impact of climate change.

However, the scale of the current road safety interventions in the country, to the growing road safety crisis, does not seem to match. In Uganda, road traffic crashes are responsible for an average of 10 deaths per day, as evidenced in Table 1 below. Look at 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020 and 2021. 

It is ironic, Mr Speaker, that road crashes affect mostly the productive age group of our country. If you can look at Table 2, this graphically demonstrates what I am talking about. When you look at the children and the population below 18, the one between 18 and 24, and so on and so forth, you notice that the majority of the people who die in road crashes, Mr Speaker, are these vulnerable road users mainly: those are the pedestrians, cyclists, and motorcyclists accounting for 71 per cent of the deaths on these roads. If you look at the table, you look at the drivers who die, the motorcyclists, the pedal cyclists, passengers or motorcycle people, passengers on night omnibuses, passengers on medium omnibuses and passengers on heavy omnibuses; the numbers are very clear there. 

It is critical, colleagues, to note that the key triggers of crashes in the country include:

    1. The human factor;
    2. The infrastructure; and 
    3. The vehicle condition; and sometimes
    4. The environmental factors. 

The irony of the situation is that most of these crashes could be avoided. And if you look at Table 4 and the number of road crashes and their causes; you will see reckless driving as the leading cause. Then speeding, of course, is also related to reckless driving, overloading, dangerous loading and then driving under the influence of alcohol, careless pedestrians, careless driving, passengers, failing to control drivers and all those causes. 

Mr Speaker, for us to demonstrate the impact of road crashes and to express it in monetary terms, as a way to enhance advocacy and awareness, according to the World Health Organisation, road traffic deaths and injuries, in low and middle-income countries like Uganda, is estimated to cause economic losses of about 5 per cent of our GDP with a nominal GDP of Shs 147,962 trillion for FY 2020/21. The estimated losses to the economy translate to a maximum of Shs 7.398 Trillion. This is manifested in form of premature loss of lives (death), reduced quality of life for those injured either temporarily or permanently, loss of income and output, either permanently or through death, permanent or temporary disability through injury, remedial expenditure on medical care to victims, loss of livelihood by the dependents, among others.

Mr Speaker, as a country and as Parliament, we cannot afford to continue witnessing these losses year in, year out. We, therefore, need to make interventions. 

For example, on 13 December 2021, my senior minister, Gen. Katumba Wamala launched the National Road Safety Week 2021 and the theme of that day was, “Safe speed saves lives”. The theme was aimed at raising awareness of the impact of speeding on our roads and crashes. Over speeding is one of the major contributing factors and makes driving more dangerous because: 

    i) It increases the likelihood that a driver will lose control of the vehicle 
    ii) It increases stoppage distances
    iii) It reduces a vehicle's ability to brake and so on and so forth. 

The National Road Safety Week is normally aimed at amplifying the road safety messages as we enter into the festive season. However, we think this alone cannot bring about behavioural change that is needed to address the situation without a sustained campaign and education programme plus other interventions and stringent penalties, Mr Speaker.

Right Hon. Speaker, road crashes have not spared our very own in this House. Members of Parliament from this august House and ministers have, over the years, lost our MPs as a result of road crashes. As leaders of this county, we need to play a very critical role, Mr Speaker. Apart from allocating resources to this critical sector for mitigation, we must play a role in mobilising the masses against road carnage. We must also become role models, Mr Speaker, in as far as demonstrating how we must conduct ourselves on the highways.

Mr Speaker, in the last three months, there has been a spate of fatal crashes involving passengers, goods and private vehicles that claimed several lives. On 4 May 2022, a bus belonging to Link was involved in an accident along Fort Portal-Kyenjojo Road claiming 23 lives. On the same day, another fatal accident occurred along Tirinyi-Mbale Road claiming six lives. On 9 July 2022, at Kalule along Kampala-Gulu Highway, a speeding taxi lost control after a tyre burst claiming nine lives.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we shall not have time to get the entire story. We need to look at what you are doing as a minister.

MR ECWERU: In a bid to improve the road safety situation in the country, my ministry has made a number of interventions. One, the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998 was amended to strengthen road safety management, provide for punitive penalties and was assented to by H.E. the President in 2020. 

A total of 14 draft regulations have been formulated to operationalise the amended law. These include:
 
    1. The Traffic and Road Safety (Demerit Point System) Regulations.
    2. The Traffic and Road Safety (Express Penalty Scheme for Road Traffic Offenders) Regulations.
    2. The Traffic and Road Safety (Prescribed Alcohol Limit and Prohibited Drugs) Regulations.

Mr Speaker, when we introduced the breathalyser for drunk drivers – unfortunately, I want to say this with a heavy heart for my colleagues in the police and Internal Affairs - some of the implementers have apparently found themselves trapped in this problem and they have since abandoned the process. This regulation is going to be enforced and we will see how we can handle it. 

    4. The Traffic and Road Safety (Post-Crash Emergency Care) Regulations.
    4. The Traffic and Road Safety (Digital-

All these regulations have been put in place and we are coming to enforce most of them. There have been areas where people are asking us why we do not reintroduce the speed governors on trucks, why don’t we enforce the police who might be clearing vehicles when they know they are in a dangerous mechanical condition? We are looking at all those challenges and seeing how best we can address them without going back to where we have been where sometimes all these interventions have come to zero.

Mr Speaker, in a nutshell, as a ministry, we are aware and conscious that the country and this Parliament wants us to come up with remedies that will, to a great extent, minimise and mitigate these road crashes. 

When you look at this report at some point, we are in touch with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to share with us some of the areas where we expect some resources particularly for sensitisation of the public on areas including the Highway Code and all those things. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Minister.

MR ECWERU: Before I sit down, Mr Speaker, the last item is on the short statement on the train accident, if it pleases you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please do.

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, there is this statement that this august House requested my ministry to make regarding the accident that happened recently.

Uganda Railways Corporation (URC) is saddened by the accident that involved one of our trains Number Yl19 - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, is that your statement or the statement of Uganda Railways?

MR ECWERU: I am the supervisor of the ministry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let it be your statement. You are saddened as the Ministry of Works.

MR ECWERU: It is my statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have stated it as if it is from Uganda Railways. Let it be from the ministry.

MR ECWERU: The Ministry of Works and its agency, Uganda Railways Corporation, is saddened by the accident which involved one of our trains, Number Yl19 with a Station Wagon Motor Vehicle Registration Number UBJ 053N at the Nakawa Level Crossing that resulted in loss of life and damage of property at about 03.30 in the morning.

Our heartfelt condolences go out to the families of particularly the late Nobert Tizikara, an Architect and Madam Caroline Aturinda, a student at Law Development Centre. 

Mr Speaker, at the time of the incident, the locomotive had departed Namanve Industrial Park after delivering cargo to the respective clients and was en route to our Kampala station. The train approached the level crossing with headlamps on while hooting continuously with a long blast. This happened when the train was at a speed of about 20 kilometres per hour. 

Mr Speaker, the ministry has instituted internal investigations and is fully cooperating with the Uganda Police Force to find out what exactly happened. 

I would like to promise this House that appropriate action will be taken after the findings of the investigations. 

The ministry asks all road users to always exercise caution when approaching railway crossings, as prescribed in Regulation 13 of the Traffic and Road Safety (Rules of Road) Regulations, 2004. Safety in railway operations is paramount. 

At every level crossing, motorists are advised to keep a distance from the line whether a train is approaching or not. 

Section 41(5) of the Uganda Railways Corporation Act, 1992 gives a train the right of way at level crossings. It should, however, be noted that this provision of the law ensures that trains and all road users coexist. 

Unique circumstances under which trains operate were taken into consideration, one of them being the inability to bring a train to a sudden stop. 

Mr Speaker, my ministry is committed to ensuring a safe operating environment, a responsibility it has undertaken. 

Mr Speaker, after investigations, we will be able to, again, brief the country. We want to look at all the crossings in the country and see what happens. Have our interventions been strong? If they are weak, we shall prescribe remedies that will try to mitigate the kind of accidents that we have witnessed. 

I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, I will allow 10 minutes for this item. I will start with Hon. Joyce. 

3.43
MR JOYCE ACAN (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for issuing a statement concerning the intervention on road safety. I have observed that many of the newly constructed roads are very narrow – and these roads are constructed under the supervision of the Government. 

Most of these roads are constructed, leaving very big pavements and narrowing the roads. The heavy trucks, cars, and motorcycles all rival each other to use the same roads, thereby causing a lot of accidents. 

The minister has not come out clearly to tell us why they allow such to happen. Most of the roads are very narrow and this is also one of the causes of accidents. I wish he could highlight that. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssenyonyi –(Member rose_)-  I have picked one from Nakawa, I cannot pick another one. Hon. Ssenyonyi represents Nakawa.

3.45
MR JOEL SSENYONYI (NUP, Nakawa Division West, Kampala City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. One of the things we need to deal with, as a country and Government, is inconsistency. It affects so many things. Once we are not consistent about certain things, people get too used and it becomes okay. 

Back then, the Government said everyone must wear a seatbelt while in a car. They executed it with precision for a couple of weeks and abandoned it. When there was a spate of bus accidents, at some point, they said speed governors – every bus has to have a speed governor. 

They executed it meticulously for a bit and abandoned it. That is a story of so many things. We are not consistent and that is coming back to bite us.

We need to get to that place where people know we are serious about certain things. Again, we had the claims back then that they implemented these seatbelt issues because “there is a top Government person that had imported seatbelts. Now that they have all been sold out, it is okay. 

It is the same thing they said about speed governors: “Somebody big in Government has imported speed governors. Once they are finished, they will abandon the idea.” Can we begin to be serious? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, the minister was trying to be courteous in terms of frustration. This is because you can have regulations but you do not have the powers to enforce it directly. You need another agency and that is what Hon. Ssenyonyi was following up.

In the Ministry of Works and Transport, you have the regulations but you are not the ones who implement them. This business of Government working in silos - we are lacking integration on some of these things. 

Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, you need to convene a meeting between the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Internal Affairs on implementation because the minister here was also showing frustration like any of us here.

3.48
MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, we have many issues where you will submit.

MS OBIGAH: Just yesterday, a vehicle carrying 40 youth that went for a competition with youth from Yumbe to build a relationship, overturned in Terego. Our major issue in Terego is the fact that we cannot get the culverts, which we have asked from the Ministry of Works and Transport. We do not have road equipment; the roads are totally messed up.

With due respect to you, Mr Speaker, can I know from the Minister of Works and Transport why they have decided to keep the culverts behind their offices? I decided to go behind their offices and I found a lot of culverts there. They do not want to give out these culverts, yet people are dying. (Applause)

Three of my youth lost their legs, five are admitted – they are unconscious – and the rest are still languishing in the hospitals. Can we know why they have decided to keep these for themselves or they are there just for design? Thank you.

3.49
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the honourable minister for his statement but most of it shows long-term interventions – if you look down, he is asking and tagging huge amounts of money on other interventions. 

What we need now is immediate interventions to control road accidents. 

I would like to seek clarification from you, honourable minister. If you look at most of the big roads, for example, Gulu highway, in the middle of the road, you find big holes. Many vehicles move and on reaching the holes, especially at night, the vehicles get accidents. 

What is your office doing to fill those big holes? I am very sure you are aware of what is going on. 

Secondly, as far as putting humps on the roads is concerned, when they are putting humps, they need to explain clearly the criteria of putting humps. 

Mr Speaker, there are some roads that do not require humps but you find very huge humps along the road. A driver who has driven for a long distance without knowing how that road is, will automatically hit it and cause accidents. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, the office of the minister needs to work on the lorries that are ever parked in the middle of the roads. If you are driving along Gulu Highway, you find lorries carrying sugarcane and those that are spoilt just parked in the middle of the road –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Colleagues, this is a matter that needs a comprehensive debate. I am referring it to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. In two weeks, study it, report back and we have a comprehensive debate – a full hour debate so that each one of you – otherwise, the Order Paper is not going to be - if we are to continue this way. Next item.

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON INTERVENTIONS TO ERADICATE MALARIA IN UGANDA BY 2030

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Regarding this statement, the minister is coming in later; so, let us go to item number 6; I want it done quickly. We have got Prime Minister’s time as well.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED “THE MARRIAGE BILL” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sarah Opendi, the mover. (Applause) 

3.52
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank colleagues for the support, even before I present the Bill; thank you very much.

Mr Speaker, this is a motion to seek leave of the House to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled “The Marriage Bill”. This is moved under Rule 121 and 122 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. 

The motion reads thus: “WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda of 1995 empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for the peace, order and development and good governance of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Article 94(4)(b) of the Constitution and rules 120 and 121 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament permit a Member of Parliament to move a Private Member’s Bill;

AWARE that Objective XIX of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy guides that the family is the natural and basic unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and the state;

FURTHER AWARE that Article 31 of the Constitution guarantees the right of a man and a woman to marry, found a family and entitles them to equal rights at and in marriage during marriage and at its dissolution;

NOTING that several types of marriages are recognised in Uganda, including Christian, civil marriages recognised under the Marriage Act Cap 251, the customary marriages recognised under Customary Marriage Registration Act, Cap 248 and the Marriage of Africans Act Cap 253, Hindu marriages, recognised under the Hindu Marriage and Divorce Act, Cap 250, Muslim marriages recognised under the Marriage and Divorce of the Mohammedans Act Cap 252;

RECOGNISING that due to the passage of time, some aspects of the laws regulating the different types of marriages in Uganda have become outdated, especially in light of the Constitution, Government policies, emerging international best practices and the legal environment;

RECALLING that the various laws regulating marriages in Uganda have been comprehensively studied by the different government agencies, including the Uganda Law Reform Commission and have been found to be in urgent need of amendment to align the laws with the Constitution of Uganda to reflect, in our laws, the socio-economic realities of Uganda, and to comply with the various decisions of court on matters of maintenance, sharing of matrimonial property, grounds for divorce, bride price, widow inheritance and parental consent;

FIRMLY CONVINCED that there is urgent need to amend the laws governing marriage in Uganda, in order to safeguard the institution of marriage, clarify the rights of the parties to a marriage, incorporate the standards of fairness and equity in those laws and codify various decisions of courts of Judicature, pertaining to maintenance, sharing of matrimonial property, grounds for divorce, bride price, widow inheritance and parental consent;

NOW, THEREFORE, this motion is moved that this Parliament accepts the introduction of a Bill for an act entitled “The Marriage Bill” a draft of which is hereto attached and do order the publication of the said Bill, in preparation for the first reading.”

Mr Speaker, the motion is moved by myself and the seconders, Hon. Nathan Byanyima, Hon. Asuman Basalirwa and Hon. Dorcus Acen, MP Alebtong District. 

I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by Hon. Nathan Byanyima, Hon. Dorcus Acen, Hon. Judith Achan, Hon. Lillian Aber and Hon. Komakech. 

Hon. Sarah Opendi, can you speak to your motion, please? Colleagues, please be mindful of Prime Minister’s Time so use five minutes.

MS OPENDI: Thank you. Mr Speaker, it is 118 years since the Marriage Act was enacted in this country in 1904. The Marriage Bill that we are proposing provides for a comprehensive legislation under one law on matters related to marriage. 

The Bill makes it easier for users to refer to, other than having the different legislations scattered under different laws, as I mentioned in the motion. The Bill provides for types of marriages, ranging from civil, Christian, customary, Hindu and Bahai marriages, and seeks to conform to the Constitution.

Mr Speaker, the age of marriage is also another issue, as Article 31 of the Constitution provides for the age of marriage as 18 years and at 18 and above, one has a right to found a family and is also entitled to equal rights in marriage, during and at dissolution. 

I want to thank the 11th Parliament and His Excellency, the President, because the Succession (Amendment) Bill was passed and assented to and that now requires we move on with the Marriage Bill since the succession issues, some of whose provisions were outlawed, have now been catered for. 

The Bill also recognises bridal gifts as an essential requirement for marriage but of course, as ruled in the constitutional case of MIFUMI and 12 others, Constitutional Appeal No. 2 of 2010, bridal gifts are supposed to be non-refundable. 

Mr Speaker, I want to state that despite that, we should note that women cannot be equal partners in a marriage when we have this bride price on our heads and they are refundable. So, the Constitutional Court ruling is really applauded. I want to be clear, Mr Speaker, that the Constitutional Court did not outlaw bride price. So, Members should note that.  

Article 16 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women calls on all partner states to take all appropriate measures to eliminate all forms of discrimination against women in all matters relating to marriage. 

Mr Speaker, our Constitution definitely took into consideration the CEDAW law and I applaud the NRM government for the support it has extended to women but also the various laws that the previous Parliaments have passed. 

The Bill will go a long way in protecting the rights of women but also men in a marriage. It also defines marriage as a union between a man and a woman and prohibits same-sex marriages in Uganda. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker, it is the state’s responsibility to promote and preserve those cultural values and practices, which enhance the dignity and wellbeing of Ugandan citizens and therefore, this is what the Bill intends to do. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Marriage Bill” be granted leave so that we can present the full Bill. I beg to lay the draft Bill which is attached to the motion. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Sarah. Honourable Nathan Byanyima is the seconder. Colleagues, let us be quick. It is a Member’s right to move a Private Member’s Bill. The Bill will be scrutinised by us. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable member who is moving the Private Member’s Bill. However, I -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sorry, repeat that.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, no. Hon. Tinkasiimire.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: The point of procedure that I would like to rise-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What has the Member done by moving? That is what I would like to hear.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I said I would like to thank the Member who is moving the Private Member's Bill on marriage or the Marriage Bill. 

Mr Speaker, in the previous Parliament, we had processed the same Bill up to Section 22. They facilitated us, as Members of Parliament, and we went to do consultation. We have never returned and now I am seeing a new Bill being introduced. The guidance I am seeking is, are we proceeding well or we are lost somewhere?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable, we are proceeding very well. I think the honourable Member is driven by the nostalgia of the 10th Parliament, but if you can remember, Rt hon. Jacob Oulanyah made a ruling on that matter and that ruling still stands. Business of that Parliament lapsed; refer to rule 245 of our Rules of Procedure. This is a new Parliament. It is the 11th Parliament; please, let us not disturb the Member. Let us continue. Colleagues, you will submit.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In respect to our colleague who is moving the Private Member's Bill, the one that Hon. Tinkasiimire talked about is the Marriage and Divorce Bill. This is a Marriage Bill. Should we wait for another Member to bring the Divorce Bill since they are separating them?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Oboth, would you like to say something about that? Hon. Oboth was the Chairman of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee and was working on this Bill. Therefore, let us take advantage of his experience.

4.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I see the LOP smiling and looking at me, as he always does. On how we need to proceed with this, the ruling has been made and I think Hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire was helping others who followed the proceedings of this House. 

Hon. Kibalya also helped because if we proceed without making any mention, like you made the guidance, the Marriage and Divorce or Marriage Bill actually started in this Parliament before some of us joined as a Domestic Relations Bill; it has kept on changing names. 

In the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, I want to confirm that it was at Committee Stage up to clause 22. Now, this is interesting. We went for consultations. There are some controversial provisions but the law is a very good law. 

Mr Speaker, when we met in the last meeting on this - members of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee will bear me out - it had now changed. The women Members of Parliament and other pro-women activists in this Parliament had a workshop and it was agreed that it will now be the Marriage Bill. 

However, as the saying goes, in every marriage, as you plan for entry, there is a plan for the exit. Though that is not general, it is generally debatable because according to other faiths, marriage is for permanence. But here, it is purely on legal provisions and I thought that what honourable -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I am entering into the Prime Minister's time already so please be conscious of time.

MR OBOTH: Just a minute. What Hon. Sarah Opendi is bringing is a genuine cause; we need further guidance from you, Mr Speaker, on how we can retract and build on what already existed or we are starting a completely new leaf with the new challenges and that would bring in more serious issues if it is the same Bill but I cannot anticipate on this matter. I would like to take information from honourable MM –(Interruption)
 
MS MUHANGA: Thank you, Hon. Oboth, for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker. The reason why the word “divorce” was removed is because Uganda is 85 per cent Christian and so the churches were complaining that we are legislating for divorce. There are clauses on divorce and there are other laws that can take care of divorce. 

However, if you say “marriage and divorce”, it is like you are legislating for people to get into a marriage and leave. So, marriage alone is enough. You do not have to say “marriage and divorce”. The Marriage and Divorce Bill sounds ridiculous.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. Colleagues, can we listen to each other? Order! Colleagues, it is a problem when we lack patience. This is what we get when we lack patience. We have already delved into the merits and demerits and the details before we can give the Member permission. 

Hon. Sarah Opendi, Hon. Oboth Oboth indirectly, gave you advice that it is important to build on the other Bill; you look at the components of the other Bill, though he wanted me to rule on it, it was an indirect way of saying there is a Bill. 

It is your right to bring a Bill, we shall have a chance to scrutinise it, including the title; if there is anything to do with the title because also the title is approved here. 

Therefore, colleagues, I request that we do not take this far, because the Prime Minister's Time by law should be 4 pm. She was generous to give me five minutes; I am seeing that I have taken long. Let me allow Hon. Nathan Byanyima two minutes and we vote on this matter.

4.11
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga North County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am bringing in a justification for this motion. We all acknowledge that the proposal to consolidate and reform the law relating to marriage, separation and divorce, has had a long history in this Parliament. 

In 2003, we had the Domestic Relations Bill and later we had the Marriage and Divorce Bill; all of them got stiff resistance from the society. 

Those Bills remained unfinished and so they elapsed. Mr Speaker, we all know that a family is the basic unit of society, and a primary social unit. 

Indeed, the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda recognises the right of a man and a woman to marry and found a family. 

The benefits of having a woman to marry and well-regulated marriages and rights that accrue are beneficial to all of us; we all owe our origin to families. 

It is important to note that over time, a number of legal and policy reforms have occurred, which render the application of certain provisions of current laws relating to marriage and divorce, arbitrary. 

For example, the 1995 Constitution, which provides for equal rights, you remember girls could not get any benefits from their fathers, now the law allows it. The resolution under Article 31- this is not fully reflected in our laws. 

In addition, courts of law have made a number of decisions, declared some provisions of the existing laws unconstitutional. For example, some grounds of divorce, the return of bride price, widow inheritance, among others. As a result, we have to face these inevitable changes and align the existing law to ease implementation. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, there is need to harmoniously consolidate and reform the current law relating to marriage, separation, divorce, to align it to the legal policy and social reforms that have taken place, some of which I have highlighted above. I beg to move. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. Colleagues, this is going to be our Bill. I was going to allow Hon. Dorcas but please it is going to be our Bill; we are the ones who are going to process it and each one of us will be given a chance, in case you give the Member permission or leave to introduce the Bill. 

Now, I put a question that a motion seeking leave of the House to introduce a private Member's Bill entitled, “The Marriage Bill” be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Hon. Sarah, go and work on your Bill; congratulations. Next item 

PRIME MINISTER’S TIME

4.15
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Mr Speaker, Hon. Nanyondo Veronica - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister, go on please.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I request for your protection.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, you are protected.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the Hon. Nanyondo Veronica, Woman MP Bukomansimbi was concerned about the high and consistently rising prices of agricultural inputs. She said that the prices of key items like seeds, herbicides, fertilisers, tools, implements and machines, among others were prohibitive, which was making agricultural enterprise unviable. 

The District Woman Representative of Bukomansimbi therefore, requested me to explain the intervention and the plan the Government has to address these issues. 

Mr Speaker and colleagues, the Government is encouraging the use of e-agriculture system to cushion farmers from escalating prices of agro-inputs. 

The Government is promoting locally manufactured agro-inputs, including seeds, acaricides, vaccines, fertilisers and herbicides. For example, the Government is working with the private sector actors like:

    i.  Eram (U) Ltd to do fill and finish poultry powders.

    ii. Sanga Vet Chem Limited to produce acaricides.

    iii. VermiPro to manufacture organic fertilisers and pesticides.

    iv.  NARO and Makerere College of Veterinary Medicine and bio-security commonly known as (COVAB) to produce tick, foot and mouth and the African swine fever vaccines.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, we shall strengthen our agro-dealer associations. This intervention aims to facilitate pooling of agro-input orders or demands from farmers and bulking them to purchase those inputs to take advantage of the economies of scale and to reduce the transaction costs between agro-input manufacturers and dealers which will translate into reduced prices to farmers. 

Building and strengthening the capacity of farmers to properly use agro-inputs while sensitising and preparing communities to adjust to rising prices. We also advise farmers to remain frugal. 

Mr Speaker, question number two comes from Nyamutoro Phiona, the National Female Youth MP. She says that recently, the Government of Uganda launched the distribution of Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG), starter kits targeting 1 million households in a bid to promote safe and clean cooking.  She asked me to update the country on this programme. 

Mr Speaker, the update is that over the years, heavy reliance on biomass, that is, firewood and charcoal as the primary cooking energy, has eroded Uganda’s national tree cover with adverse effects on the environment and the health of the population. The National Development Plan (NDP III) emphasises the need for increased uptake of LPG as an alternative and efficient cooking technology.

Government will give out one million LPG starter kits to Ugandans for free, comprising locally manufactured 13kg cylinders with accessories and a cook stove to the deserving households not using LPG, but who will be required to pay for the gas at a cost of approximately Shs 100,000. The project will initially target cities and urban centres because of their high charcoal consumption and will then be rolled out to other areas across the country. 

Mr Speaker, I would like Parliament to note that we approved Shs 19 billion for the Financial Year 2022/2023 for this purpose. The kits are being distributed on behalf of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development by Vivo Energy Uganda, Total Energies Marketing Uganda Ltd and Stabex International Uganda Ltd. The companies shall distribute the cylinders to the households in different parts of the country following the agreed guideline criteria. 

On 5 July 2022, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, launched the distribution of Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) Starter Kits at Makindye Sabagabo-Bugo Zone Busabala and the full distribution of these kits commenced on l2 July 2022 by Total Energies, Marketing Uganda Ltd and Stabex International Uganda Ltd, on behalf of the Government of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, increased usage of LPG will address the problem of continued dependence on biomass, resulting in massive reduction of plant cover, which is currently manifested through the prolonged dry spells that have recently been experienced. 

Mr Speaker, our target is to achieve a 20 per cent distribution to households across the country by the year 2030 from the current 0.8 per cent. 

We continue to encourage Ugandan households to embrace the use of this technology.

The third question is from hon. Jonathan Odur, Member of Parliament of Erute South. He is concerned about the deplorable state of Kamdini-Lira Road, whose funding from World Bank has been delayed, leading to the abandonment of the site by the contractor. 

Mr Speaker, following the finalisation of the design and approval of safeguards requirements, the Minister of Works and Transport together with the Members of Parliament conducted a ground-breaking ceremony for the rehabilitation of this road on 22 April 2022. Thereafter, an instruction to commence major rehabilitation works was issued on I7 June 2022 by the consultant. 

The contractor has fully mobilised and started with the major works including the rehabilitation and improvement works effective 0l July 2022. The contractor has also commenced drainage construction as part of the major rehabilitation works. The full rehabilitation of the corridor from Soroti to Kamdini is expected to last 36 months and to end by 30 June 2025. In order to make the section motorable during the execution of the works, forward maintenance of the Lira-Kamdini section has been undertaken.

The poor sections from Lira to Loro, about 50 km, have been improved with crushed stone material mixed with gravel and sealed with bitumen and these will be sealed to minimise on dust. Fifteen kilometres have so far been sealed. The remaining section up to Kamdini will be completed by the end of August 2022.

Hon. Joel Ssenyonyi Basekezi, Member of Parliament, Nakawa West asked a question on a looming eviction of over 30,000 people, some of whom are bonafide occupants of land belonging to Uganda Railways Corporation, in areas of Banda and Kireka in Nakawa Division, who have been given an ultimatum of up to 3l August 2021 to vacate the land.

Mr Speaker, I would like to say that Government is currently undertaking rehabilitation of the Metre Gauge railway truck from Malaba to Kampala. The project requires the railway reserve void of encumbrance and mainly for safety reasons. URC has had several consultative meetings with the railway reserve occupants, in the presence of the ministers of works, area Members of Parliament, local district leaders, security personnel and other stakeholders in preparation for this project since 2018. I believe our colleague had not yet become a Member of Parliament. 

URC has also conducted a Resettlement Action Plan, which is in two phases; the Malaba–Namanve and the Namanve-Kampala-Kyengera and Port Bell line - the Chief Government Valuer has already approved the Malaba-Namanve section. The Namanve–Kampala-Kyengera and Port Bell sections await the Chief Government Valuer’s approval. In adherence to the law of the land, URC has also issued eviction notices both on radios and newspapers. A copy of which is attached. 

Hon. Paul Akamba, Member of Parliament Busiki County asked a question on the delay in compensation of Project Affected Persons (PAPs) of the Standard Gauge Railway (SGR) project and the need for evaluation of the land, whose value has appreciated since its initial valuation time.

Mr Speaker, the entire right of way from Tororo to Kampala was demarcated and gazetted. The total land to be acquired is 4,700 acres (including the main line and spurs). The total land compensation cost was estimated at Shs 584.90 billion in 2016, to be paid to 10,676 Projected Affected Persons. 
The Government Chief Valuer approved Shs 254.90 billion for Tororo-Mayuge and Buikwe plus fish ponds and Sole Hope in Jinja in 2016. 

Out of the Shs 254.90 billion worth of approved reports, Shs 100.37 billion has been paid to 4,274 Project Affected Persons.

Reports on the section between Jinja to Kampala (except Buikwe) were revaluated and revaluation is still ongoing by the Chief Government Valuer. 

Overall, about 5l per cent of the required land has been acquired. 

Mr Speaker, Hon. Geoffrey Lutaaya, Member of Parliament, Kakuuto County, is talking about the uncertainties regarding the compensation of Project Affected Persons (PAPs) along the Masaka-Mutukula Road contrary to the 21 April 2022 undertaking by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, during her visit to Kakuuto County, that PAPs listed by the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) would be compensated.

Mr Speaker, the feasibility study and the detailed design for the rehabilitation of the project was completed in December 2020. The Government of Uganda requested the African Development Bank to consider the project for funding. 

The rehabilitation will follow the existing alignment of the road. However, there will be some widening of the road to improve safety, especially the climbing lanes.

Compensation will be limited to areas where the road will be widening because it is already an existing road and therefore, there is no need to acquire more land. 

Mr Speaker, the Uganda National Roads Authority awaits funding and is carrying out routine maintenance on that road. 

Hon. David Lukyamuzi Kalwanga, Member of Parliament, Busujju County, is concerned about the abandonment of projects in Mityana District, citing the case of water, roads and energy projects, which were prematurely deserted by contractors shortly after commencement of construction and the need for an investigation into the matter.

Electricity in Busunju County 

The line from Butayunja Subcounty, Busunju County bordering Kakindo Town Council has works ongoing now.

Mityana North 

The line in Mityana from Misere-Jungwe-Naalyankanja-Bulera is also ongoing. 

Roads

Mr Speaker, the Uganda National Roads Authority is currently undertaking the rehabilitation of Mityana-Mubende and upgrading Mityana town roads. The contractor is on site and the works are going on well. 

Hon. Charles Tebandeke, Member of Parliament, Bbale County –

a) 	is concerned about the discriminative issuance of trading licenses to fish traders. 
b) 	and limitation of licensing the trade in fish maws to aliens to the detriment of the natives.

Fisheries licensing is a fisheries management tool that is carried out on an annual basis and is supposed to be conducted from the 2nd of January to the 31st of March each year.

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has upgraded from manual licensing to electronic licensing. The licensing activity involves application by the intending fishers, traders, processors and exporters.

The applicants log onto the URA portal where assessment is done and bank payment forms are generated. Once the licensee pays in the bank, their details are forwarded to the Directorate of Fisheries Resources, where logging is done on the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries licensing portal to complete the licensing process and issue a license.

Therefore, the system is not discriminative since it is automated. Fish maw is the swim bladder of Nile Perch and hence, it is a by-product. The sustainability of the fish maw business depends on the sustainability of Nile Perch catches and stocks.

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and specifically the Directorate of Fisheries top management has established and agreed on a criterion on which the fish maw traders were to be assessed and only those that meet the minimum requirements are licensed.

This year, a total of 37 firms/individuals have had their premises/facilities inspected and recommended for issuance of the licenses for the year 2022. Those with the minimum basic facilities, as per the regulations and fulfilment of the criteria set by the Directorate Top Management, are already issued with the 17 licenses. Others are being issued as and when they comply. A total of 21 licenses have already been issued.

The licensing of fish maw collectors and traders for 2022 has, however, delayed due to a number of reasons:

1. 	The need to register and vet all the fish maw dealers before they are licensed for purposes of regulating and control of the number of fish maw dealers licensed per district on the three lakes, which have Nile Perch (Lake Victoria, Kyoga and Albert); 2. Following the massive deaths of Nile Perch in the late 2020 and early 2021 due to fish poisoning, the factories experienced a sharp decline in supply of Nile Perch for processing, which has also negatively impacted the fish exports. There are reports that the sharp decline in Nile Perch supply is linked to the primitive fishing methods of the fish maw dealers. 

Mr Speaker, this is the last question. Hon. Amos Okot, Member of Parliament, Agago North County together with Hon. David Lagen, Member of Parliament, Agago County and Hon. Beatrice Akori, Woman Representative, Agago – I have heard that Hon. Beatrice Akori – I want to take this opportunity - I know the official communication is coming but I congratulate her and others. (Laughter) You know - from everywhere – NRM is so embracing.

Mr Speaker, there has been unrest caused by cattle rustling by people coming from Karamoja subregion, affecting the areas of Omiya Pachwa, Paimol, Lai-Motu, Parabongo, Lapono, Lirakato subcounties and part of Wol and Kuywee subcounties. Over 27 parishes in Agago North County were affected. 

Mr Speaker, Adilang Town Council and Adilang Subcounty as well as Laperebong, Lukole, Ajale, Kotonor subcounties were also affected. Over 26 parishes in Agago County were affected.

In the last three months, Mr Speaker, the insurgency has caused a lot of disaster in the area, including:

    1. Over 30 people have lost their lives,
    2. Over 7,000 households are in need of food.
    3. Over 700 herds of cattle and 2,000 goats were stolen.

The prayers of the Members are:

    a. That the affected communities/households be supported with food relief, planting materials, agricultural tools and equipment to revive their livelihoods.

    b. That the Uganda People’s Defence Force (UPDF) involve the local vigilantes - Arrow Boys – in their operations.

    c. That security roads be opened between Karamoja and Acholi subregion.

    d. Combative deployment in the hilly areas. 

Mr Speaker, a number of meetings have been held in my office with Members of Parliament and the Ministry for Karamoja Affairs, the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees and the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, among others. Others have been held at Adilang Subcounty in Agago District, concerning the recent alarming security situation in the area. 

Mr Speaker, the command was changed and the Deputy Commandant of 73rd Battalion, Brig. Omagino, has been deployed in Adilang.

Notably, in Adilang Subcounty and Town Council, more three detaches were added to the already existing seven detaches, making a total of 10 in order to close the Karamojong infiltration routes.

On 17 July, warriors stole 41 cows from Adilang as mentioned below; 

    a) Mary Abala - 11 cows were stolen and all of them were recovered.
    b) Martine Omiya - seven cows were stolen and five were recovered. We are still looking for the two.  
    c) Florence Alayo - 10 cows were stolen and all of them recovered. 
    d) Santina Aloyo - 11 cows were stolen and all of them recovered. 
    e) Okot Walter - four cows were stolen and two recovered when our soldiers made a follow-up. 

In addition, changes in command and deployments were made in the presence of the leaders of the area – the district leaders, local leaders and the community – to improve the security environment of the area.

The leaders who were present, Mr Speaker, were the LC 5 Chairman, Mr Leonard Ojok Opio, the Resident District Commissioner, Hon. Okot Emmanuel and the LC 3 Chairman of Adilang Subcounty, Mr Muhammed Okwii. 

Mr Speaker, today, Government dispatched relief items to the affected districts, including Agago. 

Government is coming up with the following suggestions: 

To deploy drones to detect the attacks, including those that will come at night and a helicopter for surveillance in those hilly areas.

Mr Speaker, as we were starting the questions, a question came from a colleague about the Law Development Centre (LDC). Can I answer? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is your time, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Go on.

MS NABBANJA: I thought I had run out of time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you still have time for oral questions. 

MS NABBANJA: Can I wait for that time to answer this one of LDC?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Go on.
 
MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, as we were here, I asked my staff to rush to LDC and find out what is happening. They have brought me a statement and I request that I read it verbatim.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, go ahead.
 
MS NABBANJA: The statement is that the graduation ceremony was originally supposed to take place on 20 May 2022, as a fully physical event but had to be postponed due to the absence of a management committee. When the new management committee was instituted and it fixed the graduation date for 29 July 2022, the committee took a decision to have a virtual or online graduation ceremony, bearing in mind the uncertainty of an ever-evolving COVID-19 situation in the country and the need to ensure health and safety. Graduation was up to 5,000 people in attendance, which could be a COVID-19 super-spreader event.
 
The decision to have a virtual graduation ceremony was taken by the management committee, the highest policy body and decision-making organ of LDC. The director and secretariat team are obliged to implement that decision.
 
That the lessons learnt from the COVID-19 pandemic have led to evolution of a new normal. Indeed, the 48th Graduation Ceremony in 2022 was wholly virtual – online – and all the LDC students who passed went through the same, virtually. 

Whereas LDC would have loved to conduct a physical ceremony, there is no statutory neither legal requirement for a graduation ceremony to be held physically. The best-performing students, all Bar Course students who attained First Class diplomas, the top 10 students in other courses and a few student leaders will represent the others at the physical function.
 
It is not true that students have paid graduation fee of Shs 400,000. The graduation fee is Shs 200,000. The other Shs 200,000 is for diploma certificates and transcripts to which all graduates are entitled. The Shs 200,000 graduation fee is not physical graduation fee. 

A student will be graduated by the LDC and the service paid for whether they attend physically or not. The graduation fee is not paid to LDC; it is paid to Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) and is part of Government revenue. The Law Development Centre does not get any direct financial benefit from the fee paid.
 
The cost of organising a graduation ceremony comes from the fund appropriated by Parliament and released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to LDC. The difficult financial situation nationally means LDC, like any other Government institution, has faced budget cuts and needs to spend its resources frugally.

Contrary to popular belief, a virtual or online graduation is not cheap or cost free. There are logistical costs of setting up a virtual venue, arranging for a few physical attendances. There is also a substantial cost involved in livestreaming the event. 

Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I got this information from Frank Obonyo, the Public Relations Officer.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I think, Prime Minister, you will need to interest yourself in the issue of graduation fees in public universities. It is like me, paying fees to study. You are required to give me a report but then you say, I must pay for the report. All the years of studying when I was doing it, what was I up to? Two hundred thousand shillings as graduation fee for just a certificate is really too much. Interest yourself in the matter and I know you will look into it.

I will allow some Members to ask a few questions.

4.51
MS AISA AGABA (NRM, Bugangaizi East County, Kakumiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I come from Bugangaizi East and my people were telling me of their problems. We have an issue with dairy farmers. Their milk is being sold at between Shs 800 and Shs 1,000. However, in Hoima, the milk is sold at Shs 2,000. In Kampala, the milk is being sold at Shs 3,500. 

Mr Speaker, my people have school-going children. At a price of Shs 800 and Shs 1000, they are unable to pay for school fees for their children. My question to the Prime Minister or to the Government and the Ministry of Agriculture is: what plans do they have for the prices of milk?

Secondly, the prices of crops like maize - they are not standardised and my people cannot compete favourably. I want my people to get enough money to pay for their children's school fees and have peace in this country.

Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Aisa Agaba. Colleagues, Prime Minister’s Time is provided for in the rules and I am limited by time. Not more than 45 minutes. I have four minutes remaining.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, Hon. Aisa Agaba's question is a bit challenging because that is where I come from. Anyhow, we have a plan and some milk coolers have already been taken to Kisita Subcounty. There is also another, which we are going to take to Nkoko. When they have a way of storing their milk, I know they will look for prices, if they transport this milk to another distant area.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Please, one minute for your question. 

4.54
MS JANET OKORI-MOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The current famine being faced in Karamoja region has affected all the nine districts. Yes, Government, through the Office of the Prime Minister, is delivering some food to the Karamoja districts. However, while this is so, Mr Speaker, the people of Abim are watching with dismay, trucks carrying food passing through Abim taking it to Kotido, Abim, Kaabong and Karenga. 

Mr Speaker, this kind of scenario is very intimidating. People are contemplating intercepting some of these trucks –(Applause)- and having the food. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when is Abim District getting food under the current arrangement?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Your question is direct.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, it is true we prioritised those districts which had many issues of death. People were dying in Kaabong and all of you know it. The limited number of trucks we have at the Prime Minister’s office – yesterday, we dispatched other trucks and some of them are destined for Abim. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. One minute.

4.56
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in West Nile right now, critical operations in regional hospitals cannot take place. Vaccines that need power -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Go and take your seats, honourable members. This is not about lobbying. You do not speak in this House through lobbying the Speaker. You will catch the eye of the Speaker. 

MR OGUZU: Prime Minister, I was drawing your attention to an urgent matter, which needs urgent attention. And I was saying that right now, critical operations cannot take place in hospitals in West Nile because power is not available. The company, Electromax that you contracted as a stop-gap measure to provide power to WENRECO, doesn’t have fuel. As a result, all cold storage facilities cannot run and operations cannot take place. I want to know if there is someone or people in charge. What should we expect?

Secondly, the President guided that the Government should pay tobacco farmers. To what extent have you proceeded to implement that guidance? Thank you

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, today I am lucky. The Minister for Energy is here. I request, through you, Mr Speaker, that the Minister of Energy helps me to answer that question.

4.59
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will be in West Nile on the 28th - next week. I have already informed the people. I have been going there and I have been interacting with the MPs from West Nile trying to solve the problem of Electromax. I have just heard that the current situation is caused by lack of fuel. Obviously, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is going to talk to Electromax. We have done it before, to make sure that we provide fuel so that we can generate power to save the people. I am going to do that right away.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I had allowed Hon. Babungi - [Member: “The Tobacco issue has not been addressed.”] 

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, we have a pending issue to do with the tobacco farmers in West Nile. Two regions were struggling in the same way. Last year, we managed to pay the tobacco farmers in Bunyoro and Mubende sub regions. The President has directed that we pay those people. I am in touch and in talks with the Minister of Trade. You will also be covered.

5.00
MR DENIS SEKABIRA (NUP, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 14 June 2022, ideally 16 days to closure of the Financial Year 2021/2022, Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) officials and agents came to my constituency of Katikamu North, to be specific in Luweero Town Council, evaluated and over assessed retail businesses and gave them an ultimatum of 10 days to pay income tax.

As a Member of Parliament, I coordinated a meeting between URA and the traders, where we resolved that URA gives them more time. However, to my dismay, this afternoon I have received calls from the constituency that URA has started putting seals on these shops and yet we had agreed that they be given more time in the first place to revaluate and assess because according to the Act, these people are supposed to pay very little money compared to what was assessed. 

In this case, I do not want to pose a question to the Prime Minister but to ask her to intervene so we help these small scale traders. I thank you so much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I know it is the responsibility of all Ugandans to pay tax. Like the Member has put it, through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who shall go and intervene. There are colleagues who gave me papers -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is my power to choose who to ask you a question. This habit of Members sending you questions because I have not picked them is trying to shortcut me. Please, kindly -

Colleagues, you are about 100 people standing up. We have limitations within our own rules, which you set. So, I cannot create any more time. Next time, you will get a chance. I do not have any reason for not picking you. Please bear with me, it is so difficult. One day, I will call one of you to sit here and you see what it means. I kindly request you to read rule 41.

5.03
MS JOSEPHINE BABUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issues I am putting forward to the Prime Minister are due to the limited Road Fund, which cannot be enough for routine road maintenance.

In Bundibugyo, we have bridges that were washed away by the floods and some roads, which the district cannot manage. We requested the Ministry of Works to help us because we do not have enough funds. 

The Ministry of Works came and surveyed Humya, Bundiyolume, Kitara, Kisuba Health Centre III, Busaru-Kokoba road that connects all those areas and they are 23 kilometres. Since the ministry came and surveyed those areas, it went silent. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I want to know when those roads will be worked on. 

Secondly, about the Nyahuka-Mirambi Bridge, the then Minister for Works, Hon. Katumba Wamala, promised that the bridge would be worked on when the funds are available. This is a big bridge and it connects so many subcounties, especially during the cocoa season, when vehicles have to pass but instead -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Honourable. Make your prayer; just a question.

MS BABUNGI: Yes, I am concluding. Prime Minister, when will the bridge be worked on? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, as the Prime Minister comes, rule 41 (8) says, “The Prime Minister's Time shall not exceed 45 minutes.” So, before complaining, these are your own rules; you are the ones who allowed them. Go on, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, because they know Hon. Nabbanja is “majegere” - I have already covered one hour and I am still strong to answer the questions.

Now that the Minister of Works is here, just the way I did with the Minister of Energy, I request you, Mr Speaker, to allow him help me answer that question so that we can give a relevant answer to the Member.

5.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) Mr Musa Ecweru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I came here this morning, I met a team of my engineers to look at all the challenges affecting the country, particularly on bridges and roads.

The truth is that the burden is big and we have agreed that we are going to intervene in a phased manner. We are going to indicate to you where we are going to start from; which ones we will work on and which ones will be pending. 

I will be able to share with my colleague of Bundibugyo and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister what we are going to do particularly to the bridge and at what time we are making the intervention.

5.07
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Prime Minister for the energy in answering the questions. Allow me to begin with a light one. We have had some ideas generated from my side with my whip. Probably, they could offer a partial remedy to some of the challenges we have in the House and to the presiding officers because inevitably, we are a bloated House.

We have clustered our side over the last couple of weeks and now that we have a Government Chief Whip, probably next week, we would meet the presiding officers and agree to refresh our whipping system. 

In a House sitting for probably six hours at the maximum, not everyone can speak. If we sharpen our whipping system a little bit, it will help Members to have occasion to be on the Floor and avoid this kind of situation where everybody is fighting to catch the Speaker’s eye. If that will help a bit, I hope we can share with the incoming Whip to find a way of relieving the pressure on the House and the Members.

Secondly, I would like to ask the Prime Minister to find occasion to sort out the mess of the Law Development Centre and those small things like graduation. A graduation ceremony is a feel-good day. For some of us who went to the Law Development Centre, it is a furnace. Graduating out of there – students need a feel-good situation about the day. I will tell you that the ceremony is on the 29th but on the 31st, they have a sports day that will even gather more than the number at graduation. 

So, it is a case of probably - for lack of a better word - intellectual dishonesty for them to claim that they cannot gather those students for graduation. The graduating students are barely 1,500. The people attending – they can limit the non- students and allow students to have their feel-good day because it is not an easy situation to leave that place. (Applause) 

So, probably, the Prime Minister would want to find out why they want to deny these students their final day in the furnace, Mr Speaker. When students pay Shs 200,000 and they are 1,500, LDC has Shs 300 million for a song and URA collects for - we all know how the systems work. URA collects but for the same MDAs and, therefore, they have budgets and they will remit. So, it is a no-brainer – trying to educate us on how revenues are collected and what happens after collection.

Mr Speaker, I will be very brief. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the question raised by Hon. Veronica Nanyondo, relating to the high cost of agricultural inputs, may not be solved by asking farmers to do what you have proposed. 

Maybe - and I think it is feasible - if Government put itself together and imagined a little bit, some of the challenges require long-term solutions and, therefore, require reforms in the entire system. However, the short-term challenges to the farmers need a bit of adjustment. 

Take an example – poultry farmers are suffering with the cost of feeds because we export raw maize. We export unprocessed maize but other countries don't because they need to retain bran to support the farmers. Does that require a long-term solution? 

So, you need to allow the systems to quick-queue plausible responses so that they do not give you cram work they have in their air-conditioned offices. Ask your people to think deeper –(Applause)- to help you respond to the challenges of the farmers.

Mr Speaker, at the beginning of this Parliament, one of the issues that was raised and Members even applauded, was that ministers would take time and outline projects – road projects or agricultural projects – that they will undertake for every district in a financial year and put them in the pigeonholes of Members so that Members can know what is going to be undertaken because they have work plans and they have budget ceilings. (Applause)

For us to come here and exchange as if the Government is on holiday is unacceptable. They can make available what they are planning to do for Members of Parliament to actually understand. These Members of Parliament are very understanding; they will know that this will not be possible in my constituency this financial year and they can work properly. 

Is there a Government? Did the Government planning function go on holiday? Please, communicate. The Opposition is working; that is why we ask whether the Government is alive. Communicate to Members - Members are very understanding - to avoid this kind of exchange on the Floor of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, on the question raised by Hon. Jonathan Odur, relating to the road works, I think the honourable member did not get a response on whether Government is undertaking rehabilitation or reconstruction. The presidential order was reconstruction – I hope I am right, honourable minister for works. The order was reconstruction. The Member was concerned that what he is seeing is rehabilitation. 

Secondly, the President ordered that Government takes over because the World Bank had inordinately delayed to avail funding. Probably, the Prime Minister will have to clarify on what is going on, for the honourable members to be on the same page. 

The question, Prime Minister, raised by Hon. Ssenyonyi requires a clearer answer and I want to invite you to look at your last page – where you are informing the Member that in adherence to the law of the land, URC has also issued eviction notices.

The law of the land, specifically Article 26(b) and attendant sub articles, talks about compensation before eviction. The issuance of the notice is - we talked about a timeline of 31 August. It does not rhyme with the law of the land that you are referring to, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

So, is compensation done? That is the law of the land. Do you wish to clarify on which law of the land URC is implementing? Have they compensated timely and adequately before this notice takes effect? That is the concern of the Member, Rt. Hon. Prime Minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, LOP. Conclude.

MR MPUUGA: Yes, in a minute, Mr Speaker. For the question raised by Hon. Geoffrey Lutaaya about the Mutukula Road, people’s properties were marked, probably more than a year ago. The Prime Minister is informing Parliament, in response to the question, that actually, a few sections are going to be widened. That does not respond to the concern of the citizens – the Project Affected Persons (PAPs). Their properties were marked. Now, they are not sure. Once your property is marked, the issue is, please, take leave of this property; it is going to be compensated. 

So, Prime Minister, the vacuum is that when you make this statement, it leaves a lot of uncertainty because citizens whose properties were marked do not know whether, actually, compensation will be undertaken or UNRA is going to selectively compensate. If you are not going to compensate, let them go and speak to the PAPs hitherto whose properties were marked, for them to be sure or revert to their properties, Mr Speaker. 

Finally, the concerns of Hon. Tebandeke on the issue of licensing fish maw traders relate to the fact that the natives are complaining that there is a cartel that has partaken all the licences and that cartel is organised and connected. The concern is deprivation of citizens from accessing licences – hiding under a very stringent licensing regime. They are told, “You do not qualify”. 

The system is very complex. You go and login and it tells you, you do not qualify. This system is not from the moon. It is man-made. It is manipulatable. The duty of any Government worth its name is to protect natives to benefit from the resources in their midst. Some of these natives know only fishing as a source of livelihood.

Rt Hon.  Prime Minister, you have not offered assurance to these citizens that have been deprived of a livelihood from smart cartels that are dominating resources of this country everywhere. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker. I expect the Prime Minister to be more unequivocal in responding to Members’ question, not to leave them hanging and unanswered because they will return next week with the same questions. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, LOP. Unfortunately, our rule 41(9) allows the LOP a comment or a right of reply. So, it does not call for your question for the Prime Minister to come back here. So, it is taking note of what he has raised and then you benefit from it as Government. 

Now, colleagues, I want us to go back to the debate on malaria, which I promised to tackle last time. Okay, so we shall go back to it.  Clerk, is that item 3(2)?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON INTERVENTIONS TO ERADICATE MALARIA IN UGANDA BY 2030

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, you remember, we suspended the debate on this although many colleagues still wanted to contribute. So, I gave a paper for Members to write their names; I mean those who were here that day. I am going to give them first priority because people sat here up to 8.00 p.m; I cannot be unfair to them. 

I announced that colleagues write their names and I have the Members here who wrote; they are about 58. So, I will first read their names. Otherwise, next time I promise - and if you were not here, you didn't tell me why because you were supposed to be here. Therefore, I will start with Hon. Sharifah Taban, if she is here. 

5.20
MS SHARIFAH TABAN (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The day we discussed malaria, many colleagues in this House said that they had never received mosquito nets. I am here to attest that Koboko District received a whole trailer of mosquito nets and I was a beneficiary, and these nets actually helped my people a lot. 

Mr Speaker, my only concern is: after using these nets for seven months, they naturally started tearing. So, I would like to request the Minister of Health to get some quality control so that we get quality nets. Instead of us investing $135 million buying nets every year, it is better we buy quality nets so that next time, we can use the money for other things to cater to other departments. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The list is here and I am following it.

5.22
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to be transparent.

MS CHEMUTAI: I would like to thank the Minister of Health for the report. My concern was mainly about pregnant women. Usually, pregnant women are given the mama kits in hospitals during delivery time yet this may not save the woman who got malaria during pregnancy. 

Therefore, I request Government to always have these nets given to women in time in early pregnancy. 

I also request the ministry to increase the number of mosquito nets that are to be given out. In Kapchorwa, we received them last year but they were few; every family got only four nets. And imagine if a family has 10 or more than 10 children, it means that only four will be saved. Therefore, my request is that let the ministry distribute enough nets next time. Thank you.

5.24
MS BETTY CHELAIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concerns are on the issue of malaria treatment. According to the report presented by the honourable minister, it was said that Karamoja has red indicators of malaria cases. However, at the time of telling us about the interventions of malaria prevention, the honourable minister said that Amudat is excluded from the chemoprevention programme. 

My prayer is that the minister explains the reasons that made her exclude Amudat District yet that place has high cases of malaria. Thank you.

5.25
DR ABRAHAM ISAMAT (NRM, Kapir County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of eradicating malaria, in my opinion, for now may appear like a dream because we are aware that the vector that carries malaria parasites is actually a mosquito and the causative agent of malaria is a plasmodium. 

The idea of eradicating malaria is something that all of us can support but it calls for intensive and extensive research to be done, and this should be targeted towards acquiring, if possible, a vaccine which all people can be subjected to. That is my opinion. I thank you very much.

5.26
MR DAVID LAGEN (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the chance and opportunity to submit. I am also very grateful for the report presented by the minister, especially on the issue of malaria. Malaria has been killing people more than the COVID-19 pandemic - and these are very serious issues in the country. 

Now my challenge is, during the recess when I went back home, I happened to visit the area health centre IV. However, I was very surprised by the number of patients there. They were so many to the extent that there were even no beds for inpatients. This is a very big challenge that we are facing in Agago District. 

Therefore, it is my prayer that the ministry takes into consideration the fact that there are so many patients with malaria cases in that area yet the facilities are not enough. I pray that the ministry takes this into consideration very seriously.

Secondly, regarding the issue of the mosquito nets, I suggest that the distribution be periodical, perhaps after every two or three months. I am saying this because if you consider the population and the number of mosquito nets being given out - you know, sometimes, there are circumstances that arise where the nets get spoiled; maybe they get burnt. When such a thing happens, then a pregnant woman will have to look for another mosquito net to take care of themselves. 

My request to Government is that they need to make sure that they plan effectively to provide mosquito nets regularly. I beg to submit.

5.28
MR GEOFREY MUTIWA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the minister for the report presented. Indeed, cases of malaria are on the rise, especially in my district of Butaleja. 

Mr Speaker, over the weekend, I moved to a number of health centres in my constituency. I also got a report from the district, which shows that over 46 people tested positive for malaria between the months of April and June. Mr Speaker, many of these people were not able to get medication simply because there were not enough drugs in the health centres. 

My request to the minister is that there should be an increase in anti-malarials. The report I got is that the National Drug Authority sends drugs that are enough for just one month and for the rest of the two months in that quarter, people lack drugs in the health centres.

Secondly, mosquito nets should be given to everybody because currently, they give only to pregnant mothers. However, malaria is killing people, especially children between the ages of five to 15 years. On an average, every day, we bury about five to 10 children in Butaleja. I request that the ministry gives mosquito nets across the board as this can help in reducing the –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Milton Muwuma. Colleagues, I am reading from the list. You do not need to stand up until I finish my list or until I tell you I am done with the list. Just remain seated, I have 58 people who registered.

5.30
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me join the colleagues in thanking the Minister for Health. I want to be on record that I fell in love with the way she handles this docket. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I pray you stop at that.

MR MUWUMA: Mr Speaker, it is loud and clear. We have had ministers in this docket who are there to defend the sector. The minister before us has always been there; if there is a problem somewhere, she will always want to be part of the solution and not to just defend for the sake of defending. 

I also wanted to put on record the issue to do with nutrition. The other day when a Member talked of malnutrition, a colleague attacked her because of raising an issue to do nutrition. Nutrition is one of the key issues that we need to address when fighting malaria because a number of children die because of feeding poorly or lacking what to feed. Therefore, we want to interest the Government that as we push the fight against malaria, we should also be looking at promoting food security and providing children with the necessary diet. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, I want to be educated. In the Ninth Parliament, we struggled with Hon. Lukyamuzi when he fought indoor residual spraying. When he got convinced, we agreed that we start with Lango sub region because it was then at the highest risk. However, after that, we feel there is reoccurrence. Can we be educated further because they said the insects, on entering these houses, would die there and then - (Member timed out.)

5.33
MS JACINTA ATUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapelebyong): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Last time when the minister presented, I appreciated the report but I noticed that she did not clarify the strategies used in eradicating malaria. 

In strategy (b); Integrating Community Case Management of child illnesses, she indicated that there are 63 districts across the country. I am interested to know these districts; which ones are those? 

In addition, who are the people who carry out Integrating Community Case Management? Is it the midwives, the health assistants or the VHTs? I would also love to know. 

The other concern is those mothers who live in hard-to-reach areas, especially those subcounties without any health centre. For example, in Kapelebyong, I have a subcounty called Achinga. During the rainy season, it is cut off for a period of four months. Therefore, it becomes a challenge for pregnant women to go to the nearby subcounty to seek antenatal services. I would have loved the Ministry of Health to consider my district because you find that women have to –(Member timed out.)

5.35
MS IRENE LINDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Fort Portal City): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I equally want to appreciate the Minister of Health for the strategies tabled to this Parliament last week to eradicate malaria. 

According to the report, malaria is still killing very many people. There is need for the Ministry of Health to work closely with the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources in seeing that people stop degrading the environment because we have seen that most of their habitats have been destroyed and now malaria breeds within the communities, which is becoming very difficult for us to prevent. 

My other prayer is that the Ministry of Health considers supporting the health centres II because they are the nearest health centres to our community where most of the people can easily access services. They should ensure that these health centres are equipped with anti-malarial drugs. 

When our people go to these health centres and they do not get the drugs - and the drug shops are very far - they go back home without treating their children, hence an increase in the cases of children dying of malaria.

They should also provide malaria-testing kits to these health care centres. Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. 

5.37
MR ENOCK NYONGORE (NRM, Nakaseke North County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the report presented to this Parliament on 14 July 2022.

However, in the report, I was challenged by the strategies, among which is the way our health system is strengthened. The other day, we talked about giving capacity to the health centres IV. However, the way Uganda is running the health system - in my constituency, you saw on television how health centres IV are understaffed and the way supplies do not come on time because of many constraints, especially roads. 

Mr Speaker, I would like also to know - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please, go on. You have two minutes only and you are wasting your time. 

MR NYONGORE: There are only two health centres that have staff, in my constituency: Kinyogoga and Ngoma health centres IV. However, the wide area has no health centre IV. Now, eradicating malaria is a problem. 

Secondly, we should handle migrant –(Member timed out.) 

5.39 
MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Mr Speaker, I equally join colleagues to thank the Minister of Health for an excellent report, particularly on the idea of activating Village Health Teams. This is good for subcounties that do not have any health facility. 

I have two of them in Napak District and I witnessed the burial of a mother who left her two-month-old baby; she died after presenting with signs of malaria. Therefore, having Village Health Teams to supply those areas with drugs is a plus.

My request is that the allocation for malaria supplies should not be based on the grade of the health facility but rather on the disease burden. This is because places that do not have health facilities face challenges. For places that have health centres II that are operating as though they are health centres III because of the number of cases, the supplies become limited. 

Mr Speaker, last week, you announced in your communication that the Minister of Health would come to give us a report on the health financing for Karamoja. The week has ended but the report has not yet come. The financing for health infrastructure is key especially for those areas that do not have any health facility. 

The delay has made Karamoja miss out. We have been ring-fenced away from all other options of health financing. I wish to know when that report will come to the House so that we can know its status. Thank you.
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Faith, on that issue, the Solicitor-General and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development have cleared it. Very soon, we are going to have that issue settled. 

5.44
MS AISHA KABANDA (NUP, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join colleagues to thank the minister for the statement. I, particularly, would like to address myself to the measures that were given to eradicate malaria. I was disappointed when I did not hear anything to do with complementary medicine. 

Mr Speaker, there is a way the Executive chooses to ignore the recommendations of this House. Just two days before the minister presented her statement, this House had recommended to the Government the use of complementary medicine to help but I did not see it in the report. 

We had reported here that one of us, Prof. Ogwang, had invented medicine that would help in the prevention of malaria. If we use the triangulation of mosquito nets plus JENAMAL, you would find that we would be able to eradicate malaria. I read somewhere that if all of us used JENAMAL for two years, actually, we would forget about malaria. 

Therefore, I am here to advocate for complementary medicine to help our people. Most of the nets we use are imported. So, it is like we get money and then they take it back. Can we help our own? If the ministry recognised this drug and awarded this person with a certificate, what is wrong with using the medicine that he has discovered? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister and colleagues, I am referring this report to the Committee on Health for a comprehensive study and they report back. 

My colleague, Hon. Kivumbi, has just moved out but I have received information from the Executive that the issue of ROKO is an issue, which we have to solve today or we let the company die. 

Now, indecision of this House won’t be used because the bankers raised this issue that we have to make a decision. So, I want you, the House, to vote on this matter – either you allow it or you don’t so that a decision is made. 

Now, I would like to put the question that the House approves the proposal by the Government of Uganda to acquire 150,000 preference shares worth approximately Shs 207.13 billion in ROKO. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I adjourn the House to Tuesday next week.
 
(The House rose at 5.44 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 26 July 2022 at 2.00 p.m.) 
