Thursday, 21 July 2011

Parliament met at 11.17 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s sitting and we apologise for the delay in starting. We had a major mishap with power since about 11.00 p.m. last night. We have been working to see that there is enough power for us to do our work today. That is why we have started a bit late but I hope we shall be able to catch up. 

11.18
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): I am here to raise a matter of national importance. There is a problem of road carnage. Although we have bad roads, the situation is worsened by the movement of heavy trucks during the working hours and parking on highways at night. These trucks swerve in the middle of the roads trying to avoid potholes and end up causing accidents. 

Last Sunday a bus travelling from Rukungiri to Kampala had an accident, three people died and many were injured. Some were admitted to Mbarara Hospital in critical condition. This bus collided with a trailer on the highway between Mbarara and Ntungamo. 

I am also reminded that the last Parliament lost two Members in similar accidents. These were late hon. Viccy Kyaka of Insingiro District and hon. Balikowa of Buyende. Hon. Banyenzaki lost three sisters at a go in 2008. On 4 July 2011, six people died and more than 20 were seriously injured in an accident on Butaleja road. On 25 March 2011, sixteen pupils of Kirimbi primary school were admitted to Hoima Hospital and three passed away after a road accident. 

I am raising this matter after getting worried that our lives are at stake on these roads. For how long are we going to continue losing our people in such circumstances? 

MRS BARUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleague for giving way. You remember this Parliament passed some money for the Nyakahita-Kamwengye road. I want to inform this House that the work being done there is substandard. The dust is too much and this will cause accidents on that road. In fact Members who were there last week survived an accident by the grace of God. It is very dusty and there is no sign to show that this is a ditch or something else. I want to inform the relevant ministry that many accidents are likely to happen on that road.

MR MUGUME: I demand an explanation from the Ministry of Transport and I ask Parliament to direct the minister to ask all heavy trucks not to use these roads at night. The ministry should create parking yards alongside highways where these trucks can park. The Government should compensate the families that have lost their dear ones in such circumstances.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this House has had occasion to discuss the issue of road traffic accidents a number of times. I do not know whether there is any other commitment that we can make because it is continuing despite our lamentations and appeals to the Government?
 
11.22
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I agree with my colleagues that the carnage on our roads is caused by the traffic. In the 1970’s big trucks were stopped from moving at night. This is because at night truck drivers do not give you dim lights or way. Many people died and we stopped them. When changes took place in the late 70’s, the decision of stopping trucks at night was found to be uneconomical. 

I want to suggest that proper time is given to discuss these issues substantially and decisions are taken accordingly. I will ask the minister responsible to take note and enforce proper mechanisms to save the lives of Ugandans being killed on the roads.

11.24
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): I do appreciate the concerns and submissions made by my senior brother in this House. The issue of carnage on our roads - Uganda is second to Ethiopia on the continent of Africa. We still have bitter memories of two of our colleagues who perished while on duty in the course of the last Parliament. We had a case of hon. Balikoowa who was coming from his constituency and his life was brought to a sudden halt in Mabira forest where trucks loaded with sugar have continued to ply the route at night and without reflectors or head lights. After the death of our colleague, there was only change for a week, after which everything went back to normal as if nothing had happened. 

As I talk now, if you have a plan of plying the Jinja-Kampala Road route, you will be surprised to see all those vehicles and tractors in dangerous mechanical condition avoiding the police by moving at night thereby causing death to people. Surely, it was on that note that I brought in the good experiences of my senior brother, Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali. When he was the minister of finance, there was a stand that heavy trucks not be allowed to move on roads after 6.00 p.m. –(Laughter)– yes, I am saying this because there maybe Members in here who may not appreciate the important roles that Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali played during that time; he was a minister of finance in this country –(Interjections)– no, those are occupational hazards – (Interruption)

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank hon. Kassiano Wadri for giving way. I would like to inform hon. Kassiano Wadri that during that time our brother who is now a retired army general was a minister of finance, but today he is the Third Deputy Prime Minister, which is a higher position than the one he held in the 1970s. (Laughter) Thank you.

MR WADRI: I thank hon. Alex Onzima, the MP for Maracha for that information. However, in organizational structure and human resource management, you may also wish to know that there are times when people get horizontal promotions. Yes, you may sound so high, but functionally you may not even be there. (Laughter) So, being a substantive –(Interjections)– yes, these are realities. A substantive minister of finance during the regime of the late Iddi Amin Dada certainly, he was more functional with a lot of controls –(Interruption)

MR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, honestly, we all very well know that hon. Moses Ali is the Third Deputy Prime Minister and he has defended Government in this Parliament. Is it in order for somebody to tell us that his promotion is horizontal while we know that he is the Third Prime Minster? His promotion is vertical.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I think we still have a lot to learn in this Parliament. When you rise on a point of information and you have nothing substantial to inform me about when I am holding the Floor, do not sway into a point of order. Anyway, everybody knows this – we have a Constitution that creates offices in Government. Look at the number of ministerial positions provided for in there. I don’t want to demean positions that have been given. However, at a later stage, we might have to demand more than what has been given. Anyway, that is not the issue I am here to talk about. 

I am talking about carnage on our roads in this country. Carnage is not only occurring on roads. We have time and again seen a number of Ugandans lose lives on water, especially on Lake Albert. How many times have we read stories in newspapers of canoes capsizing on Lake Victoria? Hon. Tim Lwanga, a senior Member of this House knows how he survived by a whisker; he is here. Had he not known how to swim, by now he would not even be amongst us. All that is about –(Interruption)

MR LWANGA: Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague for giving way. When you talk about death while travelling on water, you need to understand that most people die from there because they don’t prepare themselves. I survived because I had prepared myself; I had a life jacket and of course I knew how to swim. So, before you travel on water, please carry a life jacket and you must not smoke and drink while travelling on that boat. You must also travel using a sound boat. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think what hon. Tim Lwanga hasn’t said is that he is also a Musese; a man from the island.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, hon. Tim Lwanga for that information. However, I would like to point out that not everybody is privileged to learn how to swim and to afford a life jacket, but at the same time, I would like to assure the honourable colleague that on a number of occasions I have travelled to the islands in Lake Victoria. Throughout this time, I have realized that those islanders refer to those who come from the mainland as ekidyeri kyaleeta (after all you were brought here by a canoe)- the idea of wearing a life jacket is a taboo to them. Actually many times, those islanders may even refuse passengers to wear them arguing it is satanic. So, if you survived because of that, thanks be to God! 

However, the point I am making is that there is need for Government to come up with safety measures for people who travel on roads, water and in the air so that we can make Uganda a secure place for everybody to come to.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think this matter is noted. We have other work to attend to – okay, let us have the last piece of information.

MR KAGWERA: Thank you. This matter should not only concern the minister of transport; it should also concern the Ministry of Health. The hospitals along the highways are poorly equipped. Yes, we cannot avoid accidents, but let these hospitals be equipped. You will recall that I almost died in an accident the other time and when they took me to Mubende Hospital, there was virtually nothing. So, much as we talk about the roads, we should also look at those hospitals along the highways. Thank you.

MR WADRI: Thank you. As I conclude, it all signals to the need for us, as a country, to be prepared. Yes, we cannot do away with all forms of accidents whether in our houses or on roads, but most importantly Government has to be prepared to respond to such accidents in order to save lives. Thank you, Madam Speaker and it is my prayer that after the Third Deputy Prime Minister’s commitment, we will receive possible proposals from Government for discussion and support as an institution. I thank you.

PRESENTATION OF NAMES OF MEMBERS DESIGNATED TO BE MEMBERS OF THE PAN AFRICAN PARLIAMENT, UGANDA CHAPTER, IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 12 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this matter has been pending on the Order Paper for almost two months. I now want to guide the House that under rule 12(1) of the Rules of Procedure and part (iii) of that rule, we are required to have five Members to represent us in the Pan-African Parliament. We have not been represented since January yet meetings are going on. So, I would like us to resolve this matter today. However, the rules require that we take into account the numerical strength of the parties, gender and the interests of the independents. Last time six names were presented and I gave the ruling party time to go and make their adjustments and return to me, but they have not done so. 

The proportions as of now are as follows: 3.52 percent for the NRM, 1.51 percent for the gentle Opposition, 1.41 percent for the independents. So, if you round up to the nearest unit, the Opposition are entitled to one, the Independents one and three for the NRM party. We don’t have 3.52 of a person and the rules are very clear. So, the Independents have 1.41 of a person, the Opposition have 1.51 of a person and the ruling party have 3.52 of a person. So, we can only have 3, 1 and 1 and that is the position. 

LT GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, probably we are learning new rules of mathematics in Cabinet because anything to do with 3.51 or 1.5 is corrected to the nearest figure, which is 2 -(Laughter)- but now that you are correcting it downwards, I do not know what we can do because there are no half people anyway!

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Prime minister, we have five positions – 

LT GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: But the strength of the – (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: This is information to the Prime Minister, who is also my learned colleague. If you read rule 12 conjunctively and not disjunctively, it says “…the numerical strength of the parties, gender and interests of the independent members.” so, numerical strength is just one issue and gender and interest of independents are others. In the circumstances, my learned colleague and Third Deputy Prime Minister, there is no way legally that you can abandon a written provision and head to statistics. 

Honestly, the information I am giving you is that the composition of the Pan-Africa Parliament, without consideration of the numerical strength, gender issues and the interests of the independents, would be void. That is the dictate of rule 12 of the Rules of Procedure. This is just a simple law that I wanted to quote. 

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank you for this opportunity and for airing out your concern as well. The information I would like to give to the House is that in the Eighth Parliament, the Opposition, by numerical strength, were supposed to send two and half members to the East Africa Legislative Assembly and we said that in the mathematics of human beings, we cannot have those halves and quarters and we all agreed to reduce them to two. So, we had two Members representing the Opposition in the East Africa Legislative Assembly and there were no quarrels about that. I do not know why at this moment the Prime Minister insists that he is even going to beef up the halves. I do not know where he is going to get the muscles and bones to fix into those halves to make them real human beings. 

Madam Speaker, the Opposition have given in one Member and the Independents too have also given in their Member and as the ruling party sort themselves out, I wish to propose that we pronounce ourselves on those two Members where there is no contention and that the Members continue to deliberate on behalf of the country and then we can sufficiently send the Members in time. I beg that the ruling party cleans itself very fast so that the country is really represented in this great Assembly. I thank you. 

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, I need guidance. This House was elected on the basis of multi-party democracy and we have to go along with the multi-party system. We are reintroducing the element of independents – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mallinga, have you read the Rules of Procedure? The people of Uganda should not continue to be held at ransom because of your indecision. So, we have six names and I think we should pronounce ourselves on those which are not under contention and we shall leave you to sort yourselves out. If not, we should vote but in voting, you must vote for one Member of the Opposition, one Independent Member and three others from the other party. There are no two ways about it. 

MR NASASIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think what we need to do is to agree on the election procedure if we are going to vote because like I said before, our side had an arrangement and I presented four names and we got them through a process. I understand your ruling, Madam Speaker, when you say that we should follow the rules and that you want us to bring three Members but we do not have that in agreement and I think we need a full debate on this. Our side feels that they should have all the four Members. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Government Chief Whip, I think you want to take issue with the Rules of Procedure and yet you took an oath on these rules. Do you want to take issue on the Rules of Procedure which are very clear? 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, you have rightly ruled and I do not see how any reasonable Member of this House can come to challenge your ruling, which is based on the Rules of Procedure. May I, therefore, propose that if there is to be any voting, it should be within the NRM party only? The Opposition has its candidate and the independents have theirs. So, pronounce the names of those ones and the ruling party will vote for the three positions. 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I see no reason why we should waste time on this. These people going to the Pan African Parliament are going to represent the Parliament of Uganda and already the NRM party has been given three slots on this Pan African Parliament. Well, there is mathematics but I feel that three people are enough to represent the NRM party in the Pan African Parliament and we need to agree to either go back and vote or the NRM party should give us the names of the three and we finish this. We do not need to spend much of our time discussing this business. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, hon. Members, this matter is not negotiable. The rules of the House say that we must have numerical strength of the parties in the House, gender, and I think I shouldn’t waste more time. 

MR NASASIRA: Madam Speaker, I think this involves more than just parties. Supposing we go and bring three names and there is no gender balance, who decides the gender? Is it the whole House or the parties? (Interjections) Let me get this thing clear. I am –(Interjection)- let me finish my point then you can give me information -(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a Parliament, we have a lot of national issues awaiting our attention and the country is watching us to give solutions to so many unsolved problems. You have guided this House; according to our Rules of Procedure, you have ruled on this issue of how many Members the different parties are supposed to present to the Pan African Parliament. Is the hon. Government Chief Whip in order to continue challenging your ruling while bogging down the business of the House to attend to more urgent national duties? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ministers, I have given you enough time. We have taken two months on this matter. You have failed to resolve it. So now I put the question to the names which are clear and then you can go and sort out yourselves. (Applause) 

I put the question that hon. Cecilia Ogwal and hon. Sam Otada be approved as Members of the Pan African Parliament. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: So when you are ready, you can come. (Applause)

Hon. Members, in the gallery we have students of St Charles Lwanga Kibinga Primary School represented by hon. Amelia Kyambadde and hon. Nakawunde. Where are the pupils of Kibinga Primary School? Oh, welcome, welcome.

We also have the Guild Council of Ministers from Vision for Africa Vocational Training Institute in Mukono represented by hon. Kibuule. Here they are. You are welcome.

11.47
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Thank you, Madam Speaker for the ruling and I want to thank Members for the decision they have just taken. We would like to know when the ruling Government will be in position to present to this House, the representative to the Pan African Parliament. I would like to assist my colleague, the hon. John Nasasira who was hesitant about whether the party will be in a position to realise the interests of gender and those other interests. As parties, we have constitutions that help us in these matters. Your party has a constitution that talks about gender very well and in our present situation where you are requested to present three slots –(Interjections)- I would imagine that you look at the 40 percent of the three slots -(Interjections)-and give it to the women. If you really feel that the 100 percent can be a composition of women; there will be no problem with that. (Interjections) But you should be mindful of the provisions of your constitution. They will guide you in choosing the members. So, can you help us and tell us when you will bring them? I thank you.

MR NASASIRA: I wish to ask hon. Anywar not to bring a point of order when I am trying to clarify this. I wondered whether the Opposition Chief Whip is trying to whip me - are you trying to whip me? I think that is out of order! Anyway, the point I was trying to raise and I am saying this for today and for posterity if we are going to follow the rules and take care of the interests of independents and gender, the best process should have been a voting system so that – please, can you be patient hon. Anywar for a change? It is this Parliament voting to get five representatives. When these five Members of Parliament reach there, they are representatives of the Parliament of Uganda; forget about FDC or NRM or Independents. They go there as Members of the Parliament of Uganda, five of them. 

I wanted to have a system in such a way that there is a way of voting. That system will ensure that all those interests are catered for as appendix 3 does. The whole House votes on them and it takes care rather than parties nominating names and then we come here and say, “Oh, you have not taken care of gender.” How would I know the Member the party is going to nominate? I think it would have been better to have a voting system of selecting the five. In that voting system, all those interests are checked and at the end of the day, the interests are fulfilled. (Interjections) That is the point I wanted to raise. Anyway, since the Speaker has ruled, we shall go and sort ourselves out. 

THE SPEAKER: For the record, hon. Members, you have had two months to attend to this matter. You had the names all this time from the whole House. If you want to amend the rules and put in the processes, that is different but the names have been known for over two months. I think the interests of the country cannot be held at ransom anymore. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the interest of this House, I would like to give this information pertaining to the composition of the Pan African Parliament. Rule 4 says:
“1. Member States shall be represented in the Pan African Parliament by an equal number of parliamentarians.
2. Each Member State shall be represented in the Pan African Parliament by five Members, at least one of whom must be a woman.
3. The representation of each Member State must reflect the diversity of political opinion in each national Parliament or other deliberate organ.”

This is the information I would like to give to the Chief Whip. He should bear in mind that we are watching. Even where we are sending our representative, we already have a guideline. I pray that he conforms to that and does not shame the country in the Pan African Parliament.  

PRESENTATION OF NAMES OF MEMBERS OF THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS BOARD OF TRUSTEES

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have a Parliamentary Pensions Board of Trustees. Parliament is required to nominate one Member from the Parliamentary Commission. The other Members are supposed to come from Members of Parliament pensioners, and members of staff pensioners. 

Today, I just want to fulfil our responsibility. The Parliamentary Commission has nominated hon. Emmanuel Dombo to represent the interests of the House on the Board of Trustees. The other names will come from the pensioners and you will be informed but they do not have to come to this House. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

I) THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORTS ON AUDITED ACCOUNTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2010 FOR TOWN COUNCILS AND MUNICIPAL COUNCILS

11.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Jack Sabiiti): Rt Hon. Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to lay on the Table the reports of the Auditor-General on the audited accounts for the year ended 30 June 2010 for the following municipal councils and town councils: Malaba Town Council; Zombo Town Council; Mpondwe-Lhubiriha Town Council; Kibito Town Council; Manafwa Town Council; Pallisa Town Council; Kapchorwa Town Council; Lwakaka Town Council; Kampala City Council headquarters; Kampala Town Council, Makindye Division; Kampala City Council, Central Division; Kampala City Council, Nakawa Division; Kampala City Council, Kawempe Division; Kampala City Council, Lubaga Division; Kihihi Town Council; Masindi Town Council; Bukwo Town Council; Soroti Municipal Council; Fort Portal Municipal Council; Mbale Municipal Council; Tororo Municipal Council; Butaleja Town Council; Pallisa Town Council -(Interjections)- Accounts for the year ending 30 June 2010; Kyegegwa Town Council; Sironko Town Council; Hima Town Council; Hoima Town Council; Katwe-Kabatoro Town Council; Koboko Town Council and lastly, Kibaale Town Council. As a point of emphasis these are the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2010. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. All those are committed to the Local Government Accounts Committee but with the caveat that the standing committee’s work will be in abeyance starting tomorrow, for the next three weeks until we have completed the Budget. Do not do it simultaneously. 

II) AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT ON AUDITED ACCOUNTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2010 FOR REFERRAL HOSPITALS

12.00
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table, the Auditor-General’s reports on seven referral hospitals. I have Hoima Regional Referral Hospital, financial statement for the year ended 30 June 2010; the financial statement of Mbale Referral Hospital for the year ended 30 June 2009; Mbale Regional Referral Hospital, the financial statement for the year ended 30 June 2010; Jinja Regional Referral Hospital, financial statement for the year ended 30 June 2010; Fort Portal Regional Referral Hospital, financial statement for the year ended 30 June 2010; Arua Regional Referral Hospital, financial statement for the year ended 30 June 2010. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

III) AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT ON THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF SPORTS FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2008

12.02
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Madam Speaker, apart from the regional referral hospitals, I also have financial statements for the year ended 30 June for the National Council of Sports. Thank you.

IV) AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT ON THE UGANDA GLOBAL FUND TO FIGHTS AIDS, TUBERCULOSIS AND MALARIA PROGRAMMES -GRANT NO. UGD-405-GOM, 30 JUNE 2010

12.02
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Lastly, but not least, Madam Speaker, I have got the financial statement for the Uganda Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria Programmes in this country for the year ended 30 June 2010. Thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon. Members, all those statements are committed to the Committee on Public Accounts but with the same caveat that the standing committees will be in abeyance from tomorrow until we complete the Budget process.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO INCUR EXPENDITURE OF SHS 61,333,333,333 ONLY TOWARDS THE THERMAL POWER SUBSIDY UNDER VOTE 107, MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you may recall, during the Vote-on-Account this matter was deferred and committed to the Committee on Budget. We would like now to receive the report of the committee.  

12.03
THE CHAIRMAN, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr Timothy Lwanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. All the Members should have had copies of this report by now, unfortunately you know what happened yesterday with the electricity, but definitely you are going to have a copy. 

This being my first time to speak in this Ninth Parliament - although I said something earlier on - I wish to take this opportunity to - (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I am standing on a point of procedure pursuant to our Rules of Procedure, which we greatly honour. It would be absurd if we created a precedent -(Interjections)- the copies have come? (Laughter)

MR LWANGA: Madam Speaker, if I may continue - as I was saying, this being my first time to speak in this Ninth Parliament, I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate you for having been unanimously elected Speaker of this Parliament. And in the same breath, I want to congratulate all the honourables for having made it to the Ninth Parliament. Our prayer is that this Ninth Parliament will make a positive difference in the lives of our people and of course with God on our side, nothing is impossible.

I now go on to the report of the Budget Committee. Madam Speaker, as an introduction, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented to this House on Thursday, 30 June 2011, a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to incur expenditure of Shs 61,333,333,333 only towards the thermo power subsidy under Vote 017 Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development above Vote-on-Account for the Financial Year 2011/212.

The resolution raised a number of issues that could not be disposed of immediately. It was, therefore, referred to the Committee on Budget for detailed scrutiny and it is my pleasure to present the report.

Methodology 

The committee worked with the Committee on Natural Resources –

MR OMOLO: We have been given a motion and not a report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when I was communicating to you this morning I informed you that since 11 o’clock last night there was a major power breakdown in this institution and that is why we even started late. The copies of the report are being circulated. 

MR LWANGA: Madam Speaker, the reports are ready and are being distributed. Do not worry, they are coming.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am reluctant to disallow hon. Tim Lwanga to present their awaited report save that in accordance with our Rules of Procedure, it would be absurd for us to create a precedent, which we cannot defend in future. So, knowing that –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the copies of the report are being circulated and I have informed you that we had disruptions of power until about 10.30 a.m.

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Lukyamuzi, patience works; please be patient.  

Methodology

The committee worked with the Committee on Natural Resources as advised by the Speaker. This provided an opportunity for them to establish the impact of the proposed resolution on the original financing outlay and work plans of the sector.

The two committees then proceeded to scrutinize the motion together with the Hansard to enable them address issues that were raised by Members on the Floor of the House. These issues were later discussed with the following: the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, the technical staff from the Ministries of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and that of Energy and Mineral Development, including the Accountant-General and the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. 

Background 

The committee was informed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the Government of Uganda approved a short term plan to use thermo power plants to meet Uganda’s electricity demand since 2004. This called for subsidies to the power sector to keep the tariffs at affordable levels. Since then – that is 2004 – the Government has been providing Shs 92 billion annually for this purpose, in addition to the IDA credit funding of US $212 million, which got exhausted in October 2010. 

During the last quarter of the Financial Year 2010/11 – to be precise in April 2011 - the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requested for a supplementary allocation of Shs 92 billion to cater for part of the energy subsidy up to 30June 2011 – that is up to the end of this financial year - and the justification based on the following: 

(i)	The exhaustion of World Bank IDA financing of Aggreko Mutundwe Thermal plant;
(ii)	Fluctuations of foreign exchange rates;
(iii)	Global rising fuel prices; 
(iv)	The growth in demand for electricity in Uganda; 
(v)	Decreasing water levels of the River Nile. 

It should be noted that whereas the energy Sector had presented a supplementary request of Shs 299.53 billion to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, given resource constraints and other demands, the Ministry of Finance provided for only Shs 92 billion which was submitted to Parliament and approved. 

At the time, the Budget Committee supported this request and tasked the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Energy to harmonise requirements for future funding for the sector and factor them in their budget during the normal budgeting process. 

Issues raised by the Members on the resolution as we saw them in the Hansard. The committee reviewed the Hansard in order to address issues raised by Members regarding the resolution and summarised them as follows: 
(i)	How the Shs 92 billion provided for under Supplementary Schedule II of financial year 2010/11 was spent. 
(ii)	Whether the Shs 61.3 billion was meant to pay arrears or advances to thermo power producers.
(iii)	Why the Shs 61.3 was not provided for under Vote-on-Account. 
(iv)	The total subsidy requirements of the sector. 
(v)	Whether it is possible to have outstanding amounts owed to thermo power generators during the first quarter of the financial year 2011/2012 before the financial year commences. 

Committee Findings 

Accountability for the Shs 92 billion released in April 2011 

The committee was informed that the supplementary request of Shs 92 billion approved during last financial year was used as partial payment for debts owed to thermo power generators. The debt as at the beginning of this year, January 2011, stood at Shs 299.53 billion. It reduced to Shs 207.5 billion after the Shs 92 billion was paid. 

Table 1 prepared by the Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited is a summary of these payments. Hon. Members, I am not going to read the table; so you can look at it yourselves.

Purpose for request for the Shs 61.3 billion 

The committee was informed by the minister of finance that Shs 61.3 billion requested for in the resolution over and above the Vote-on-Account of Shs 30.6 billion was meant to partially cover outstanding arrears. The current arrears stand at Shs 207.5 billion as shown in Table 2.

Why the request of UGX 61.3 billion was not provided     for under Vote-on-Account 

The committee was informed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the request of Shs 61.3 billion was part of the Shs 92 billion budgeted for thermal power subsidy for the Financial Year 2011/2012. It could not be catered for in the Vote-on-Account because it was over and above the ceiling for Vote-on-Account as provided for under Article 154 of the Constitution and Section 18 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act. 

Total Subsidy Requirements for the Sector 

The committee was informed that Shs 455.96 billion is required for this financial year, 2011/12 to cater for subsidy. However, only Shs 92 billion has been budgeted for this financial year.  

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development informed the committee that Government has sourced US $130 million, which is approximately Shs 325 billion to cater for thermal power subsidies through a World Bank support project (Poverty Reduction Support Project IV) -(Power blackout) 

THE SPEAKER: Let me suspend the House for ten minutes. 

(The House was suspended at 12.19.p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.25 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we had to break off unceremoniously in the morning so I wanted to explain to Members of Parliament that this is a result of a high power load on the control panel of the Parliament building because we have had to procure additional equipment, which has put pressure on the existing facilities. But we have advertised for works to improve on the plumbing and electrical systems, which will solve the current challenges and I am sure that next week, we will not have this problem as we are trying to handle it.

Also, the Uganda Parliamentarians Forum on Food Security, Population and Development, together with UNFPA and Population Secretariat have organised an orientation workshop for Members of the forum. It will be held tomorrow at Imperial Royale Hotel starting at 9.00 a.m. and ending at 5.00 p.m. Please, attend.

2.26
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITEE (Mr Timothy Lwanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before the electricity went, we had just finished 5(3). 5(4) is the total subsidy requirement for the sector.

The committee was informed that Shs 455.96 billion is required for the Financial Year 2011/2012 to cater for subsidy. However, only Shs 92 billion has been budgeted for this financial year. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development informed the committee that Government has sourced US $130 million, which is an equivalent of Shs 325 billion to cater for thermal subsidy through a World Bank support project. I must mention that part of that money, we were informed, should be used for that.

Payment of Non-Budgeted for Outstanding Amounts Using Funds from the Current Budget 

It is wrong to pay non-budgeted for outstanding amounts owed to thermal power generators as arrears using the current budgetary provision. The committee’s observations on this matter are articulated below in 6(1).

Observations of the Committee

The Shs 61.3 billion requested for was to cater for domestic arrears and may not be paid for using current budgetary allocation. A review of the Ministry of Energy policy statement revealed that arrears in this respect have not been budgeted for in this Financial Year 2011/2012. Only Shs 71 billion has been provided for domestic arrears in the national budget for the Financial Year 2011/2012 and Shs 68 billion of this is meant to cater for pension arrears. 

It is, therefore, irregular to authorise Government to incur this expenditure. Article 154(4) of the Constitution and Section 18 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act provides for withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund in the event that the Appropriation Act has not come into force. That is what we normally refer to as Vote-on-Account. This is however only applicable for financial services required during the first four months of the financial year and should have been budgeted for as provided for under Article 154(5) of the Constitution. 

In addition, there are clear procedures to be followed when handling domestic arrears including verification by the Auditor-General. There are no proper plans relating to subsidies for thermal power generators. Although Shs 455,960,000,000 is required for this financial year as subsidies, only Shs 92 billion is provided for in the budget. This is totally insufficient, leading to ad hoc methods of replenishment. It also causes unnecessary inconveniences to Parliament who are left with a very short time to scrutinise requests. The entire country is, therefore, left to suffer power shortages that have adverse economic effects.

It was confirmed that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and the Ministry of Water has released more water at Owen falls Dam for hydro power production and an additional 40 mega watts is being produced. This is however a short term measure for four months and should bring down the total subsidy required for this Financial Year 2011/2012. The Committee on Natural Resources has promised to follow this issue.

Recommendations of the Committee

The committee recommends that it would be irregular to pass a resolution of Parliament authorising Government to incur expenditure of Shs 61,333,333,333 above Vote-on-Account amount for the Financial Year 2011/2012 and pay for domestic arrears.

The committee, therefore, advised the minister to:

1.	Withdraw the motion.
2.	Note that Government can only spend the current budget as budgeted.
3.	Present to the House a corrigenda adjustment to the budget to cater for domestic arrears.

Madam Speaker, the committee appreciates the central role electricity plays in the economic development of this country and has treated this matter with the very importance it deserves. I beg to move that the report of the committee be adopted. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson.

2.31
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the committee chairperson and indeed the committee for helping us solve a puzzle that was on the Floor of this House.

I would like to buy the committee recommendations and I agree with them that it would be financial indiscipline if we continued with the minister’s proposal that we give them arrears, which are not budgeted for and not even scrutinised by the Auditor-General.

I would like to observe that I think thermal energy is a very expensive venture and from what has been presented to us, it looks like it is going to be unsustainable on this economy. I think it is time that Government gets to look at those alternative renewable sources; geo-thermal and solar energy for instance. Our neighbours in Kenya are doing very well with geo thermal energy. If you go to the Olkaria plant, it is fantastic.

Madam Speaker, the other thing that I would like to encourage is already proposed by the committee. There are gymnastics going on in the energy sector; we must do an indepth investigation. What happened to the Salim Saleh inquiry into the energy sector? What happened with this blackmail? There are days when we were switched off even before we spent the money, which had been given through the supplementary budget. I hear that providers switched us off even before 30th June. Somebody must investigate what is going on there and give the House an in-depth explanation.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, just to confirm what hon. Alaso has said, the Government of Kenya is using the rift valley to produce power and I do not know why we can’t do the same since we also share part of the Rift Valley.

2.34
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): I wish to thank the honourable chairperson and his committee for a very good presentation that they have submitted to us this afternoon. This submission further confirms that they have this country at heart and they are for the people. I take exception to the last statement, which underscores the important role played by energy as a driving force in the economy of the country.

In the month of June, I led a Ugandan opposition team to Kenya and we visited Naivasha region in the Rift Valley. We were impressed and we could not believe that this was next door to Uganda. There are many geothermal plants. I took trouble to ask the area engineers whether we have suitable places in Uganda. He told me that Bundibugyo is a suitable place for such a project. If Government is mindful about the role played by energy in any development, I think the Ministry of Energy should be foresighted enough to begin thinking about engaging our next door neighbours to get ideas and the knowledge of constructing geothermal plants.

I want to say that there is a lot of laxity on our part as a country. Today we are crying about electricity services but the entire energy infrastructure in West Nile was sold to Aga Khan at US $1. All those lines that were constructed even before I was born, including the site at Nyagak where the sector minister D’Ujanga comes from, was also sold at that same price. Who would fail to pay US $1 today? This is about Shs 2,600 and that is the price at which we have given away this investment! All the wires and poles have gone away at US $1. If Uganda as a country can give away such a resource to an individual who holds us at ransom and can keep West Nile in darkness for one or two months, then how serious are we? Are our decisions taking into account the interests of our people? 

I want to move a substantive motion that let there be an inquiry into how this was sold and what Uganda as a country expects. I want to request this institution to interest itself in this particular thing. All that Uganda invested was given away at US $1. The sector minister is here, if I am telling a lie let him stand up and challenge me. I support this motion and the recommendation brought by the committee that we withhold giving this money because it is irregular and illegal. 

We have just passed Vote-on-Account. If the sector is in need, it can go ahead and use the quarter of its money. They can then apply at an appropriate time through the normal procedures to get a supplementary. If we are to pass this as it was in the motion by the minister of finance, the public out there will wonder what kind of people are seated in this House as we would have done an irregular thing.

THE SPEAKER: I am a bit disturbed when the chair of the committee says that this item has still not been budgeted in the new financial year. Is it the plan of Government to use Parliament to just get a supplementary after another? This is an abuse of Parliament. 

2.39
MR ROBERT SSEKITOLEKO (Independent, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is recorded on the Hansard that when the hon. Minister Irene Muloni was trying to defend this motion, she said that the thermo power arrangement was brought on board as an interim measure. When you read this report, it is evident that this arrangement has been in existence since 2004. This ceases to be an interim measure. This country needs a mix of energy sources. We can generate thermo power at a much lower cost than the way we are doing it now. This is if we chose to build thermo power generation plants without going through hydro power plants to generate the would-be hydro power but using thermo methods.

Hon. Members, you do not need a water dam to construct a thermo power plant. Why are we limited to water dams? (Interruptions)

MR D’UJANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank my honourable colleague for giving way. Indeed you are right and nobody is doing that. You do not need a hydro dam to generate power using diesel. 

MR SSEKITOLEKO: I would like to defend myself. What is happening now is that the generators, which are run by diesel, are used to rotate the turbines that generate the power we use today. These turbines are built and immersed in water. When you begin turning turbines which are immersed in water, the water itself becomes a resistance against the turbines. This resistance becomes an additional load to the generator. 

MR D’UJANGA: The arrangement at Kiira is such that diesel sets are placed on the outside and then power from diesel sets is passed through generator transformers. There is a difference: a generator transformer is very different from a turbine. We use generator transformers to transform 11KV to something higher. So, is it in order for the honourable member to come and misinform this House when this equipment are there and there can be seen?

THE SPEAKER: Let him substantiate.

MR SEKITOLEKO: Yes, the point I am trying to make – the hon. Minister should know that the point is that we are generating power at a higher price than it would be if we were doing thermal. That is the point I am trying to make. Besides, it would not limit us to positions where we only have waterfalls. We could decide to build thermal power plants in every district in Uganda –(Interjections)– yes, we don’t have to generate power from where there are waterfalls only. 

I also think that would be a much cheaper way of generating power. But also, it will reduce the pressure that the august House has been put under to approve supplementary budgets all the time. It also means it ceases to be an interim measure as they put it. Anyway, we need to know what else the ministry can do to generate more power – and it is anyway happening in Kenya where Government is generating much more power than we are doing here. Why can’t we do it also? 

For the last six years we have been using an interim measure that has become indefinite. All the time power rates are going up and you know that we cannot sustain this. You also know the problems associated with hydro power generation. This has ceased to be a reliable power arrangement. That is why we need emergency measures that will include other forms of power generation.

2.45
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like, in my capacity as Shadow Minister of the Environment, to applaud Members of the committee for calling a spade, a spade. I am saying this because the contents of Article 93 on the scrutiny of expenditure by Parliament are very elaborate. I would like to thank you once again for calling a spade a spade.

Recently I was in the UK and had the opportunity of talking to the Ugandans at the Commonwealth office. One thing they told me was that they don’t understand the way we do things here. According to them, Britain is assisting Uganda in power generation but that amount of money spent under the IDA is not explainable. They told me they had sent a team here to carry out investigations and I think that team is still doing its work.

In addition to that, as a Member of Parliament for Rubaga south that hosts the Mutundwe Power Station where these generators are located, I would like to report that the noise made in that area by those generators is environmentally unfriendly. (Laughter) Something should be done to save the residents from that noise. It appears as if the money we are injecting into this project is not doing its work. At one time the residents threatened to demonstrate in order to cause some change.

On the second thought, if the committee whose report we have looked at today had reported what it reported, I would express some alarm. For example, if this Shs 61 billion was to be paid, to whom would it be paid? Would it be paid in an omnibus form or to individual companies? If so, do we have a published balance sheet from that company in accordance with the Companies Act? Would we be paying through the regulatory authority and if we were, I would love to see a published financial statement before that huge money is paid out to them. We are actually opening our eyes very extensively –(Laughter)– to make sure we protect taxpayers’ money. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I can confirm that the eyes are really very big. (Laughter)

2.48
MR GABRIEL AJEDRA (NRM, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to add to what the previous speakers have said about this power issue. I had the opportunity to visit South Korea twice. During that time, I visited all their power stations, including the nuclear power stations. One thing I saw is that every river in South Korea has a dam to generate electricity. But here we are in Uganda with so many rivers and potential sites to generate electricity, but 48 years now, we cannot generate enough electricity. What are we up to as a country? There are so many sites in this country with potential for enough power generation. And I am sure ERA has that booklet that gives all the potential sites that we can use to generate electricity.

Internationally the cost of generating electricity per mega watt is US $1,000,200 and here we are borrowing money to subsidize electricity generation using thermal generators? We are being subjected to fluctuations in the foreign currency. We are being subjected to price fluctuations in fuel yet we cannot develop the potential sites that we have in this country!

Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister is on record – please watch NTV News this evening – saying that Parliament is reaping what it sowed –(Interjections)– yes, hon. Kajara in on record as having said that Parliament is now reaping what it sowed, meaning that because we refused to pass – is it the Vote-on-Account, therefore, the power cuts that occurred this morning are a consequence of our refusal to do that. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I think it is high time that as a country we resolved this energy crisis once and for all for the sake of ourselves and our children. 

In my earlier submission I indicated the reasons we are not developing fast enough as being the lack of power. There is no country that can develop without sufficient energy. The sooner we direct our effort towards generating sufficient electricity, the better. Otherwise, we shall continue to subsidize these thermal pants yet they are very expensive to maintain.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for your indulgence. I listened to hon. Ajedra very well. I just noticed that he mentioned something in his statement that was unsettling. He said that the minister – did he mention hon. D’Ujanga? Okay, the minister who said that Parliament is reaping what it sowed and it has been in my mind that the energy generating companies are trying to blackmail this nation. We have been trying to get over that with time, but again for a minister who is not mentioned to say we are reaping what we sowed and such a matter goes unsubstantiated, is going to be really disheartening because some of us dedicate our time and everything to serving this Parliament faithfully. So, is it possible for us to get that information and then get the relevant minister to explain to us what we sowed and what we are reaping?

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask hon. Ajedra to substantiate what he said.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, I thought I was clear that you should watch NTV Tonight. The hon. Minister was just in the corridors of Parliament and I overheard him [HON. MEMBERS: “Which minister?”] hon. Kajara. 

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I want to state clearly that I did not and if the Member is using hearsay that we should watch NTV Tonight, you cannot really impute such a thing unless NTV has given you the information. I have not talked to NTV in that spirit. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the honourable colleague and he has said that if Members want further information, they should watch NTV Tonight but he made a statement that he overheard the minister addressing the press in the corridors; he did not say that he was told. That means that he saw him talking. As an institution of Parliament, we are here – (Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wonder whether it is order for hon. Members of Parliament to start basing their arguments in the House on rumours when the minister concerned has actually said clearly on the Floor of the House and it is very clear that hon. Ajedra overheard him from the corridors of Parliament. I wonder whether it is in order for us to continue arguing about the same thing and whether it is in order that ministers of this august House should address people in the corridors rather than in the House. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the precincts of this Parliament extend from the plenary to the lobbies, to the corridors into their offices, and into the car park. Those are the precincts of Parliament. However, I will instruct the clerk to watch NTV Tonight and confirm to us what was said.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As a country, we are keen on the transformation of Uganda’s economy. As a businessman, I usually look at the cost effectiveness of whatever strategy you put in place. From what I see, it seems there is a bottomless pit where we are sinking monies and the beneficiaries do not want this business to come to a standstill. It started temporarily but it is threatening to become permanent and I am concerned because we were all keen on seeing the Bujagali hydro electricity power plant start but up to now, we are getting excuses. The minister says there are unforeseen circumstances. So, I wonder whether these people benefiting from the thermal would continue encouraging these unforeseen circumstances since it is business. 

I think we need to take this matter seriously. We need to institute a commission to inquire into this subject of energy because the President is very interested in energy as the driver for transformation. Equally as Members of Parliament, we are very keen on having appropriate energy that can boost the economy of Uganda. Thank you very much. 

3.00
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (NRM, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Madam Speaker, having heard all that, I think it is explicit. We are here to defend taxpayers’ money and we are faced with a huge argument of blackmailers to the extent that yesterday, you witnessed the issue of a power blackout and today, there was no question about it. You would wonder about that magic figure of Shs 92 billion that was presented in the first motion in form of arrears which was not clear and today, the motion has been withdrawn. That shows you the motive of the people asking for this money. It is very clear that this sector in this country - I do not know whether the word “rotten” would be the best to describe it but we are one of the countries in sub-Saharan Africa that pay the highest tariffs at home and we have attracted as many loans as possible for subsidisation of energy. It is the taxpayer paying all this money. 

Madam Speaker, what company – and even if they were three or four companies - in the world can operate with arrears totalling to Shs 207 billion and do not collapse? Let them show us their balance sheets. In budgeting, when you deal with arrears, it is very simple to misappropriate money because you pay these people at your own terms. That is why stories are changing now and I would like to thank this august House that we were able to witness it from the word go. Imagine if we had passed it then! 

Madam Speaker, with your wisdom in guiding this House, I am very comfortable that we can move a motion today to create a select committee of inquiry into the energy sector and if Members agree, this will be the best because Uganda deserves a financial audit versus an energy audit. We were promised that there wouldn’t be any load shedding; but if you are in Kampala, how would you know whether they have load shed Arua or Katakwi? We pay the same bills and it is the same invoice that comes because there is an agreement. How can one in Mbarara know that there is load shedding in Rukungiri? How much money is saved and siphoned off by dubious members working with people within technical offices in Government to cheat the taxpayer? I beg to move a motion here and now that you create a select committee of Parliament to make a forensic inquiry to show Ugandans the bad and the good these service deliverers have been giving them -(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one minute.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I move a motion that a select committee of Parliament be constituted to carry out a forensic enquiry into the energy sector mainly the power sector of this country.

3.04
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am standing to second the motion but with a slight amendment, that we create an ad hoc committee of Parliament to investigate and possibly carry out a quick audit of the energy crisis in this country. I wish to realise that today - I think we were intimidated starting yesterday - when they knew that this issue was coming up in Parliament they started the power cuts -(Interjections)- I am not accepting the information. The House is fully informed and the slot is mine. I am at liberty to say no to the information. I do not accept the information. The honourable minister had all the time to inform this House. 

I am saying the House was intimidated; starting yesterday, power cuts in Parliament have been the order of the day. Even this morning -(Interruption) 

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. You are aware of the problem this Parliament has been having. I personally got involved in rectifying the problem. The problem this Parliament has got is that when the contractor on the South wing installed a crane, the line, which supplies this Parliament, became overloaded. This line was overloaded after the meter; the responsibility of Umeme or any other company ends at the meter. 

Yesterday, we went off and today we went off. I went out and called our engineers. We checked everything until we reached this point –(Interjections)- I am on a point of order. We found that the line supplying this Parliament is overloaded. I have advised the Parliament engineer -(Interjections)- the Sergeant-at-Arms is aware. Is it in order for Umeme or Government to be blamed for a fault or mistake of the Parliament engineer? He is outside there. I have advised him to change the circuit and separate the line of the contractor from the line supplying Parliament. He is outside there, he can be asked. Is it order for someone to mislead this House?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when we were beginning this session I informed the House about the reasons for the disruption. It is the overloading of our facilities. It is not that Umeme interrupted but we had a problem with the overload. Fortunately, she did not mention anybody. She just said we were intimidated. I do not know by whom.

MS KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for your wise guidance -(Ms Alaso rose_)- I can accept your information.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, my whip, for giving way. The information I want to give is that about two weeks ago, I got a message from Umeme on my phone. When I consulted a number of MPs, they had also got the same message. The message was saying there would be load shedding for 12 hours. I do not know whether this was as an institution of Parliament, as Members of Parliament, as voters or as citizens but Umeme said they would be load shedding us for 12 hours. 

MS KIIZA: Thank you my colleague, hon. Alaso, for the information. The information is in good faith.

Madam Speaker, I stood here to second the motion that this Parliament sets up an ad hoc committee - the “ad hoc” came in as an amendment – if it is accepted by this House. I believe it is through this ad hoc committee that we can possibly fully understand the crisis we are talking about. I request that the minister takes this in good faith. Possibly after this thorough audit, we can pass the loan request if we feel the loan is necessary. 

However, the country is at a loss. I am not sure that even if we passed this loan request today, we would be able to salvage this country from the power cuts it is experiencing. I beg to second the motion that an ad hoc committee of this House is composed and a thorough audit of the energy sector is carried out -(Interjections)- and to ensure that the citizens of this country get the watts worth the taxes that they pay -(Interjections)- I see the honourable general is coming to give the Government’s side of the story, I beg to move and support the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before the distinguished leader speaks, I want you to join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Namaswanta Primary School represented by hon. Godfrey Lubega of Kassanda North. You are welcome.

3.11
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I want to draw the attention of the House to the fact that the motion was moved without the authority of the Speaker -(Interjections)- Yes, I am here in the House. It was just a chorus; people just shouted, “Motion, motion.” This is not the authority of the Speaker.

Rule 44 states: “Notwithstanding the provisions of rule 43, a Member may, with leave of the Speaker...” I did not hear the Speaker saying “yes”. Therefore, this motion is faulty and defective because it is supported without authority. 

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity, with a lot of pain in my heart, to say that my senior brother, the Third Deputy Prime Minister, should not mislead this House. I invite him to read rule 46; it is very clear. Rule 46(1)(b) says, “The following motions may be moved without notice....” 

We are discussing a matter of national importance. The issue of electricity strikes from the north to the south, the east to the west. We are saying, it being a matter of national importance and even in support of a report of a committee, we pronounce ourselves on a motion to establish an ad hoc committee to assist this institution to better understand what the root cause of this problem is. 

Is the honourable member in order - although it is not my intention - to come up and refer us to rule 43 and the rest of it? I think let us take this in the spirit of national importance and of this country. Let us not polarise this thing, that if we accept this motion and we have an ad hoc committee to help us understand this issue, we are failing. We are not failing. We are supporting Government by way of saying, “If your hand cannot reach your back to scrub it, we are ready to give you a scrub on your back.” Please, accept this in good faith. 

3.15
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise to support the motion. There are three issues here. First of all, I would like to recognise the urgent need for us to have sufficient power to run our country, our lives and the industries and, therefore, the economy of this country. 

Somewhere in this report on page 7, it is interesting that after observation 6.1 and 6.2 there is a sub-paragraph that says, “In addition, there are clear procedures to be followed when handling domestic arrears including verification by the Auditor-General.” The spirit in which this motion has been proposed -(Mr Baryayanga rose_)- just a minute. The spirit in which this motion has been moved is in the same spirit that the committee observed that. In business, you do not simply pick money from one basket where you have sold posho, to buy sugar and when the sugar is sold you come back. There must be systems in place. We are running the state.

These details that have been furnished to us and the recommendations therein are clear. The manner in which this money must be requested for is clear. Madam Speaker, you were in the past House, under your wise leadership and guidance and many of the colleagues - (Interruption)

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you for giving way, my dear honourable colleague. The information I want to give to this House is that there was a time I went to the Natural Resources Committee and the Budget Committee and I availed members with a copy of Gen. Saleh’s report. I have availed the same copy to the Speaker now. 

On page 37 of Gen. Saleh’s report, it is written that 0.266 litres per kilowatt hour were increased to 0.277 despite a rejection by the Electricity Regulatory Authority. The Electricity Regulatory Authority refused this increment but the Permanent Secretary went ahead and made the increment. 

What does this increment mean? This is what you call a unit when they are charging. It means that every month, for a trailer which carries 35,000 litres we get an increased number of trailers, which comes to 27 per month, with each trailer carrying 35,000 litres. This comes to Shs 998 million of losses every month, close to one billion, just out of that very small increase. 

There is a letter that hon. Hillary Onek, who was the Minister of Energy then, wrote to the Permanent Secretary. He says: “My humble appeal to you is that we focus ourselves on the most important issue which, as per now, is high electricity tariffs, poor performance of these companies, poor quality services, exaggerated costs and corresponding abnormal profits by these companies.” However, the Permanent Secretary wrote a letter in reply to this one saying that the honourable minister was incompetent. 

I have availed you the copies of those letters. I, therefore, think that a forensic audit should take place in the Ministry of Energy. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

MR TANNA: As I wind up, I would like to thank my honourable colleague for availing us vital information. I would, however, like to move a slight amendment to the motion and create a timeframe within which this ad hoc committee should report to this august House because of the urgency of the matter. 

My honourable colleague has already provided us with information that there was a forensic audit done by Gen. Saleh, and there was a report by the minister which was called incompetent. So we already have the basic information on which to rely and can very quickly come back. I would like to propose a period of two weeks within which this ad hoc committee must report to this House. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: May I ask hon. Baryayanga to come and lay those documents on the Table?

3.21
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table information, which is in form of these books. The first one is the Electricity Regulatory Authority (ERA) matrix for implementation of Gen. Saleh’s report. This is the one. It is dated 30 October 2009.

There is a report on electricity tariffs reduction, September 2009, which was implemented by the committee led by Gen. Salim Saleh. I beg to lay it on the Table. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I had inadvertently forgotten hon. Akena whom I had already given permission. Hon. Akena then Katoto, then Cerinah and I will finish. 

3.23 
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report and I support the motion on the Floor. In all honesty, I think the Ministry of Energy owes the people of Uganda a clear explanation. 

There is a sentence on page 3 of the report which talks about the decreasing water levels of the River Nile. On page 8, at bullet 6.4, the report then brings out the fact that the Ministry of Water and Environment is going to release more water in order to generate more electricity. The reality of it is that these four months of subsidy will cost us later. By the time we are supposed to commission Bujagali, the water levels would have decreased even further and we will have a greater deficit of electricity in order to be able to supply. 

I would have liked the Minister of Energy to get into the depth of what should have been done and what was not done. Earlier on when we were talking about the dams, I saw some ministers pointing at members who had been in the Sixth Parliament as if they were to blame for the lack of power. However, I would like the Minister of Energy to tell us what happened to the project of Ayago North and Ayago South, which would have given us twice the power of Bujagali. It was costed and a feasibility study done but the project was relocated to Bujagali, which will not serve its purpose well because if the water levels drop at Jinja they will equally drop in Bujagali. 

At this moment we are not getting full capacity. Although it is mentioned that Bujagali is going to give us 250MW, we will be lucky if we can get close to 200MW. So in the foreseeable future, Uganda is going to rely on thermal electricity, making us very uncompetitive in business and in industry as things stand. Until we commission a serious dam – which may be seven years down the road – thermal energy is going to remain. 

I would like to advise my colleagues that this load shedding may not stop now. You may, therefore, look for other solutions like generators, inverters, solar and others because we are not going to have sufficient power in the near future. Therefore, if the ad hoc committee is set up, we need to look at which way forward – (Member timed out_)

3.26
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas Ugandans are suffering and some are dying, some here are rejoicing and telling us to spend more money of the taxpayers to generate electricity, which is not going to benefit them. Considering climatic change, as you see electricity has become expensive; people cannot afford to pay for electricity to cook food and so they have resorted to cutting down trees. All this is because of the Ministry of Energy. (Laughter) We are here laughing but tomorrow we are going to be dead because of climatic change. 

I, therefore, emphasise that the ad hoc committee should be created now to investigate the corruption in that sector. The whole country uses a total cost of fuel of US $135 million a month while these people are demanding for US $177 million! Is that really what we can tell Ugandans, that we should approve this budget? I thank the committee for rejecting this budget of Shs 63 billion. Madam Speaker, in respecting the taxpayers’ money I second the motion put forward by hon. Nsereko that an ad hoc committee be created, so that we unearth the whole story within the Ministry of Energy. Thank you.

3.28
MS CERINAH NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to bring it to the attention of this House, especially the Committee on the Budget that we are not just refusing to pass this budget but we care about the taxpayers’ money. 

When we were in the committee, I realised that the Permanent Secretary had some personal interest in some things because he refused to bring out all the information. We were asking him some questions and he would not give us some of the answers, especially on the way they give out contracts to private companies. I think they determine the prices themselves and they overcharge us to the extent that people in rural areas can no longer afford electricity. So, I stand up to second hon. Nsereko’s motion so that we can get accountability. Do not consider us as enemies because we love this nation.

3.30
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to what my colleagues have said. I belong to the committee that rejected this budget. 

There is a problem we have in Uganda, especially with this energy ministry – not the whole ministry but some individuals who are tarnishing the ministry’s image. First, I want to ask for your indulgence; why do people always come up asking for subsidies yet we pay high tariffs? These days, when the month ends without you paying, you cannot even spend one more day with power because it will be cut off. So, why are they keeping these profits? What are they doing with the money? Moreover, the Government is subsidising them every now and then. So I strongly support what hon. Nsereko suggested because there is something rotten somewhere and we need to unearth it.

My colleague also mentioned the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Energy; he looks like he is not a good man. (Laughter) We were told that he actually made the life of the previous minister living hell in the ministry. Today, while we were interrogating him, he was answering us as though we were insignificant. He was undermining us in the committee. We want to go in there and find whatever rotten mango is hidden under the bed – we will want it out. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, so far I have not heard anyone speak against the report so I think that we need to take a decision on the report. I would like to put the question that the report of the Budget Committee be adopted by this House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: We now need to deal with the issue of the motion. Arising from the debate, there appears to be an overwhelming demand for better information concerning this sector. I think that it is a matter sufficiently important to warrant the institution of an ad hoc committee in this House. However, we need to sit down and work out the terms of reference although we should agree on the principle. So, I want to put the question that this House does agree to set up an ad hoc committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: So, we shall work out the reference and name the Members. (Applause) 

Hon. Members, in the public gallery we have students and teachers of the Royal Institute of Business and Technical Education in Kawempe Division. They are represented by hon. Sebaggala and hon. Nabilah. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members, I would like to thank the members on the budget and natural resources committees who came out with a clear report on what needs to be done. I would like to agree that from this motion having been withdrawn, the hon. Minister of Finance did address you, Madam Speaker. In that address, she clarified that the Shs 92 billion is budgeted for and is to be spent to finance the current subsidy requirements during the first quarter of this Financial Year, 2011/2012.  

We did discuss with the Budget Committee and agreed, among other things, that Government had mobilised additional resources, first of all towards the thermal power subsidy, to meet the projected requirements of the current financial year. We further agreed that we are going to lay on the Table a corrigenda adjustment to the budget so that we cover the deficit of these arrears. I, therefore, wish to table a draft corrigenda adjustment of the development budget for the Ministry of Energy and Minerals. This is to cover both the arrears of Shs 207 billion and to cover the Shs 209 billion, which is to cater for the cost of energy subsidy before the commissioning of Bujagali Dam. I beg to lay the draft corrigenda on the Table. 

It will be added in the estimates book once this estimates book has been published. So, it will be part and parcel of the estimates covering the arrears as the committee recommends in No. 3, that we present to the House a corrigenda adjustment to the budget to cater for domestic arrears. I beg to present. 

Madam Speaker, in the letter that the hon. Minister of Finance  wrote to you, she indicated that we withdraw the motion of 30 June 2011 as recommended by the Budget Committee and replace it with one requesting to spend Shs 61.33 billion against the financial year’s budgetary allocation for the thermal power subsidy. With your leave, this motion has already been submitted to the Members and I would crave that the Members really understand the situation.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I understood that the House received and adopted the report and decided that the way forward lay in the motion which you guided the House through. You okayed an ad hoc committee to be set up to look into all those matters in depth. So, I got the impression that before we move on the matter of any additional monies to the thermal power generation in this country, we must unearth all the things that this House has requested and all those that the committee had provided. 

I am now asking: what is the purpose of this replacement motion that the Minister is bringing in when we have unanswered questions in regards to the arrears, in regards to the commission of inquiry report which has been tabled? Is it that the Minister is trying to reintroduce the matter through the backdoor or what?  Madam, I need your guidance. 

THE SPEAKER: I think that we shall benefit from the information from the chairman of the committee because we have adopted his report. Let him explain the instructions they gave to the ministry of finance. 

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In our report we did explain clearly that you cannot spend money that is not budgeted for but you may front-load. Front-loading means that, for example, we have got a Bolton account in this case which is Shs 30. 6 billion and the amount in the budget is Shs 92 billion. If the money is to be spent within this quarter, the minister of finance, with a resolution of Parliament, may actually spend that money. So, the two things are different.   

What hon. Alaso and the minister are talking about are two different things. What the minister is doing is looking for permission to be able to front-load the Shs 92 billion, which is included in the budget. That really, Madam Speaker, has got nothing to do with the ad hoc committee to look into the - 

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect to this House, it is true that we have passed the motion presented by hon. Nsereko but we have also adopted the committee’s report. When you read the recommendations of the committee, the first was for the minister to withdraw the earlier motion. Recommendation No. 2 also puts it very clearly. 

Why did we reach the point of requesting the minister to withdraw? First of all, we all appreciate that we need power. We appreciate that we have load shedding because we are indebted, because the government subsidises and we are in arrears. However, the problem was technical, in that, in the earlier motion presented to this House by the minister, she was presenting for this House to pass Vote-on-Account yet it was arrears. That is why the Rt Hon. Speaker referred the motion to the Committee on Budget. 

While we looked at it, as the chairperson has explained, we agreed that first of all we could not - after looking at the policy statement of energy, we realised that there was Shs 92 billion. Why this amount? We need more than this. The explanation was that we are operating a cash budget and they could not have budgeted what we do not have. Much as the need was higher, the ministry could only provide Shs 92 billion and that is why this is the amount even though we need more.

From that, when we looked at the policy statement, we realised that Shs 92 billion had been budgeted for in this financial year but the companies were demanding Shs 207 billion, which had not been provided for in the budget. That is why we reached a consensus that much as we need to pay the debt, the minister –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was one of the members who were in that committee where our able chair and the vice, chaired the committee. We looked into the problems of energy as they requested the money. Having noted the inability of Parliament as an institution to pass illegal requests, the committee made recommendations, which have been given to members right now. That was the position of the committee members. 

The honourable member holding the Floor is saying that as committee members, we agreed. What she is alluding to is that an agreement of the committee is not reflected in the report that is presented to this House. Is the honourable member in order to mislead the House that as committee members we agreed on the move, which the minister is presenting to the House while it was not reflected in the report which we have given to the House? Is she in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Budget Committee is a committee of this House performing a delegated function on behalf of this House. The House would be interested in knowing what was done in the committee and that is what she is explaining. So she is in order.

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, when we reach page 8 of the report by the Budget Committee as adopted by this House, there is recommendation No. 1, which concerns withdrawal of the motion, which the minister did. 

When we got to recommendation No. 2, it notes that Government can only spend the current budget as budgeted for. That is what I was explaining; the earlier motion of the minister was requesting this House to pass Shs 61 billion above the Vote-on-Account. This is what this House referred to the committee for scrutiny. 

We scrutinised this and we recommended that we could not pass monies budgeted for this financial year for arrears. That is also when we got concerned and discovered that yes, we are indebted and that is why we are in darkness. Our people are suffering but what have you put in place to realise the monies that this country owes to the companies? The honourable minister came to explain and we taxed him to explain to us how the money is to be raised. The minister presented to us how he is going to raise the money from PRS 9 and presented the plan. That is when this committee came in to adopt, pass and present to this House the report, which the House has adopted, that the minister presents to this House a corrigenda adjustment.

I would like to clarify to this House and make it clearer that much as we have passed the setting up of an ad hoc committee, its work and terms of reference, which are going to be drafted, are quite different from the corrigenda. The corrigenda moves to assist us have these monies included in the budget because the monies for arrears are not in the budget.

In addition, I need to present that the moment this money is in the budget, the ad hoc committee can also do its work. The moment we pass the corrigenda, we are not going to spend the money tomorrow and meanwhile, the ad hoc committee will be doing its work. The work of the ad hoc committee is to do the energy audit and look into whether we really need to pay Shs 207 billion but we would have included it in the budget. I beg to clarify, Madam Speaker.

MR KAGWERA: Madam Speaker, the issue on the Floor is between what hon. Nsereko has proposed and what hon. Alaso has brought up. I see a lot of agreement between the two. 

The issue of whether money was spent or whether money should be spent is not the question. The question is: was the money spent correctly and do we propose that we spend more money when we have not heard the committee? This is how the issue of the committee came up. So, Madam Speaker, I believe the idea of the committee should go on and what my honourable sister is saying may stay. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have already concluded the issue of the committee and we are now dealing with the presentation of the ministers about the corrigenda. Do not go back to the other thing; we have moved already.

3.49
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have listened carefully to the chairperson of the committee and the explanation given by the honourable member. I would like to support the proposal being laid on the Table for the corrigenda adjustment. However, I would like to draw the attention of the House to Article 154(5) of the Constitution. We are bound by this Article to ensure that even the corrigenda budget is subjected to the Appropriation Act, which will come into place later. As of now, however, we shall not and we cannot approve any amount of money in excess to the vote-on-account. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.51
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nadala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank my colleague for that information. We must be clear to the ministry or the government that Parliament is not refusing to give you money. One of the things you are saying is that these are arrears and if they are arrears, they must have been verified and approved. That is one. At any time when they are approved, they should have become part and parcel of our budget but if you are checking on our budget - (Interruption)

MR LWANGA: Thank you, hon. Mafabi, for giving way. Colleague, in the profession it is not arrears. This is the information I want to give you on the arrears bit. Unfortunately, you came late but this has been dealt with. This is why he wants to come up with a corrigenda adjustment. The one the minister is looking for is that money that is in the budget, that is, the Shs 92 billion, of which we have already allowed him, on the vote-on-account, to spend Shs 30.6 billion. So the balance is what he is seeking permission to spend. He wants to front-load it for current expenditure.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I think I have a copy of the corrigenda -(Interruption)

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to inform the House and remind them that the report from the committee has been adopted with three recommendations. One is to withdraw the motion. Two is informing the House that Government can only spend the current budget as budgeted for. Three, the minister has been advised to present to the House a corrigenda adjustment to the budget and this is what the minister is doing. 

These three recommendations have been accepted by the House and now the same House is jumping out of the three recommendations. How serious is this House? You have accepted the three recommendations but now you are denying the third one. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to thank you for the information asking how serious we are. A corrigendum is to correct, and the correction here is that the Shs 92 million they are talking about is not arrears. However, I wish you could see what the minister has written and attached at the back. He is saying that the outstanding bills for 2011/12 are Shs 207 million. Can you imagine that he is saying these are outstanding bills for 2011/12 and yet the financial year has just started? 

MR WERIKHE: If you look at page 8 - already the House has adopted the report but the minister was asked to withdraw the motion. Government can only spend the current budget as enshrined in the Budget. The current budget has Shs 92 billion provided for, and this what the Ministry of Finance is asking for, not for arrears. They are seeking for permission to spend the money which we have already allowed them to spend in the budget. The Shs 30 billion is already ensured on the vote-on-account. The Shs 61 billion is also in the very budget that we have this financial year. 

Their request is that they would like to have the Shs 61 billion so that it comes to Shs 92 billion for the current running of the services being provided, not domestic arrears. We have already adopted this in the report. It seems we are overturning what we agreed on. Unless the House goes back to reconsider the report that we have just passed, then we go ahead. I beg to move.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, let us not try to do the work of the Ministry of Energy because they failed to do their job as they never put the money that they needed in the current budget. Secondly, they cannot spend money more than what we have already voted for. 

The corrigendum being talked about is where you can make adjustments within the budget that has been approved. If they have money within what we have already approved, we can even authorise them to do that but they cannot go beyond the money that we have already approved. As you know, this money is not in the budget if you look at their statement. This is means that we shall be authorising a supplementary and this is irregular. If you look at Article 154(5), the Constitution does not allow that. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The chairman of the Budget Committee knows what we are talking about. Under our Constitution, we cannot go beyond the Vote-on-Account. If they use Shs 92 billion every three months, that means that they should have multiplied Shs 92 billion three times and we would have given them a-third. If you look at the corrigendum that the minister has brought, you find that he has attached a document at the back. Look at the second last line - you are saying that domestic arrears amount to Shs 207,532 million but you are saying that these are the outstanding bills for the Financial Year 2011/12.

MR KAJARA: What the Leader of the Opposition is saying is correct. We made an error in the last line. The outstanding bills should read 2010/11. The Shs 207,532 million refers to the outstanding bills for the year 2010/2011. It would benefit this House if I read out this motion because they would really understand. We went on discuss the details of the motion which I gave out before I even explained what the contents of the motion are. I think it would answer some questions if we read out this motion. 

THE SPEAKER: You were given the opportunity but you did not read out the motion. You read it now.

MR KAJARA: The opportunity was taken away when someone raised an issue of procedure and procedure became a debate.

THE SPEAKER: But now you have the time to read it.

MR KAJARA: This is a new motion. It is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to incur expenditure of Shs 61,333,333,333 towards a thermal power subsidy under vote 17, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, above the Vote-on-Account amount for the Financial Year 2011/12. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS in 2006 Government approved a short term plan to use thermal plants to mitigate Uganda’s electricity shortfalls; 

AND WHEREAS the power tariffs at the time were unaffordable for most consumers of power and Government took a policy decision to buy down the tariffs and approved budgetary subsidies to the power sector aimed at keeping tariffs at affordable levels; 

AND WHEREAS the subsidies were approved to stay until the commissioning of Bujagali Hydro Electricity Power Plant of 250 mega watts in October 2010;

AND WHEREAS the commissioning of the said Bujagali Hydro Electricity Power Plant delayed due to unforeseen circumstances and is now expected in October 2011, one year later;

AND WHEREAS on the 8th day of June 2011, Government presented before this Parliament the statement of revenue and expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012 in accordance with the provisions of Article 155 of the Constitution;

AND WHEREAS Government has in the said statement of revenue and expenditure provided Shs 92 billion to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development in the Budget of FY 2011/2012 for the thermal power subsidy;

AND WHEREAS Parliament has approved Shs 30,666,666,667 as Vote on Account for the thermal power subsidy under the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development;

AND WHEREAS Government, having considered the implications of the current risk of not meeting the subsidy requirements on electricity generation mix, considers it necessary to spend Shs 61,333,333,333 above the Vote on Account to make payment to the thermal power generators in the first quarter of the FY 2011/2012 ….”

Madam Speaker, this means that the money we provided for - the Shs 30 billion - will be insufficient for the first four months starting from July. 

“…NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that: 
1. Government takes appropriate remedial measures to alleviate the problem and fully provide for the thermal subsidy requirements, that is, the Shs 30 billion plus the Shs 61 billion making a sum of Shs 92 billion.

2. In accordance with Article 154 (5) (a) and (b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Government be authorised to incur additional expenditure of Shs 61,333,333,333 above the Vote-on-Account during the first quarter of this FY 2011/12, bringing the total authorisation of Shs 92 billion, which is the entire annual provision for this item already provided for under Vote 17 for Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, Project No. 0940 - Support to Thermal Power Generation - as follows: 
Item 263206: other capital grants - Shs 61,333,333,333.” 

Madam Speaker, the Committee on the Budget did not recommend that motion in its report because that motion only provided for the use of money from the current financial year to pay off arrears but now we have withdrawn that motion. 

The committee noted that Government can only spend money from the current budget. In the current budget, Government has provided for Shs 92 billion for this subsidy. However, all we are saying is that the money provided for on the Vote-on-Account for this financial year cannot last through the first quarter. That is why we are asking approval of Parliament to spend this money. That is why we had to bring a separate motion from the motion relating to what has been provided for on the Vote-on-Account. 

This motion is intended to front-load this money that is already provided for in this budget to cover the expenditure for the first quarter. This was done bearing in mind that we owe these power generators arrears that we cannot pay now. We can only use this money that we are requesting for to pay these arrears so that we continue consuming power for the first quarter of this financial year.

We should understand this motion from that point of view and spirit. The power generators have even run out of working capital because Government owes them a lot of money. In the amended corrigenda, we have provided for these arrears. They will be paid during this financial year, but for this very important aspect of our economy we are requesting Parliament to allow the ministry to spend this money in the first quarter of this financial year. That is the spirit of this motion. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.09
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the hon. Minister for adhering to the recommendations that the committee put to him. I would like to make it clear to the House that this is not a supplementary as one member insinuated. What has been presented here now is a corrigendum to adjust the current budget. In doing that, the minister has introduced new resources, as he explained to us in the committee meeting. In effect, it means that the budget has actually gone up. 

On the current year requirement for the first quarter, the minister has brought a motion for a resolution that he requires Shs 92 billion. But again, there is also an amount here that has been indicated for payment of the domestic arrears. Now, taking into account the legal requirements on the Vote-on-Account, if the new monies being provided for here in the corrigenda increase the total budget, automatically today - if we accept this corrigendum - we shall have to go into a committee of supply to supply an additional 30 percent to cater for the domestic arrears. So, I believe we shall be supplying an additional Shs 69.1 billion on Vote-on-Account on these domestic arrears

I would like to thank the minister, yes, but also inform the members that that is implication of this corrigenda – that we shall have to go to the committee of supply. So, what the minister now has to do is to clarify to the House that these are new sources; and if that is the case, then the actual new total for the budget for this year has gone up. So, vote on account has to be supplied on account of the domestic arrears.
On the recurrent budget for this financial year, he has already asked for Shs 92 billion, which is over and above the domestic arrears. So, we cannot therefore again supply it. So, by implication we have to supply it through this motion. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.12
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas I agree that this is not a supplementary, from the professional point of view as an account, I would like to say that it will eventually lead us to a supplementary if we approve this. I am saying this because at the planning stage, when this money got into this budget, they were looking at one year but now the ministry is asking us to spend it in only one quarter. So, what will happen to the entire life of the financial year? That is one issue.

Two, we have had problems related to approval of supplementary budgets and it is my prayer that we put an end to this. If we continue encouraging this poor planning and management by crisis - as an accountant, I know what it means bringing things at the end - even this disease of corruption that we talk about everyday will not stop because of this management by crisis. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.13
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geofrey Ekanya): Madam Speaker, I thank you and I thank the honourable minister, and I want to thank the chairperson. 

I find error in the Minister’s motion. I do not know whether it was by the people who prepared this document or it is not an error anyway, but the motion partly reads: “Whereas the subsidies were approved to stay until the commissioning of Bujagali hydro electric power plant of 250 megawatts in October …” So the minister is telling us that by October, we will have 250 mega watts from Bujagali? (Interjection) I am reading an annexed motion. So, I want to thank Government because by October we will have 250 mega watts and this will be a huge saving for this economy. 

If that be the case, the minister is asking for an additional Shs 61 billion to cater for the first quarter of this financial year, and the first quarter of this financial year ends in October. If you add that to the Shs 31 billion, it comes to Shs 92 billion. I find a problem with the corrigenda of the minister. In the corrigenda, the minister is asking for an additional Shs 117 billion for the entire financial year. If we shall have our own power from Bujagali from October, then who do you want to pay? 

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, I have listened to hon. Ekanya say that 250 megawatts will be on board in October. Is it possible for the Minister of Energy to clarify whether this is true or false? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Members, the motion of the minister in paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 4 says that Bujagali will be on board in October 2011.

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House that it is only after receiving correct information that this House can progress. 

The true position is that in October 2011, one of the five machines which is rated at 50 megawatts will be commissioned. In December 2011, the second machine of 50 mega watts will be commissioned and we will go on until April 2012 when the last machine will be commissioned, totalling to 250 mega watts. This is the true position. If the minister’s motion reads 250 mega watts, I propose an amendment to it. 

THE SPEAKER: But honourable ministers, I do not know why the Minister of Energy is not assisting the Minister of Finance to get the right information to take the decision. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I think the Minister of Energy and the Minister of Finance have an axe to grind. That is why a motion came to the Floor of the House presented by the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Energy stood on the Floor of the House and contradicted it. This also takes us back to the point that they did not budget for this money. So, these two ministries have an axe to grind and I want to call upon the Prime Minister to get the Minister of Energy and the Minister of Finance and the technical people to do the job for this country. If they have an axe to grind, get those officials out because they are wasting our time. 

There is even an error in the statement which they gave to the chairperson, hon. Tim Lwanga. They said that Bujagali is coming on board. So, hon. Minister, we need to give you this money to solve the problem but you need to put your house in order because – (Interruption)

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I understand the most expensive dam that has ever come up is Bujagali and it is already on record that even the number of mega watts they are talking about are just on paper. I want the minister to come up and state the real number of megawatts being produced because every megawatt that will be produced is being paid for. The amount of monies that were disbursed are to be paid for the 250 megawatts but right now, we are facing a problem of a lower number of megawatts because those megawatts are not on the ground. 

The people with the contract are saying that we cannot produce those megawatts and even with the fall of the water levels on the River Nile, there is no way they can produce those megawatts constantly. Can the minister come up and clarify on the number of megawatts coming up and whether every megawatt will be paid for. Thank you. 

MR ALEX BYARUGABA: Madam Speaker, I had kept quiet and hon. Ekanya is a colleague and I like him, but I realise we have rules of procedure and we should as much as possible try to adhere to them. Hon. Ekanya is a member of this particular committee and he even appended his signature to the report and he is the same person opposing the report. I do not understand it and I want clarification from you. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not think he is opposing the report. He is taking issue with the contents of the resolution which has just been moved by the minister of finance. We finished the report and we are dealing with a new resolution and this is what he is taking issue with. 

4.22
THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, I rise on behalf of Government to apologise for the mix up in figures. As you know, even in the President’s State of the Nation Address at page 19, he gives figures on Bujagali and it reads as follows: “The commissioning of the first turbine of 50 megawatts is still on course in October this year and thereafter, the full commissioning of the 250 megawatts’ plant in April 2012.” Obviously, this was a mistake which we regret but the facts are clear. I urge my colleagues to address the substance and we have this corrected. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for advising my colleague. I did not contribute to the debate on the report but I am here as the Shadow Minister of Finance. I want to thank the Prime Minister for putting the record correct on behalf of Government. I hope the ministers of finance and energy will put their act together. 

The question that the minister of finance and minister of energy need to inform this House about is in your corrigenda. You have Shs 117 billion that you need, bringing the total requirement for this financial year to Shs 209 billion. As the Prime Minister has stated, we are going to have 50 megawatts progressively up to December, which is good. I want to appeal to this House that based on the situation that we have - even now, we have an ad hoc committee – the only challenge the House needs to sort out is the legality of this matter. 

The other colleague raised a constitutional matter. The Prime Minister was not in but he raised a constitutional mater and read it very clearly. As of now, we need to give Government time and then the investigation continues. That means the Minister of Finance needs to correct his corrigenda; we are going to have Bujagali come on board - 50 megawatts - so, why do we need this Shs 117 billion? -(Interjections)- Attention, my sister! 

Also, the Government has allowed more water to flow from the River Nile and we are generating 50 megawatts -(Interjection)- okay, 40 megawatts. So, 40 plus 50 coming in October, that is 90. I have a document which talks about -(Interruption) 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, hon. Ekanya, our Shadow Minister for Finance. I was following you and you raised a very important issue and I thought that you would have paused there. Everything we do here first and foremost should be in defence of the Constitution, the details or the urgency notwithstanding. When I look at Article 154, it directs this country on how charges on the Consolidated Fund can be imposed. It says: “Withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund. 
(1) No monies shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund except -
(a) To meet expenditure charged on the fund by this Constitution or by an Act of Parliament ….”

It goes ahead to list the Acts of Parliament - the Appropriation Act, the Supplementary Appropriation Act - and then advises on expenditure before the two Acts are in place - the Vote-on-Account. As we proceed, what are we dealing with? Is it supplementary appropriation, Vote-on-Account or appropriation itself? Until that first question is settled, we are in a very strange area. This kind of matter seems not to have arisen before. The Attorney-General needs to guide this House, to define to the House what we are proceeding on. 

Who is not worried? It is terrible to have your supplies in a little fridge in Nakawa Market black out and rot. We all need power. We needed it yesterday but we have to do things the neater way. Why doesn’t the Prime Minister or the Attorney-General deal with first things first - the principle of what we are doing - and we will vote the money even at midnight? We will stay here!

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Werikhe and then Sabiiti -[MR KASSIANO WADRI: “Werikhe has become active these days.”] Hon. Members, he is a Member of this House! 

MR WERIKHE: I wanted to give him a point of order but - hon. Ekanya was saying 40 megawatts are going to be given to us for a certain period of time. I want to inform the House that the 40 megawatts are for only four months. When the 50 megawatts come on board, they will replace these 40; so it is not 90. The 40 are for the four months and when the 50 kick in they are going to replace what is being provided now.

MR EKANYA: I want to thank hon. Werikhe. I wanted to photocopy this document which was given to this Parliament in April. I am an authority on what I am speaking about. Let me read: “Brief to Parliament on additional subsidy requirement to meet the national power demand.” It is on page 5. It was given to us in the Budget Committee in April -(Interjections)- by the minister of energy. 

It says, “Option one. Increase water release at Jinja to produce additional 50 megawatts.” That is why I was saying 50. The other day when they came, they said 40 and I kept quiet diplomatically. It says “the first option recommended for implementation is to increase water releases at Jinja to cater for additional 50 megawatts. The current flow at Jinja is maintained at 800 cubic meters per second. The lake level at the Jinja gauge is about 11.20 meters which allows a natural flow of 719 cubic meters per second based on the agreed curve policy. Each megawatt of power requires about six cubic meters per second which brings the total flow requirement for 50 megawatts to 300 cubic meters per second, bringing the total outflow to 11,000 cubic meters per second.

Assuming that the 2011/2012 budget will become effective in August, allowing additional water release for a period of four months – May to August - and assuming that the flow will be maintained at 18 hours per day, a total of 2.4 billion cubic meters will be required in that period. The surface area of Lake Victoria is 68,800 square kilometres. The additional water flow will cause a drop in lake levels of about 3.5 in that period. This is negligible compared to the drop in the lake which occurred due to evaporation.”

I got the document from Government. I did not manufacture it. I want to plead to this House - we now have an ad hoc committee to investigate but for this period, we are going to have either 90 or 100 mega watts from October. The issue we need clarification on is the legality that the colleague raised and hon. Alaso raised and we move forward. 

Also, the Prime Minister has committed himself to reining the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Energy in. We are also going to them so that we uproot the rotten maggot, as hon. Okwenye said. So, we need to sort out the legal issues, Madam Speaker, and then once we sort out the legal issues we look at this additional Shs 117 billion. 

4.33
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, first of all this figure of Shs 117,486,000,000, if you read the details, is to cater for the full cost of the energy subsidy before the commissioning of Bujagali. In arriving at this figure, Government has taken into account all the costs that will accrue. Some of these costs come about because there are adjustments in the exchange rate. There are also adjustments in the water flows, as hon. Ekanya has just alluded to. 

If you heard the Minister of Energy, the commissioning of the whole plant of Bujagali is not going to be at one go. It is going to be in series- 50 megawatts, which will run for some time and another 50 until there is full commissioning. 

In any case, these are estimates; they are not the actual. By the time we commission the Bujagali Project, this is the amount Government is estimating will have been spent. If this amount is not spent, and certainly like it happens in Government, it is not spent. If it runs in excess, then it calls for supplementary funding. So, in order for us to really move, I would like to confirm to this House that in arriving at that figure, all those issues that hon. Ekanya is alluding to have been considered. 

The honourable member was saying this is a supplementary. This is not a supplementary because for supplementary budgeting, you do not budget for it in the first incidence; it is an extra besides what you budgeted for. So, this money, the Shs 92 billion, is in our budget and now the additional funds have also been captured in our budget. There is nothing supplementary. If a supplementary arose, certainly it would be brought to this Parliament. There is no way Government will spend beyond the acceptable limits by the law without coming to Parliament for approval. So I want - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the clarification I want to seek from the minister is that on page 1 of the corrigenda that you have attached, you are saying - (Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank my honourable friend and colleague, the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament. In light of the very important and credible sounding presentations on the question of the law and on the question of the figures, and in light of the fact that we can obviously survive between now and Tuesday, I wish to move, Madam Speaker, that we stay considerations and determination of this issue. We go back and put our house in order – (Applause)– on the figures we thought-out below and we come back on Tuesday so that we can sort it out then. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, obviously our programmes have been thrown into jeopardy. Today we were supposed to have concluded the debate on the State of the Nation and send you out to your committees. I will stick to my programme. I will want the sessional committees to start work on Monday but I will allow the Budget Committee to continue sitting to oversee this matter, and I reserve the right to call you back when the Government is ready. Let my programmes also move. 

So, the House is adjourned sine die but as I have said, I reserve the right to call you back when the Government is ready. I will call back the plenary when you are ready. For now, the House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 5.38 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)
