Wednesday, 9 July 2014

Parliament met at 2.12 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I just have two matters to communicate. This afternoon, I met the Board of Directors of the Uganda Manufacturers Association (UMA) and they are raising concerns about non-tariff barriers in the region. They are not permitted to sell sugar in Kenya and they are unhappy that, taking into account the volume of trade between Uganda and Kenya and especially for us who import over 60 percent of our goods from Kenya, they think that it would only be fair to be allowed to sell their sugar to Kenya. 

I request the Minister for Trade to examine that issue and report back to us because it is a breach of the COMESA protocols. 

They have also requested that they would like to be considered as stakeholders in the debate on the Budget and so, I will request the Committee on Budget and the Committee on Finance to invite the UMA Board of Directors to raise their concerns on the issue of the Budget. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Before the Bills, there was something small by hon. Lubogo.

3.11
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have an issue of national importance. For about two weeks now, the press has been awash with a story that our National Anthem is going to be modified and that contracting work has already started for us to have a new version of the National Anthem. 

It is alleged that the Minister of Tourism is championing this with the purpose of promoting tourism in the country. What I seek to know is; where did the demand for the modification of the National Anthem start from?

I also would like to know, who is it intended to benefit? I seek that the Minister for Tourism comes up and explains to us so that the nation can know what is taking place. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, that is an important matter. We want to know with whom you agreed to change the National Anthem. So, please, come and explain to us at an appropriate time. I thank you. 

3.13
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yes, it is true that the print media, especially and other media, have been awash, to use my colleagues words, with the report that the National Anthem was in the process of being changed. This is false reporting. The National Anthem is not being changed. 

There is no consideration whatsoever to change the National Anthem. (Applause) And if ever such an idea came up, we would discuss it in all appropriate organs of Government and we would come to Parlaiment so that if there were changes, we would all own them. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for that re-assurance. 

3.14
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are ready to proceed with this Bill but we are still waiting for a certificate of financial implications from the Ministry of Finance. So, as soon as we receive it, we will be ready to lay it on Table for first reading. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: That is the Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill. So, you are not ready. 

3.15
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think that I should voice my concern alongside the one of my colleague, hon. Akol, in regard to a certificate of financial implications. It is becoming the norm with Ministry of Finance that when the House gives us leave to bring in a Private Members’ Bill, they will sit on the request for a certificate of financial implications.

You may recall that in September 2013, I actually came here and the House granted me leave but I have since written three letters to the Ministry of Finance to get me a certificate of financial implications and they have not done it. They do not even have the courtesy to respond to all my letters. I think they are in a way deliberately undermining the provision that allows Members to move a Private Members’ Bill in this House. 

I thought that all they need to do is to cost it and tell us and if we find that it is something that the Consolidated Fund cannot bear, then the effort is dropped. But now, they just do not tell you what the implications are; they do not even want to respond to you. They are becoming such a stumbling block to this entire process.

THE SPEAKER: I hope the Minister for Finance will tell us why. Are there any other certificates pending? 

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a procedural point. You always give us time to raise matters of national importance and yesterday, quite a number of issues were raised but most Members of the Front Bench were not around. Those were serious matters of national concern. Others were raised from the Chair; the issue of Sudan, Western Uganda, teachers’ salaries and general salaries, the issue of China. They were really serious issues that Ugandans cannot wait to hear from the ministers now that the Front Bench is full. 

Would it not be procedurally right for the Prime Minister to direct his ministers to respond to some of these very urgent matters of national concern? 

THE SPEAKER: There was an acting Prime Minister yesterday and I do not know if the real Prime Minister has been briefed. (Laughter)

3.17
THE PRIME AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Hon. Flavia Munaaba, who very effectively and to my great satisfaction held the fort of Leader of Government Business while we were on our way from an engagement, did indeed report and I am happy to inform this House that the relevant ministers have received these queries and will be giving their responses starting tomorrow. We will start with the situation in Western Uganda and so on. We are going to get a response for each one of them starting tomorrow. 

Thank you.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Some matters that were talked about yesterday as matters of national importance are very urgent, involving lives of human beings. We cannot just keep quiet and begin speculating about what could be the causes without Government giving us a position on the matter. 

Madam Speaker, postponement of issues affecting the people in Bundibugyo and Kasese, the deaths that are taking place in those two districts, mean a lot to the people in those districts. For Government to say, “We shall talk about it tomorrow” may cause more confusion. 

May we know from Government, for example, why Government cannot give its position right now as it is and what they think the population should do to ensure what has happened does not continue?

MR FUNGAROO: I am just adding something to what my sister said. The issue of Bundibugyo and Kasese needs a daily brief. If you want to say something tomorrow, that is okay, you will say it. But for today, they need to tell us –(Laughter)– now that my counterpart from the Ministry of Defence is here, they need to tell us, what do we do in the current situation?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, I do not know whether anyone is ready today? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I concur with my colleagues who have alluded to the gravity of the matter on the situation in Kasese and Bundibugyo. As you have heard even through the media, Government is paying maximum attention to it. 

I briefed the Speaker earlier on that we would like to make a comprehensive statement but we were unable to prepare one in time for this afternoon. That is why I said we will certainly present a comprehensive statement on Kasese tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please, join me in welcoming Miss Cecile Compaore Deputy Representative United Nations Population Fund; Ms Martha Songa, National Programmes Officer, United Nations Population Fund; Mr Andrew Tiyondi, the Head of Monitoring and Evaluation Department at the Population Secretariat. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have pupils of Entebbe Highway Primary School, Entebbe Municipality, represented by hon. Kawuma and hon. Seninde. Children of Entebbe, you are welcome! (Applause)

We also have on this side, pupils of Heritage Junior School in Kyadondo North Constituency, represented by hon. Sebunya and hon. Seninde. You are welcome. (Applause)

Now, hon. Members, I do appreciate that the matters we raised yesterday were very grave but I think we also should get a proper answer, not a half-baked answer. Let us give them 24 hours to give us the right information so that we can speak from a point of knowledge. 

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: I am talking about the issue of the female workers of Mweya Safari Lodge, Madam Speaker. The eviction of the children is supposed to happen today. The directive you gave yesterday was that the Minister of Tourism takes up the matter and reports accordingly. We would like to know whether the minister took up the matter and talked to the management of Mweya Safari Lodge to stop the eviction of the children from the premises.

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Tourism here? – Anyway, as we wait for the Ministers of Tourism, let us proceed. I will watch for her; when they come, I will let you know. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

FINANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Finance (Amendment) Bill, 2014 be read for the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Minister, I think this House wants clarification. You did table a number of Bills at the end of the financial year. Now you are tabling amendments, all of them to do with the Budget. So, which ones should we handle? We instructed the minister and the Business Committee to tell us. We have all these Bills for 2013 and when they came, I asked, “Why are you bringing them at the end of the financial year?” So, they are with us. Now you are giving us another set for the new financial year. 

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, what is true is that every financial year, we bring amendments to the Value added Tax, the Excise Tariff Act and the Income Tax Act and Finance Bill. But that is for the purpose of the Budget provisions of that financial year. The substantive Bills do exist and we thought that among the provisions of the Bills, there are important amendments which we want amended not necessarily for the financial years when they come. 

So, those are substantive amendments and those Bills are before the committees. We have made one appearance before the committees to consider those Bills. These ones are the ones that come every financial year but they are for the purpose of that financial year only. The ones we laid before Parliament are substantive amendments to the Act. 

THE SPEAKER: Where is the chair of finance, because we discussed this matter in the Business Committee? 

3.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Ssebunya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. After we had discussed the matter in the Business Committee, I perused the Bills and came to understand that some of the Bills, as he has said, are amendments to the Act, but that does not necessarily mean that they have to go with the Budget process.
 
Like the rotaries, betting and gambling; those are substantial Bills. And also Excise - but Excise and Stamp Duty looked like they should go with the Budget. May be we need to ask the minister to read them further, but they seem to be going by the Budget because they are changing rates. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 





3.27
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the Business Committee, we agreed and Government undertook to write to you an explanation on what is happening because we had Excise Duty Bills for 2013 and they are also sending 2014. So, there is that clarification that is needed in writing and I think probably, as a matter of procedure, if we can commit to an undertaking, as Government to write to the Speaker to clarify.

But the explanation of the minister is still lacking. So, it would be better to go back and study this situation and come up with a proper explanation in regard to that issue.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, we had discussed in the Business Committee and the hon. Minister for Information was in charge of the Government side and asked for an explanation. Are you bringing new Bills in the new financial year or do we proceed with the old ones? So, we want that explanation in writing before you can present this for the first reading. Let us go to the next item.

STATEMENT FROM THE UGANDA PARLIAMENTARIANS FORUM ON FOOD SECURITY, POPULATION AND DEVELOPMENT ON MARKING THE WORLD POPULATION DAY, 2014

3.29
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to make a brief statement on behalf of the Uganda Parliamentarians Forum on Food Security, Population and Development on marking the World Population Day, 2014.

This forum brings together Members of Parliament that champion the cause of population and development. The Rt Hon. Speaker is our patron. This document has been uploaded on the intranet. So, Members can follow my presentation using their iPads.

On Friday, July 11 2014, like it is always done, the world marks the World Population Day. This Friday, Uganda will join the rest of the world to mark this day. The celebrations in Uganda will be held in Dokolo District under the theme: “Invest in young people today to ensure a brighter future for Uganda.” A number of Members of Parliament will be traveling to Dokolo to participate in that function.

This is a day for all countries to reflect on the issue of population and the challenges therein, as a basis for planning for the future that we want. It is worth noting that there are over 1.8 billion youths aged between 10 and 24 years in the world today, which makes a quarter of the world’s population. The proportion of the global population that is between the ages of 10 and 24 years accounted for 28 per cent in 2010, slightly higher than the Asia and more than 31 per cent of the population of Africa.

The projections show that while this proportion will decline in most regions in the coming 25 years, it will remain above 20 per cent in all regions except Europe until 2035 and above 30 per cent until 2035 in Africa. So, for a long time, we shall have huge populations of young people.

Currently, half of Uganda’s population is less than 15 years of age; below 15 years, we have about 51.1 per cent Ugandans and those below 35 years are about 86.9 per cent. So, we have a very young population and that is why we see the demographic character of Parliament reflecting young people generally.

Such a young population is a barrier to economic development because it makes it difficult for families and Government to provide adequate education, health and empowerment of women, among others.

The high percentage of young people is as a result of high fertility. We estimate to have a fertility rate of about 6.2 children per woman in Uganda, in her reproductive life time. This is very high by any standards. [Hon. Member: “And men”] We do not usually measure the fertility for men; we only measure the one of women for social and biological reasons. (Laughter)

And only 34 percent can access family planning services. This, therefore, means that women who would like to postpone or stop having children do not have the opportunity to do so in Uganda. That explains why women still bear many children.

The decline in infant and other under-five child mortality while the birth rate remains high, has created an imbalance resulting in a high and unsustainable population growth and a youthful population. Adolescents and young people are central to the development agenda because they represent a large cohort in absolute terms. 

The Uganda Parliamentarians Forum on Food Security, Population and Development recognises the proportion of the young people in the country’s population and the contribution they make towards the development of our country.

The following issues have been considered imperative for the august House to make reflection on:
    1. The largest generation of adolescents that is entering sexual and reproductive life, yet there has been too little progress in preventing adolescent pregnancies and safe abortions, maternal death, sexually transmitted infections, including HIV/ AIDs and there are significant gaps to the availability and access to comprehensive sexuality education and services for young people in Uganda. The young people all over the world want to make sure that they are put in the picture of future development plans.

    2.  More girls are enrolling for primary education but many of them drop out before completing. More so, only a few who access and complete secondary and tertiary education. Consequently, many girls have fallen in trap of engaging in risky behaviours like premarital sex, early marriages, drugs and substance abuse and teenage pregnancies, among other challenges.


    3. Unemployment among the young people is high; currently estimated to be above 80 per cent in Uganda, yet, majority of those young people lack competitive skills to acquire employment. If these are not assisted to gain access to employment, the young people may pose a high risk to the country’s security and economic development. Madam Speaker, if you checked those combatants in Bundibugyo and Kasese, you realise that most of them are young and unemployed young people. And the recent story of the two youths who came here with piglets – the reason they gave was unemployment and the situation they live in.

    4. Young people are still not adequately involved in decision-making processes on issues that directly affect their lives. About 76 per cent of the countries have reported about instituting concrete procedures and mechanisms for the participation of adolescents and youth in making decisions that affect them. These countries include: Uganda, where we have a provision for the youth to be represented not only in Parliament but also at other governance structures at all levels.

Our call for action is that Uganda’s young age structure can be turned into a valuable asset for achieving socio-economic transformation as envisaged in the Vision 2040 if the birth rate declines rapidly, and the right investment is made to make this key cohort of the young people skilled, productive and employable. 

Madam Speaker, the population of Uganda will continue to grow whether the fertility rates decline or not. So, what is urged is that we must utilise the huge segment of the young people to make them skilled and productive so that we can turn that huge population into an asset, a phenomenon that we call the demographic dividend that the country must harness.

We further need to accelerate the demographic transition, which means reducing the fertility and death rates through investments that facilitate rapid fertility decline, enhance child survival and improve education and general empowerment of women in this country. 

We also need to reduce teenage pregnancies and unwanted pregnancies, which are quite high and also end child marriages, which are prevalent in most of our constituencies and tackle the negative cultural beliefs and practices some of which have remained persistent in our country.

We also need to enhance investment in higher education to develop a well-educated, skilled and innovative labour force.

We urge Government to invest heavily in the USE programme and ensure completion up to high level especially for girls while equipping them with skills at tertiary level and to improve the quality of education, remunerate the teachers better and produce a conducive learning environment to keep both boys and girls in school.

We also call for heavier investment in the health sector to nurture a healthy and productive labour force. Our country together with others pledged to raise the proportion of the budget that goes to health to at least 15 per cent in Abuja about 20 years ago but today, only six countries in Africa have been able to meet this target but Uganda is not one of them.

We have been oscillating between eight and 10 per cent of the budget going to health sector and I think the current budgetary provisions have given about nine per cent.

We also want to urge for acceleration of economic growth and job creation through modernisation of agriculture, which employs majority of our population. We urge for investments in fiscal policies and governance reforms to enhance savings to attract foreign direct investments and ensure efficiency and accountability in use of public resources.

Appeal to Government to continue popularising the upcoming national housing and population census, an exercise that will take place in August just a few weeks from now and it will be the best tool in planning for this country.

We call upon Ugandans to fully participate in the census exercise as well as the on-going registration for the national identity cards, whose days are almost running out. So, we urge Ugandans to participate and get registered. 

As Members of Parliament, we need to reflect on the issues raised for action to ensure that the right policies are in place, resources are well appropriated, implementation done and monitored to improve the quality of the people of Uganda.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the challenge for us as Ugandans is to reduce the population of young dependants and make the right investments so as to reap from the large youthful population, which we have today.

With good planning and investment in the right policies, this can be done. There are many examples of countries, which have done the right investments that have turned their huge populations into an asset. We can create a society for all ages in which both young and old people can claim their rights and have a chance to equally contribute to and benefit from the development process.

Investing in young people today by promoting healthy habits and ensuring education, competitive skills and employment opportunities as well as access to health services and social security coverage for all workers is the best investments to improve the lives of the future generations.

I thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Members for listening.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, that is a statement; it is not a motion and we are not going to have a resolution. I advise Members to use that information in their debate on the State of the Nation Address and the Budget.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: I rise on a point of procedure -

THE SPEAKER: I have not allowed you. (Laughter)

LAYING OF PAPERS

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

Ministry of Internal Affairs

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on Table Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Internal Affairs in respect to: Vote 009 Internal Affairs Headquarters; Vote 120 National Citizenship and Immigration Control; Vote 144 Uganda Police Force; and Vote 145 Uganda Prisons in respect to financial year 2014/15. 

I beg to lay.

Office of the Prime Minister

3.44
THE MINISTER FOR GENERAL DUTIES (OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In accordance with section 6(2) of the Budget Act 2001, I have the honour to present to the Ninth Parliament the policy statement of Vote 003 Office of the Prime Minister for the financial year 2014/2015. 

I beg to lay.

Ministry of Foreign Affairs

3.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR REGIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Asuman Kiyingi): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Vote 006 ministry headquarters and votes 201 to 236 Missions Abroad. 

I beg to lay.

Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs

3.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, in line with the Budget Act, 2001, I beg to lay the Ministerial Policy Statement covering the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the nine allied statutory institutions to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs in the sector-wide approach development programme of the Justice Law and Order Sector. 

I beg to lay.

Ministry of Defence

3.46
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Defence Vote 004 for the financial year 2014/2015. 
I beg to lay.

Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the year 2014/2015 Vote 008 and Vote 130.

I beg to lay.

Ministry of Works and Transport

3.47
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Madam Speaker, in line with the Budget Act, 2001, I have the honour to lay the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Financial Year 2014/15 of the Ministry of Works and Transport, comprising of the following votes: Vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport; Vote 113 - Uganda National Roads Authority; Vote 118 - Uganda Road Fund; and Vote 500 - Local Government. The total budget is Shs 2,305.3 billion. 

I beg to lay.

Ministry for Water and the Environment

3.48
THE MINISTER FOR WATER AND THE ENVIRONMENT (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, in accordance with Section 6(1) of the Budget Act, 2001, I wish to lay on Table the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Financial Year 2014/15 covering Votes 019 - Ministry of Water and Environment; Vote 150 - the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA); Vote 157 - the National Forestry Authority as well as votes 101-850 for funds disbursed to local governments under the conditional grants arrangement for the rural water supply services. 

I beg to lay. 

Ministry of Public Service

3.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LUWEERO TRIANGLE (Ms Sarah Kataike): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Public Service, I wish to lay the Ministerial Policy Statement for Financial Year 2014/2015 Ministry of Public Service - Vote 005; and Public Service Commission - Vote 146. 

I beg to lay.

The Parliamentary Commission

3.51
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Madam Speaker, in accordance with the relevant provisions in the Budget Act, I beg to lay on Table the policy statement for Vote 104 - Parliamentary Commission for Financial Year 2014/2015. 

I beg to lay.

The Presidency

3.51
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I lay on Table, allow me to first explain the issue, which was raised yesterday. (Interjections) If I do not explain it – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please!

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, first of all I wish to apologise that there were mistakes in our policy statement. And on 1st July, we wrote to the Clerk of Parliament, giving a corrigendum or an addendum showing the pages that had errors. It was received on the 3rd July. 

I must sincerely and honestly apologise for those mistakes. It is not these salaries that are quoted here. The salaries of the civil servants of State House and President’s Office are like those of other civil servants of Uganda; those who fall in U1 and U2 - and previously they have been appropriated through this Parliament. 

So, on that basis, Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on Table - (Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. Please, take your seats.

MR TUMWEBAZE: I wish to lay on Table the ministerial policy statement for the Presidency containing Votes 001 - Office of the President; 002 - State House; Vote 107 - Uganda AIDS Commission; Vote - 112 Ethics and Integrity; Vote 159 - External Security Organisation with the corrigendum to correct the errors. I hereby lay on Table.

Kampala City Council Authority

3.53

THE MINISTER OF THE PRESIDENCY (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please, take your seats.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Financial Year 2014/2015 for Vote 122 - Kampala Capital City Authority. 

I beg to lay.

Ministry of Information and Communication Technology

3.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Nyombi Thembo): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Ministerial Policy Statement for Financial Year 2014/2015 in respect of Votes 020 - Ministry of Information and Communication Technology; and Vote 126 - National Information Technology Authority of Uganda. 
I beg to lay.

Inspectorate of Government

3.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Nyombi Thembo): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the policy statement for the Inspectorate of Government - Vote 103 for Financial Year 2014/2015. 

I beg to lay.

Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INDUSTRY (Dr James Mutende): Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives containing Votes 015 for the Ministry of Trade headquarters; Vote 110 - for Uganda Industrial Research Institute; and Vote 154 - UNBS for the Financial Year 2014/2015. 

I beg to lay.

Ministry of Local Government

3.57
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesigye): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the ministerial policy statement in respect of Vote 011- Ministry of Local Government; Vote 147 - Local Government Finance Commission; Votes 501-778 - all local governments in Uganda for the Financial Year 2014/2015. 

I beg to lay.

Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development

3.58
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on Table the ministerial policy statement for Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development - Vote 012 and for Uganda Land Commission - Vote 156, for the Financial Year 2014/2015. 

I beg to lay on. 

Office of the Auditor-General

3.59
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Madam Speaker, in accordance with the relevant provisions in the Budget Act, I beg to lay on Table the policy statement for the Office of the Auditor-General - Vote 131 for Financial Year 2014/2015. 

I beg to lay.

Ministry of Education and Sports

4.00
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (MAJ. (RTD) JESSICA ALUPO): Madam Speaker, in accordance with section 6 (2) of the Budget Act 2001, I would like to present the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Education and Sports for the Financial Year 2014/2015 comprising of the following votes: Vote 013 – Ministry of Education and Sports; Vote 111- Busitema University; Vote 127 – Muni University; Vote 132 – Education Service Commission; Vote 136 – Makerere University; Vote 137 – Mbarara University; Vote 138 – Makerere University Business School; Vote 139 – Kyambogo University; Vote 140 - Uganda Management Institute; Vote 149 – Gulu University; and Votes 500, 501, 850 – Local Governments. 

I beg to lay.

Ministry of Health

4.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to lay the Health Sector Ministerial Policy Statement for the Financial Year 2014/2015 with the following votes: Vote 014 – Ministry of Health; Vote 114 – Uganda Cancer Institute; Vote 115 – Uganda Heart Institute; Vote 116 – National Medical Stores; Vote 134 – the Health Service Commission; Vote 151 – the Uganda Blood Transfusion Services; Vote 161 – Mulago Hospital Complex; Vote 162 – Butabika Hospital; Vote 163 – Arua Regional Referral Hospital; Vote 164 – Fort Portal Regional Referral Hospital; Vote 165 - Gulu Regional Referral Hospital; Vote 166 – Hoima Regional Referral Hospital; Vote 167 – Jinja Regional Referral Hospital; Vote 168 – Kabale Regional Referral Hospital; Vote 169 – Masaka Regional Referral Hospital; Vote 170 – Mbale Regional Referral Hospital; Vote 171 – Soroti Regional Referral Hospital; Vote 172 – Lira Regional Referral Hospital; Vote 173 – Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital; Vote 174 – Mubende Regional Referral Hospital; Vote 175 – Moroto Regional Referral Hospital; Vote 176 – China/Uganda Friendship Referral Hospital, Naguru; and Votes 501 to 580 – Local Government. 

I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, all those policy statements are sent to the relevant sectoral committees for perusal and report back. You will have an opportunity to establish the contents of those policy statements in your committees. 

4.03
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Madam Speaker, I wish to make some comment on the statements laid. I thank you very much. 

According to Rule 135 these statements are supposed to be laid by Government by 30th June – (Interjections) - now they are being laid today on 9th July! The same rule also requires us to make responses and lay them by 15th July. We would like to ask for your consideration that we may not be in position to respond to these statements within the few remaining days but we shall try.

Secondly, yesterday, we got the statement from the Presidency and Members began talking about it here in the House. The Opposition Chief Whip raised some figures regarding salaries of State House staff. At the time, we did not have any other information concerning this submission. After it had been read, we got some document on our iPads yesterday. 

Later in the evening and this morning, the Minister for the Presidency was in the media attacking the Opposition Chief Whip - I have heard him being quoted. It is not that the Chief Whip created figures but read from this document, which you have just corrected and we do not have those figures here. 

So, we would ask the minister to apologise for attacking the Opposition Chief Whip for no wrong done. She read figures from this book, which figures you have corrected. (Interjections) Ordinarily, I am very familiar with publishing and when you have erratum in a book, you indicate. You should have withdrawn these books. If you wrote here on 1st July, you should have withdrawn these books and stated erratum on these books so that by the time we got them, we have all the corrections. In future, all the others should learn from that. 

I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, have you been attacking the Chief Opposition Whip? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, I honestly would like us to be truthful. I acknowledged the mistake and apologised. I have not spoken to the media apart from the ones that I met at the steps of Parliament coming here –(Interjections)– but you have just said that I have been on the media since morning. 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, it is only – 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MR TUMWEBAZE: With due respect, allow me to say that it is only the President’s Press Secretary  this morning who went to the Media Centre and gave the salaries of the State House employees. I met the media outside here and I gave clarification - (Interjections) - I know what I am saying –

THE SPEAKER: Clarification.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Let me first say what I said.

THE SPEAKER: Information from hon.  Baliddawa.

MR BALIDDAWA: Madam Speaker, I would like to give information that the hon. Minister has posted on Facebook regarding this issue. I did respond and advised you that you just apologise – (Interruption)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, my Facebook post is there for everybody to read. Hon. Bahati has just read it. Somebody came and deceived people that I had abused the Opposition Chief Whip. Why? My interview to the press will be quoted. I clarified that this was a mistake. (Ms Kiiza rose_) If you are my friend on Facebook hon. Kiiza, then go and read what I posted. Hon. David Bahati has read it. Colleagues, simple things should be taken as simple things. (Interjections)  I have owned up to the mistake and it is not the minister that works on this statement – [Hon. Member: “But you signed it.”] Yes, I signed it and that is why I own it. It is not the first time to have an error in a book. 

But I wish to be on record that I did not attack the Opposition Chief Whip; I responded and corrected the impression. Nobody in State House earns Shs 96 million; State House employees are like any other Government employees; this was a mistake. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very clear that this matter was raised on the Floor of this House yesterday. It is also very clear that some Members have raised concern over the response of the Minister of the Presidency in the media instead of coming to raise it on the Floor of this House. 

Madam Speaker, you have made your ruling which is very correct. The minister is now trying to explain to us issues that he did not actually read the very book which he tabled before this House, which he signed. Is the minister, therefore, in order to come and disown his own signature?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the minister began by apologising. That is on the Hansard; he apologised. Please, let the Members of the committee go and examine; they can take on the minister later in the committee. 

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2011 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

4.11
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following sub counties: 

    i) Busimbi sub-county – Mityana District
    ii) Ssekanyonyi sub-county – Mityana District
    iii) Maanyi sub-county – Mityana District
    iv) Kakindu sub-county – Mityana District 
    v) Butayunja sub-county - Mityana District 
    vi) Rupa sub-county – Moroto District
    vii) Tapac sub-county – Moroto District 
    viii) Katikekile sub-county – Moroto District
    ix) Lwabenge sub-county – Kalungu District
    x) Kalungu sub-county – Kalungu District 
    xi) Gweri sub-county – Soroti District 
    xii) Asuret sub-county – Soroti District
    xiii) Kamuda sub-county – Soroti Distric T 
    xiv) Arapai  sub-county – Soroti District 
    xv) Magoro sub-county – Katakwi District 
    xvi) Ongongoja sub-county – Katakwi District
    xvii) Ngariam sub-county – Katakwi District 
    xviii) Katakwi sub-county – Katakwi District 
    xix) Palam sub-county – Katakwi District
    xx) Toroma sub-county – Katakwi District 
    xxi) Omodoi sub-county – Katakwi District 
    xxii) Akworo sub-county – Nebbi District 
    xxiii) Pakwach sub-county – Nebbi District 
    xxiv) Kasasa sub-county – Rakai District 
    xxv) Lwankoni sub-county – Rakai District
    xxvi) Kasaali sub-county – Rakai District
    xxvii) Kibanda sub-county – Rakai District
    xxviii) Rwanyamahembe sub-county – Mbarara District
    xxix) Nyakayojo sub-county – Mbarara District
    xxx) Bugamba sub-county – Mbarara District 
    xxxi) Ukusijoni sub-county – Adjumani District 
    xxxii) Ofua sub-county – Adjumani District
    xxxiii) Ciforo sub-county – Adjumani District 
    xxxiv) Logiri sub-county – Arua District 
    xxxv) Bukukwanga sub-county – Bundibugyo District
    xxxvi) Kisubba sub-county – Bundibugyo District 
    xxxvii) Ndugutu sub-county – Bundibugyo District
    xxxviii) Kirumya sub-county – Bundibugyo District
    xxxix) Bubandi sub-county – Bundibugyo District 
    xl)  Rigbo sub-county – Arua District 
    xli) Ogoko sub-county – Arua District
    xlii) Ayivu sub-county – Arua District 

I beg to lay, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all these are sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for perusal and report back. 

BRIEF TO PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO UNIT OF ACCOUNT 70 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK FUND OF THE AFRICAN BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING THE ROAD SECTOR SUPPORT PROJECT V

4.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay before Parliament a proposal to borrow Units of Account 70 million equivalent to US$102,464,700 from the African Development Bank of the African Development Bank Group for financing the road sector support project 5. I beg to lay –(Interjections)– This will cover two roads: Bubombi-Lwakhakha, which is 44.5 kilometres, and Rukungiri-Kihihi-Ishasha-Kanungu, which is 78 kilometres.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know if we start doing that, I will complain about the Kamuli-Bukungu Road. However, what will happen to those who are not there?Let us send it to the committee.

MR ODONGAOTTO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The last time such a loan came here, I complained to this Parliament that the way this loan was requested for was sectarian and non-regional. I recall a debate ensued in this Parliament for 40 minutes before it was resolved that the next time they bring such a request, Government should look at the country from a wider perspective. 

In Pader, we do not have even half a metre of tarmacked road when other places are now tarmacking feeder roads. If we do not treat this country as one, we will cause problems to the people. So, Madam Speaker, even before you send this request to the appropriate committee, the issue of allocation of roads to be tarmacked in all parts of Uganda should be handled comprehensively. We cannot continue approving loans for others yet we have nothing in our villages.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that debate should ensue when the committee is reporting.

MR EBIL: Madam Speaker, I would like to support what hon. Odonga Otto has said because in Lango, people are almost going through Bundibugyo because they are saying that the road from Apac going through Lira to Kitgum has been a song– they really want their road tarmacked. They gave the President their votes and they want to be appreciated.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the minister. Maybe he has a solution.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and colleagues, allow me give you information on how we are financing our infrastructure, especially the roads. We either borrow from the World Bank or the African Development Bank. Those are the main bodies that we borrow from. For a road to qualify for funding, there are certain parameters that must be fulfilled –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not think that argument is tenable. I have driven to Pader using the road he is complaining about, which has been promised for a long time. We do not want to listen to that kind of argument. We are talking about equity in road distribution. Please, tell us about that. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I thought I owe it to this House –(Interjections)– Well, if the House is rejecting my explanation, then we shall come in at appropriate time.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister and Government, I think you should be sensitive to the sentiments of Ugandans. The Kapchorwa road has been promised to be tarmacked for over 20 years – that road from Kapchorwa to Suam – and we have not done it. Is it because there is no traffic? No, no, no.

THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I am sorry I had gone out but managed to hear you talk about the Kapchorwa-Suam Road. I would like to inform the House that that road is one of those that are going to be funded by ADB. 

In the ADB, there are different pillars of funding. The Kapchorwa-Suam Road is being taken on as a regional project. We are working with the Kenya Government in regard to the road coming from Kenya. The East African Community officials were here and we discussed this matter with them. In order to make sure that in Uganda we get this road in time, – we have already designed it – in our budget we have included a provision of Shs 10 billion for the design review. All these have been done to ensure the road is done on time.

MS ABIA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is not only painful but it is indeed immoral for the honourable minister to come up and suggest to this country – First of all, there are inconsistencies; the Minister of Finance is telling Ugandans today that there are certain qualifications that your roads must have in order to be tarmacked but the line minister is saying that there are some projects that can only fall into a certain financing group, for example, the World Bank or the IMF.

Is the honourable minister in order to suggest to Ugandans that a road, which is a public utility, which is going to be funded and financed by the taxpayers, can only go to a certain specific region only and only if it is politically right? Why do we say that?

THE SPEAKER: No, you are now debating.

MS ABIA: Madam Speaker, can I just give the basis of this? It is because the ministerial policy statement indicates precisely which roads are going to be funded and if you attach politics to each, then that is deliberate. Look at the UNRA report, the majority of the roads that have been tarmacked are found in Western Uganda. Now they are also bringing in that road, which is only 40 kilometres, and the one in Western Uganda is 72 kilometres.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know that everybody wants equity but we should also tell the truth. I was in Arua and I got to know that the Oraba Road has now reached the border. Yes, we want equity but also let us tell the truth. There is that new road from Arua to Oraba to Koboko. I know it because I have driven along it myself.

This loan request is for a road from Lwakhakha to Manafwa, and then for Kanungu, where the hon. Chris Baryomunsi does not even have a road. Honourable members, let us do this: let us receive the proposals and when the report comes, we can quarrel about distribution.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, this issue of roads in the North has been coming up. As I speak now, in less than a month I have signed a contract to build a road from Olwiyo-Anaka to Gulu; I have signed a contract to construct a road from Gulu to Acholibur; and I have signed a contract to construct a road from Acholibur to Kitgum to Musingo. All these roads are in the northern region.

As I speak now, I have a running contract from Kiryandongo to Kamdini; I have a contract from Kamdini to Gulu; I have a contract from Gulu to Atiak; I have a contract from Atiak to Nimule. These are all running contracts. I have a road from Moroto to Nakapiripirit where construction is going on. So, how can somebody come and say that there are no roads in the North? We must be truthful; these are on-going contracts. 

We should be patient and know that Government cannot do everything at ago. These are roads that are in the North, unless we have changed the boundaries of the North. If there is somebody who can correct me on those roads, you stand up.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the loan request is sent to the Committee on National Economy.

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on the Floor of Parliament a proposal to borrow US$ 175 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to support the second Kampala Institutional and Infrastructure Development Project (KIIDP II). I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara):Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a proposal to borrow SDR 157 million, equivalent to US$ 243 million, from IDA of the World Bank Group for financing the proposed North Eastern Road -Corridor Asset Management Project. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a proposal to borrow up to US$ 145 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance the Albertine Region Sustainable Development Project. I beg to lay.

MR PAUL MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am saddened by the manner in which we are proceeding. We debated this matter very extensively and took a decision. You wisely guided this House and said that the minister should come up with the road network for the whole country and come up with a strategy on how we are going to deal with these roads. However, we seem to be operating in an ad hoc manner because that is how all these issues are arising.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I respect the honourable member, but he cannot say that we are just ad hocing. If he does not know that does not mean that we are just ad hocking. 

I have stood here several times and said that we have a national plan for these roads. We have national corridors, unless he does not want to be in the community and does not want to respect what we agreed on in the community as regional corridors. We have been here and agreed that we must go where there is high productivity, agriculture, tourism and oil. These are the roads that we are working on.We have also said that we should endeavour to go to the headquarters of districts and this is what we are following.

There are also other issues that we should put into consideration; for example, how are we funding these roads? You should know that our development partners have their criteria known as the internal rate of return. Some of these roads do not qualify but because now your Government has got money generated within Uganda, we even go where the internal rate of return does not reach the required numbers. That is why we have gone to Moroto-Nakapiripirit and other roads. Is the honourable member in order to say that the Government of Uganda is ad hocking?

THE SPEAKER: He is not in order.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I appreciate your wise ruling. We have travelled in this country. When you move to other countries, they can tell you that these are tourism roads and they have been made by this country; they can tell you that these are agricultural roads and they have been made by this country. How do they do it? They have a strategy on how to work on these roads. The absence of knowledge by my good friend, hon. Byandala, about how roads are managed in other countries does not mean that this becomes the sufficient way of managing the road network in this country. 

What we are saying, Madam Speaker, is that we want to look at a strategy. He should actually clearly say that he is giving priority to these roads because of these clearly stated reasons. In the same way, we have theNational Development Plan but if you asked those seated at the front whether we are following that plan, they cannot tell you. They are just there wasting time. (Interruption)

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker and colleagues, we are respectable Members of Parliament and we should speak from a position of knowledge. If we do not have knowledge, we should look for it. Is the honourable member, whom I may call my muzukulu, a very respectable Member of Parliament, in order to stand before us and say that Government is not moving in line with NDP? I am the one in charge of NDP and everything that every sector does in Uganda must move in line with the National Development Plan. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, unless you can prove that the minister is not moving according to that plan, withdraw it.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I even offer to resign my seat from Parliament because what I have proved is that our colleagues are proving to be- I do not want to say irretrievably mediocre.

The Auditor-General’s report has clearly stated those issues. I can offer to resign my seat in this House. The evidence is there; it is in the Auditor-General’s report. I can accept; you can give me time to resign my seat in Parliament. I know what I am talking about.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you have that information, you will lay it on the Table. You bring it tomorrow.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I did not want it to sound as if roads are not being done in other parts of the country. It is true that the Karuma-Olwiyo-Kitgum Road, which the minister mentioned is on course. However, the National Road Development Plan, 2013/2014 shows that 54 percent of the roads worked on in Uganda are in Western Uganda. That is public information released by a department of Government. 

The request I want to make concerning the earlier requests is that if only the minister could bring a loan request to Parliament to tarmac all the roads in metropolitan Kampala. This is because most of us now live in Wakiso, Mukono and parts of Mpigi along murram roads. So if a substantive loan request could be brought in Parliament that would see all the roads within 40 kilometres of Kampala tarmacked, those are the kinds of things we would love to support. 

We see Nippon services sweeping Entebbe Road every day because murram comes onto the road and yet we know where the murram comes from. Honourable minister, can you please bring a loan request and we tarmac most of the roads in Wakiso and Mukono so that metropolitan Kampala is a little neater? These are the kinds of initiatives we would support, honourable minister.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what are we debating? What are we going to resolve?

MR ALEX RUHUNDA: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. The big challenge, which we are witnessing right now, is the failure by Government and the Opposition to work under one common vision for this country. Vision 2040 was launched officially and when you go through that vision, it gives a whole macro plan for the country - moving this country to the middle class. These plans are well followed through in the National Development Plan as a medium-term framework. The budgeting process that we follow every year fits within this framework. 

Madam Speaker, one honourable member has offered to resign his seat, but I do not understand at this point in time how you can come and make allegations that we are working without a clear strategy when all these strategies are in place and year in and year out we get into meetings and discuss these macro plans. So, can we really work together to build our nation rather than tearing each other apart.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I send all those requests to the Committee on National Economy. Let us go to the next item.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP BILL, 2012

THE CHAIRPERSON: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when we last convened we had a disagreement on the progress of that Bill. I do not know whether the Government has feedback so that we know whether to proceed or not.

THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMETN BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Chairperson, indeed as was exhibited on the Floor of this House, there was some disagreement within Government on some provisions of the Bill. I would like to formally extend our appreciation to you, Madam Chair, for the manner in which you rationally handled this issue. (Applause) It gave us the opportunity, and indeed we have done precisely that, to go over the issues and I am happy to report to this House that all the issues were resolved.

We will be coming with a UDC Bill - we shall come with a proposal because this is what Government has agreed to do - to re-establish Uganda Development Corporation (UDC). This UDC will be under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and it will operate as will be proposed in the Bill through the creation of subsidiaries, which will be special purpose vehicles for investments in PPPs.This is important because it is critical that in the arrangement, we cater for possible contingent liability which may arise out of unscheduled, unforeseen activities in the future. We would not like the Treasury of the Republic of Uganda to be raided because of misfortunes in business because in business there are risks.

We also agreed that under the Ministry of Finance, which is responsible and whose mandate it is to handle the public purse or the finances of Government, there will be a regulatory authority. This authority will be in the Ministry of Finance and its job will be to regulate the functions of public private partnerships. We think this is correct and this is what we agreed.So we think we should deal with the PPP law, and we will soon be coming with the UDC Bill, because on our side we have harmonised all positions. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. Honourablemembers, before we proceed I want you to welcome the children of Hope Academy Primary School, Kamwenge County South in Kyenjojo. I think they are here. They are represented by hon. Kajara and hon. Timbigamba. They are welcome. 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. I want to thank the Prime Minister and the Executive for coming up with a position in line with what seemingly caused a delay in the PPP as far as the state’s participation, the regulation, special purpose vehicle and how the private sector comes in, is concerned. 

However, I would also like to add that the PPPs are going to be possible because Uganda is now credible. The multinationals are now willing to come because they know you have money. Therefore, there must be a deliberate, conscious effort to give long-term financing with the UDC. If we do not have a UDB-capitalised –(Interjections)– I would request that the UDB long-term financing-

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Mukitale, that Bill is not here. You are making proposals for a Bill, which is yet to come.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Chair, I am only making a request that when the Bill for UDC comes-

THE CHIRPERSON: No, you are offending the rule against anticipation. Please, hon. Mukitale. We are at committee stage. Honourable members, when we adjourned, we had stood over clauses 7, 8, 9,10, 12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 24 and 4 as well as the title. 

Clause 7

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Chair. The committee proposes that we delete sub-clause (1) c. The justification is that the actual solicitation of a private party is done by the contracting authority for which accounts the accounting officer is responsible. This was transferred to clause 6 while we were considering clause 6 and so, it is a function that will now be done by the accounting officer.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 7 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, deleted.

Clause 8

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, clause 8 - functions of the process auditor; in sub-clause (2), insert the words “to the accounting officer” between the words “report” and “indicating” appearing on the second line. The sentence would now read, “Before an agreement is signed, the process auditor shall prepare a report to the accounting officer indicating whether the contracting authority has complied with the requirements of this Act.” The justification is that it is important to specify where the process auditor will report.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 8 be amended as proposed.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Before clause 9, the committee proposes that we insert a new clause immediately after clause 8 to read as follows: 

“Functions of the Transaction Advisor
The functions of the Transaction Advisor are to:
a) 	undertake a comprehensive feasibility study for a project including commercial, financial and legislative work required for a public private partnership agreement;

b) 	ensure optimum risk allocation in a public private partnerships agreement;
c) 	design and negotiate a public private partnerships agreement that guarantees long lasting social benefits;
d) 	safeguard the interests of a contracting authority in the management and execution of a project; and
e) 	any other function as may be determined in his or her instrument of appointment.”

The justification is that though mention is made of a transaction advisor in clauses 5 and 6, the Bill needs to define functions of a transaction advisor in a PPP. This will ensure provision of the requisite expertise and skills to develop successful PPP projects.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new sub-clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Clause 9 -functions of the project team. The committee proposes that we delete clause 9.The justification is that this is handled under new clauses establishing the project teams. If I could draw your attention to pages 21 to 22, we were very comprehensive on establishment of the project teams. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 9 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9 deleted.

Clause 10

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Clause 10 - evaluation committee. Under sub-clause (1), delete “on the recommendation of the project team.” The justification is: to avoid conflict of interest.

Under sub-clause (3), delete the word “law” and replace it with the words “regulations made under this Act.” The justification is: to be more specific.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Clause 12 - role of the Ministry. The committee proposes that we delete clause 12. The justification is that it has been handled in detail under new clauses 6 to 12, establishing the Public Private Partnerships Unit as contained on page 18.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It has been moved to clauses 6 to 12?

Mr ANTHONY OKELLO: There was a new clause proposed earlier and that new clause was establishing the Public Private Partnerships Unit and it comprehensively dealt with what was in clause 12. So the committee has proposed a deletion of clause 12.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 12 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, deleted.

Clause 13

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Clause 13 - project inception.In sub-clause (3) (a) replace the word,“Ministry” with the word, “Unit”.So, the sub-clause will now read, “register the project with the Unit…” rather than the Ministry.The justification is that the Unit is responsible for the examination of the project proposals.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 13 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Clause 14 -feasibility study.Under clause 14(2),insert a new paragraph to read as follows:

“(i) Indicate any envisaged future contingent liability.”The justification is that the PPP’s have a potential risk of creating future liabilities. It is proposed that a clause to cater for reporting an envisaged future contingent liability be included within the feasibility study report.

Under clauses 14 (4), (5), (6) and (7) replace “Ministry” with “Committee.” The justification is that the authority responsible for approval of the feasibility study should be explicitly stated, that is, the committee. The Ministry is too vague.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 14 be amended as proposed. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, I just want to seek clarification. Who does the feasibility study? Are we going to entirely leave it, as we passed it in the previous clauses, to the transaction advisors? Are these transaction advisors also going to carry out the economic cost-benefit analysis and if so, what is the difference between economic cost-benefit analysis and a feasibility study? 

The basis of this is purely that many times we get involved in projects and without knowing - We have already passed a law here for transaction advisors but we do not have control over these advisors. What they tend to tell us is what we take. What measures are we going to put in our law so that we can empower the contracting authority or the ministry to carry out their own feasibly study without it being hijacked by transaction advisors?

MR KASAIJA: Madam Chair and colleagues, the initiator of the project in terms of ideas is the parent ministry, department or agency. They are the ones who would lead the study. If they are short of expertise, then they acquire that expertise either from sister ministries or hire people who would be able to advise them. There is nobody else who can do a study without it being initiated by the ministry, department or agency which is championing that particular project. 

MR OBOTH: The honourable minister, I am afraid, has not helped me much. You are giving an assumption, which is helpful in economic terms, that all the times Government should be the one to initiate. However, there are some business partners who may come up with an idea and they sell it to Government. In that case, you will have no option to do a feasibility study. They might say they have done this and found it workable. 

My worry is that, and I think you were attempting to clear it, before we get to that level of getting transaction advisors, what mechanisms are you going to put within this legal framework to make sure that we do not just hire people for the sake, but first exhaust all avenues? Honourable minister, you know –(Interjections)– I am saying this with the view that I was recently the chairman of an ad hoc committee. You do not know how much money was spent getting transaction advisors who did nothing to advise Government. They seemed to have worked for those who are coming here to do business. This is what I am talking about. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, the issue being raised by hon. Oboth Oboth is very important and I can get the background that he is drawing from. I remember how I stood here to talk about the work of the Attorney-General’s Office in the face of what the transaction advisors did as far as the Umeme agreements were concerned. 

Principally, my understanding is that a transaction advisor is an advisor. The primary responsibility falls on the contracting party being advised. You cannot simply say that the work of a transaction advisor is binding on the contracting party; certainly not. They are there to advise you. In other words, when they are advising you, as the initiator of the project you must have the basic knowledge and conceptual understanding of that particular project. If that particular contacting party does not do that, there are many ways of accountability. That particular contacting party must account to the relevant authority why it cannot actually put in its own knowledge.

My only worry is actually on the clause we have just passed because in the functions of the transaction advisors, it appears like all is set to be carried out by a transaction advisor even where it is not necessary. Sometimes you do not need to assess that you need power in a particular place and yet here you specify in a provision that one of the functions of the transaction advisors is to carry out a feasibility study, even where it is not necessary. In some places you may need to do a survey and design but you say he must also do feasibility study, thereby incurring so many other expenses. Those are matters we can revisit. My submission is that the primary responsibility is on the contracting party. 

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Chair. This argument gives me a flashback about the inclusion of the local governments. We know that local governments lack capacity. We are now saying that all this should be the work of the transaction advisors. Now, in a case where the local government does not have the capacity and yet in clause 3 we say they should also be allowed to enter into a contract minus the parent ministry - we are yet to pass that clause - I do not know if we are proceeding well on this note.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you mean that you want us to go ahead and then come back? 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, I think the concern raised by hon. Santa Alum will be addressed when we get back to clause 4. In the definition clause, the committee has recommended the inclusion of local governments also to be contracting authorities. In the event that any contracting authority lacks capacity, there is already a provision in the new clause that the committee came up with. If I may draw your attention to page 21, you realise that the committee has made a compressive proposal that caters for any agency that wants to contract a PPP arrangement but lacks capacity. If I may read verbatim: 

“(2) Where due to the technical requirements of a public private partnership, a contracting authority does not have the appropriate officials to be appointed as project officer, process auditor or transaction advisor, the contacting authority shall, under the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, procure a person with the appropriate skills and experience from outside the contracting authority to act as such”. So in this case, even local governments, once we agree that local governments should be part of this arrangement, could be catered for under this provision when they lack capacity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Just to console hon. Santa, clause 4 has been stood over. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 14 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.


Clause 17

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, clause 17 is about evaluation of bids. In sub clause (2), replace “Ministry” with “Committee”. Justification: the authority responsible for approval of the feasibility study should be explicitly stated, that is, the committee. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 17 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

 Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, clause 18 is about public private partnerships agreement. Replace sub clauses(1) and (2)to read as follows: “(1)An accounting officer shall not sign a public private partnership agreement without the approval of Parliament.” In sub clause (3), replace the words “an agreement shall be forwarded to Cabinet for approval where the contracting authority confirms that” with “The Minister shall submit with the proposed agreement, a statement confirming that”.

Justification: the public private partnership agreements are of very high value and in most cases create contingent liabilities for Government. Parliament should examine them for consistency with the national budget and policy priorities.

We recommend the deletion of sub clause (4). The justification is that all agreements will be approved by Parliament.

Under clause 18 (6), we recommend that we insert the words, “among others” between the words “shall” and “specifically”.It will now read as follows: “An agreement shall, among others, specifically provide for the following…” The justification is that the highlighted areas are not the only provisions of the contract.

We also propose that Parliament replaces paragraphs (j) and (n) with the following: “(j) the mode of operation, maintenance and exploitation of the project and penalties for failure to meet performance standards;
(n)…” –(Interruptions)

MS OSEGE: Thank you, Madam Chair. The chairman just made a statement on what he wants to amend in that clause. He says “specifically, among others…” I donot seem to comprehend that kind of English. You say “specifically” but you also use the words “among others”. Would you like to make that more candid to avoid ambiguities?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think what they are saying is that an agreement shall, among others, specifically– The “among others” is in between “shall” and “specifically”. “An agreement shall, among others, specifically provide for the following…” That is what he proposed.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, I said that we propose the insertion of the words “among others” between the words “shall” and “specifically.” So, it will read, “An agreement shall, among others, specifically provide for the following…” Okay, we need to do away with the word “specifically”. I concedeon that. Let us change it and have it read like you have proposed.

Madam Chair, I was on the proposal to replace paragraphs (j) and (n) of clause 18(6). I had already read out (j) and now I will go to “(n) the substitution of the private party or by the contracting authority and the circumstances under which the substitution may be permitted.” 

We also propose the insertion of new paragraphs to read as follows: 
“(x) minimum capital of the private party and share transfer restrictions;
(y) rights of the private party to guarantee securities to creditors;
(z) direct agreements and step in rights of lenders where applicable.”
The justification is that these are key provisions of PPP agreements.

We move for the insertion of new sub clauses to read as follows: 
“(7) 	The Minister may by regulations specify the form in which a project agreement under this Act shall be drawn.

(8) 	The agreement entered into by a contracting authority under this Act shall be subject to the provisions of the laws of Uganda.
(9) 	The agreement shall only be amended or varied with the approval of Parliament.
(10) 	Parliament shall not approve an amendment, or variation to a project agreement under subsection (9) 	unless the agreement, if so amended or varied-
(a) 	the project continues to provide value for money; 
(b) 	the project continues to be affordable, where such amendment, variation or waiver has a financial implication; (c) the continued transfer of appropriate risks to the private party; 
(d) 	the continued provision of efficient and effective service to the public; and 
(e)	the continued protection and preservation of the environment.”

The justification is that prior approval of Parliament is required for any material amendments to a public private partnership agreement, including any material variations to the outputs therein or any waivers contemplated or provided for in the public private partnerships.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposals to amend clause 18. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chair, I thank the committee chairman for the serious thought put into these proposed amendments. My only worry is the involvement of Parliament in granting approvals at the relevant stages. You see, even when the ministry or government was providing for approvals by Cabinet, they were very careful - they even said at certain benchmarks or thresholds or monies involved. I say this because in a day, Government can execute about 10 to 20 PPPs. Assuming that all these were to be cleared by Parliament, I think we would be overstretching the work of Parliament.

Two, to me this is an executive function. Parliament comes in through its oversight function. It is like an auditing responsibility that Parliament plays; if it gets involved in the actual implementation of these projects, it will greatly undermine its oversight and auditing function. Therefore, Madam Chairperson – [Mr Balikuddembe: “Undermine”]-Well, hon. Balikuddembe wants me to use “undermine”; okay, let me use the word “undermine” without using “greatly”, although in my opinion we would be greatly doing it. 

Madam Chair, I beg that the committee gives serious consideration in conceding on this particular provision and leaves the powers with the Executive as stipulated in the Bill.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, I want to thank the Attorney-General. He has been participating since this Bill was brought to the Floor of the House. We had a serious debate whether the PPP arrangement will, in effect, involve borrowing. This is because we are going to have a private person come in with their money and Government is supposed to take it; does that amount to borrowing? Because of that, we said let Parliament get involved so that we can clear that ambiguity. That is why we did that. 

Whether you can have 20 PPP transactions in a day, I do not think that is possible. I know that hon. Fred Ruhindi comes from a busy constituency, but it is not going to be like a busy market where anybody will just come in to transact. I think Parliament’s role is very important because Government is going to commit the people of Uganda through partnerships with a private sector, which will invest money in this project. So, we need to know that this would be done rightly. 

Madam Chair, Parliament has always been very cooperative when it comes to approving loans and similar transactions from the Executive. We have always been very fast and straightforward on these matters. So, there is no way that we will hinder the process; actually, this will just strengthen the process. Thank you.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Madam Chair. I know the learned Attorney-General is aware that the principle of separation of powers does not move alone without the one on checks and balances. Whereas it is the mandate of the Executive to contract on behalf of Government, Parliament is also empowered to provide the checks and balances. 

We also do not have a good background in as far as piloting of PPPs is concerned. This country has been committed without unveiling the contingent liabilities, the partial risk guarantees, purchase agreements which commit the country. Most importantly, a PPP is an alternative financing of national priority. It is not just related to borrowing; it is actually borrowing and by the Constitution, Parliament has to approve borrowing. 

I would like, in the spirit of Parliament working together with the Executive, that we maintain parliamentary approval. If you have a problem, I would be bring in the aspect of thresholds - at what value would want the Executive to proceed without parliamentary approval in areas where we have classified, for example, that these are already agreed in terms of national policy, parliament after all appropriates. So we can allow a threshold and say below this threshold it is fine but as for big commitments, I would like to plead with you, Attorney-General and Members, that we maintain parliamentary approval.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chair. I got worried when I heard the minister say that in a day Government can clear 20 PPP agreements. (Laughter) At that rate, you would mortgage the whole Uganda and beyond because PPPs are a mortgage. They are a source of financing for Government. You are getting money now with a commitment to pay for a certain period of time in future because you cannot afford to pay the whole sum now.

Under such an arrangement, when you are going to commit Government for a future obligation that is financed through our budget, it is important that the representatives of the people of Uganda get involved to know what is going on. We approve loan requests here; even today, the minister presented loan requests that shall be approved by this House. 

This PPP is another form of financing; as a committee, we did not see why the same procedure cannot be followed. I appeal to my honourable colleagues to support the position of the committee that we allow Parliament to always approve these agreements before they are signed.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chair. I kind of agree with the spirit advanced by the committee, but again looking at our role as Parliament - You approve a commercial transaction, when the business goes bad who will hold others accountable? The Executive initiated, Parliament approved; shall we put a provision for the other party to go to court as an accountability measure? Who would play the accountability role?

It sounds very good for all of us and I know this is because of the past experiences we have had and we are legislating for the future. The past dictates that everything must come to Parliament because we have very bad experiences. Things have gone bad, but are we giving a vote of no confidence? I can tell you for sure that if we agree, I would support that the Executive –(Interruption) 

MR KASAIJA: Madam Chair, we need to balance two things. One is expediting the doing of business so that Parliament is not seen as if it is placing an undue break in the process of doing business, but at the same time Parliament must maintain its supervisory role in overseeing what Government is doing.

The issue at stake is not about borrowing; it is about an agreement. It is about an agreement. Also, not all PPPs would involve borrowing. I will give you an example, which we are contemplating, and that is the construction of the Jinja-Kampala Highway. Somebody brings his money, we have no obligation because he is going to put his road toll and recover his money under the agreed system. If there is an element of borrowing, then we will have to follow our Public Finance and Accountability Act, in which we will come here as we have come this afternoon asking for loans that caused people to be heated up this afternoon. That is the information I want to give and we can proceed.

MR OBOTH: I think the minister has given valuable information. On that basis alone, that we are the supervisors, what can we do to make sure that what we supervise does not get us into the game ourselves? Can we put a threshold? Since there is a constitutional provision that requires borrowing to be approved by Parliament, why must we do this other approval of lending or borrowing through the PPP Act? Why can’t we allow it to come clearly before this House - that this is borrowing - and then we remain the prefects and the watchdogs? That is the reason that I would be inclined to support the improvement on that proposal - that Parliament is slightly left out but also very viable in playing a role of accountability.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Chair. First, I want to implore the House that the oversight role actually starts at all stages of initiation of be it an agreement or a project. Therefore, honourable Attorney-General, I believe that while we engage in this, the Parliament must be involved in knowing what the Executive is about to commit this country to through approvals and scrutiny. This is because when these requests by the relevant ministries come here, they will be designated to the relevant committee and the committee will do its examination of whether we are entering a good deal or a bad one.

The minister has actually confirmed here the fear that this provision is going to cure. Of course, as ministers, you swear by collective responsibility. You can agree at Cabinet level and endorse a project; you have given us the example of the Jinja-Kampala highway. What if the proprietor or the company that you are going to contract begins levying exorbitant road tolls thereby rendering the roads for selective usage by members of the public? How shall we, as a country, feel?

So I think this provision is meant to bring the public on board. If the terms and conditions the partner is bringing are not suitable in the long run, then as Parliament, we can also bring our suggestions forward before the country is committed to such a partner. So, I want to implore the House to support the provision by the committee that Parliament be involved in the process of processing these agreements so that projects can be implemented with fairness. Thank you.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson, for this opportunity. I totally support the committee’s position because what the minister actually said needs a lot of intervention by Parliament to critically analyse even the agreement. This House can bear me witness that many of the agreements signed on behalf of this country have misled us and we have lost a lot of funds. 

Secondly, people have contributed and many have said that we do not have a good background to pilot this programme. Therefore, this necessitates the involvement of both the Cabinet and Parliament for approval.

I also do not agree with the issue of having thresholds. Money is very important for this country and people can play about with figures. If I want to accrue Shs 100 million and the threshold is about Shs 50 million, I can make a deal to divide it into two phases. It is high time that we seriously scrutinised all progress made if we are to record achievements in what we want to see in this new Bill that we want to pass into an Act. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I don’t want to spoil things but I wanted to get the position of the Attorney-General. I think we have had two occasions; one in the Tourism Sector where we were given a concession for 25 years and locked out everybody. That has been done by Cabinet and we woke up here in Parliament and said, is this what happened? Bidco, the national parks - I want to know what you think, Attorney-General - 25 years is a lifetime but it has been done.

MR KAKOOZA: I would like to comment on the guidance you have given. For instance, regarding Bujagali, the government came here and we said this is a very good project but they did not have money. Parliament extended a facility of Shs 90 billion to implement that project but it ended up being one of the most expensive projects because at the time of the agreement, we did not take keen interest. 

Why we proposed this is simple; there is a simple clause where we said, Attorney-General, look at the agreements we want to make with any party. If you do not have the money, come and say you are committing public money. Ugandans and Parliament must know; say you want this money and we will give it to you because the objectives of that borrowing will be known and will be clear. 

All these PPP projects are multi-billion dollar projects. It is not just $20 million. It is above $100 million. Take a loan of $30 million from World Bank, Cabinet comes here and we approve it because we need to take keen interest in the loan. What is the purpose of the money you are committing? The PPP is where Government does not have money and you are requesting someone to help you out. So if you do not have the money, come and say please, we want this amount from the Treasury and Parliament must appropriate it. It is as simple as that.

COL. (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. One time you deployed us to go and benchmark and find out how PPPs are run in other countries. Unless we want to change the tradition, what I have discovered and tried to inquire into is that PPPs are normally driven by two drivers. One is that the government or the public sector does not have money but wants to bring services to the country. Therefore, the other second driver is that Government approaches the private sector which has the funding. 

Here in this document, it is the private sector that borrows not the public sector. This is normally how PPPs are managed and run. They set up special vehicles like PPPs. So, I do not see the controversy, Madam Chairperson. It is only the private sector that has the capacity, the track record and expertise that brings in all these things and the government brings those services. So, I do not see where Government is involved in borrowing but should the government want to borrow, then it should follow the procedure of borrowing and come here. That is my contribution, Madam Chairperson. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister for the Presidency and you are a former chairperson of the Finance Committee.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Yes, that is the motivation and we partly handled this Bill. There are two issues we need to look at. There is a component of procurement in PPPs. There is also a component of borrowing. I do not know how the lawyers could help us before we go into the unnecessary divisive lines of Parliament and the Executive. How do we allow Parliament to continue approving every borrowing bit in a PPP and obviously in procurement, Parliament approves the procurement plan at the budget stage? So how do we allow Parliament to continue approving the borrowing component but do not involve Parliament in the approval of agreements which I believe is a constitutional obligation of the Solicitor-General?

Madam Chairperson, without trying to sound as if it is either for or - how do we draw the line? If a PPP project involves the private sector bringing money and therefore Government is more or less borrowing by committing rent or whatever, Parliament definitely should be involved in that and that is taking credit. Maybe it can be done as the relevant sector appears before its committee for budget. But how do we insulate Parliament against going to clear agreements which it will later have to be supervising and overseeing? I think that is the point of contention, Madam Speaker. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But as we debate, I think we need to look at the definition of the PPP. You know that there is something here that says that a Public Private Partnership means a commercial transaction between a contracting authority and a private party where the party performs a function of the contracting authority on behalf of the contracting authority, for a specified period, and 
    (a) Acquires use of the property, equipment or other resource of the contracting authority for the purposes of executing the agreement;
    (b) Assumes substantial financial, technical and operational risks in connection with the performance, et cetera –

MR LUGOOLOBI: Madam Chairperson, if we go back to the basics, I think we are saying that Government wants to deliver a certain public good but in the circumstances, they do not have the resources to deliver that public good within the time they require it. 

Now when we talk about financing, we talk about sources of financing - banks and these multi-lateral organisations but also the private sector. In this case, we are choosing the private sector to finance these projects to deliver the public good. There are a lot of issues at stake when we take these decisions. Take the example of one form of PPP, the BOOT (Build, Own, Operate and Transfer); you are actually saying that own an asset for a certain considerable period of time – an asset that was originally in the hands of Government. That is a huge decision and Parliament comprises the people’s representatives and you are giving away an asset belonging to the people of Uganda for 30 years and you are saying that Parliament should not get involved.

I want to submit that this really constitutes some form of borrowing and the Constitution is very clear on borrowing. Article 159 (2) says that Government shall not borrow, guarantee or waive a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or person except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament. So, that provision is very clear –(Interjections)– yes, that is what we are saying that it should come back here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Sebunya and then we shall come to the chairperson of the committee and then the people from the mountains.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Thank you so much. I want to ask my neighbour, the Attorney-General that the committee specifically wanted to put controls on Government after we have signed the agreement. The provisions which I think he is disputing are that the agreement entered into by the contracting authority shall act subject to the provisions of the laws of Uganda. That is for arbitration purposes.

Secondly, that the agreement shall only be amended or varied with the approval of Parliament. I do not want to repeat what other Members have said but just in case the private party comes in partnership with Government and after some time their intention is to take over the project. For instance, if we build a Kampala Express Highway with good intentions but after some time, Government says that it was high time that it jumped out of the project, they will go and vary the contract and maybe sell all the shares to the private party. So, that is why we are locking in provisions like that clause where we said that Parliament shall not approve any amendment of variations to a project agreement under Section 9 unless the agreement, if so amended or varied, the project continues to provide value-for-money, it continues to be affordable and those things that will protect the public. That is why these provisions we formed are very important and well benchmarked. So, I would ask the Attorney-General to at least allow this provision to be there just for control purposes and any eventualities. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank so much, Madam Chair. Allow me to draw your attention to road tolls. Road concessions always require heavy government financial commitment the world over and to fully recover costs and yield a return, tolls would likely be too high in most markets. The market risks are very high due to the difficulties of making accurate projections on traffic volumes – this is on road tools and as a result, developers will likely pick the most financially viable project. 

On a scenario like this one, government subsidies will have to fill the gaps because even during negotiations, the private party would like to know that in the eventuality that he does not meet the traffic volumes, what happens to his money? So, this is where Government involvement comes in handy. We would then have –(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Madam Chairperson, it is actually in the same commitment and liabilities that we talked of earlier. You find in energy that you have the Escrow Account. Where does such a private party draw money? That is where you will find that the person wants a Power Purchase Agreement so that whether you buy it or not, he has been guaranteed. That is where they get guarantees. 

So it is really important that when the Executive is committing this country to an elected party – that this Parliament, which is elected the people’s representative, can give a check. And it is just a check. Even for the loans that we borrow, Parliament does not negotiate any loan from any party and does not even talk about the feasibility study. Parliament only approves after Cabinet –(Interruption)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, hon. Mukitale is bringing in the point. So, how do we phrase it then such that that check of Parliament is maintained and it is captured? My trouble is that you do not go to the World Bank to negotiate as Parliament and so, how do we still maintain this - that it is not Parliament to negotiate the terms of the PPP agreements but it only approves the money to be borrowed and the principle? How do we phrase that?

MR MUKITALE: As I conclude, the earlier submission by the Prime Minister on why we should proceed pending the UDC Bill would actually have helped us. It comes with the other areas where Members’ concerns could be answered in the face of public vehicle, the public regulator and all these others. In an event that the party has failed, how does Government come in?  (Members rose_) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think that he is giving information to honourable.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, and I want to thank hon. Mukitale and hon. Tumwebaze for the information.

Just as I was submitting, government subsidies will have to fill the gap. In economies where we benchmarked, you find that there are liability gaps to fund and guarantee funds. These are funds that are very important unless Government is able to cover the cost through availability payments. And more often than not, concessions based on tolls like the one the minister stated – the Kampala-Jinja Highway - will likely require renegotiation to align the toll with investor expectations. 

So, in the event that the concession is 30 years, just imagine at what point in time Parliament will be involved because at mid-year say 15 years of the concession, there may be need for these agreements to be revisited? 

Madam Chairperson, allow me to give you just one example then probably you will understand. Let me give you the toll road programme of Mexico. In the 1980s and 90s, Mexico had the largest private toll road programme in the world and between 1989 and 1994, over 52 concessions were awarded; over 5,500 kilometres of highway and 5,120 kilometres representing 44 concessions opened up to traffic. The cost overruns were endemic along with charges of corruption. Of the 31 toll roads, 17 concessions had cost overruns exceeding 25 percent. Traffic volumes were only 68 percent of estimated level on most of the roads and the programme failed when Government was forced to bail out 25 concessions and assume a sum of $7.7 billion of concession debt. 

Madam Chairperson, many success stories can be told about PPPs but there are also many failed programmes as well, due to a weak legal framework that fails to provide adequate checks and balances. So, as a committee, we still hold a very strong view that Parliament should approve amendments or variations in agreements. Thank you.

DR KIYONGA: Madam Chairperson, I think the fundamental question is the one which hon. Oboth posed. His question was; what mechanism will enable Parliament to keep watching what is going on to ensure that we get the benefit we wanted? The way I understood hon. Oboth was not so fixed on a particular mechanism; he wanted assurance that we shall keep track of what is happening. 

In my view, we want three things in the PPPs. First, if we are going to borrow for the purpose of the PPP, we are sure that Parliament is there to meet our constitutional demand that if there is a loan taken, then Parliament must get involved? And even if we are not going to borrow and are using our money to finance this project, will it come through appropriation? Because as the people of Uganda, we are going to put money in a project and through Parliament, we must have to approve it through a budget. But the third thing which should intersect is delivery as efficiently as possible maximally but also if possible on a timely basis. So, how do we make all these things meet?

In my view, Madam Chairperson, number one, this law is subject to the Constitution. So, where we are borrowing or giving a guarantee, there is no doubt Parliament must get involved the way we have been involved all the time. If money is going to come from the Consolidated Fund, there must be a budget line through which it will go. Is it going through a ministry; is it through UDC? That will have to come through Parliament and Parliament will have to see that money going and it will be followed by the Auditor-General as required by our rules. 

Then we are left with the bit of efficiency; that the business person who comes to partner with us can do business quickly, which we cannot do ourselves. So, I propose, Madam Chairperson, that where it is a loan, we must have Parliament approve it and where it is financing, it must come through the budget. 

We could put another check point that whether we have used a loan or locally financed - but because this is something in our country and we are involved somehow, every so often, there must be a report coming to Parliament that since we started the PPP, this has been the volume of commitment for the past three or six months. That means that even where we had already gone through the budget, say, through UDC and the businessman came with say, 50 or 60 percent, we should still call to know how the PPP is going. Are they efficient and are they delivering on time? So that in the event the money had gone through a budget, we do not have to follow the contract directly by ourselves. 

And Anthony, our chairperson, would have helped when he read the story of Mexico, where losses were made and where corruption was involved. What would help the House is to tell us what happened in that case; what was the cure once they discovered this problem because this is a new animal in our case and we need to learn from best practices elsewhere. But if the day-to-day contracting has to go through Parliament, that would delay service delivery. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I know from the mover of the Bill; what are the areas that you might want to have a PPP so that we know whether it is 20 per day or one in a year – tell us the broad areas. 

MR KAJARA: Madam Chairperson, we have said that PPPs are one way government would extend services. There are many areas, mainly infrastructure projects. Roads are one of them. We are also talking of social services where there is no x-ray in hospital B and some doctor wants to partner with Government to offer that service. We can give him space in Mulago Hospital and he gives that service at a reasonable cost. 
We are talking of education facilities where for example a facility does not exist, say in Makerere University, but a private partner might have that service. He can ask Government to partner with him so that the service is given. 

Madam Chairperson, we thought very deeply about this matter. In fact, in clause 18, the original version, we said, “The minister shall, with the approval of Cabinet, by statutory instrument prescribe the value of an agreement for which approval of Cabinet is required before the agreement is signed by the accounting officer.” We are even thinking about variance; suppose somebody is bringing an MRI machine to Mbale Hospital, does that have to come to Parliament? No, the Ministry of Health – (Interjections) – yes, it is a PPP – that is what it involves. You give space to somebody to introduce an MRI machine in Mbale Hospital – even in South Africa, that is what happens. In Bloemfontein Hospital, the complicated machines are offered by private parties in hospitals. That service is given to the public and those who can pay do so. Government can come in to subsidise the cost of that service. 

So in the interest of offering that service, instead of Parliament approving agreements, let us provide that the minister should on a regular basis provide information or even table them before Parliament so that Parliament is active and following. But Parliament should not be involved in approvals because that would make it difficult for Parliament to play its oversight role – because it would be participating in procurement, negotiations, approvals and amendments. 

So, Madam Chair, I would implore members – even as Cabinet has said that where an agreement of a certain value – we involve the approval of Cabinet. An agreement of a certain value – the contracting party, through the accounting officer can sign it. But you are even involving local governments. A local government will want to do a small road, for example of half a kilometre at $1 million and that has to come to Parliament for approval. That will be just too much. That is why we think that instead of involving Parliament approvals, we just make sure that agreements are periodically laid before Parliament. All PPPs agreed upon or signed are laid before Parliament so that members can monitor and follow.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, hon. Minister, when you lay them here, will that just be information or what? After you have laid them here, what do we do with them? Should we just be informed?

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am very happy that this matter has been brought up by the Minister of Finance. What he is saying works but in a normal situation. On 14 December 2005, the Government of Uganda represented by the Minister of Health executed a Memorandum of Understanding to go under a PPP with Quality Chemicals Ltd. Mr Katongole brought Shs 100 million and Government of Uganda brought Shs 10 billion. We used that money to do business with him and shortly after in 2009, you officials – and you know it because you are the Minister of Finance – carried that Shs 10 billion and brought it back and told Mr Katongole that Government of Uganda wasn’t a shareholder in Quality Chemicals Ltd anymore. But remember, we had signed a contract with him to supply ARVs and malaria drugs. They gave him the incentive. So, what did Uganda benefit from that PPP?

What we are saying apparently is that the issue of the money can go through the appropriation process but also the issue of the loan can still go through the approval process but how do we deal with the interests of Ugandans. You were in finance as the minister, the Attorney-General was there but to date, nobody has ever explained to Ugandans how the Shs 10 billion moved from the Treasury to Quality Chemicals and back to the Treasury. What did we get? –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, the clear example can be picked from Malaysia, at the time when Singapore was breaking away from Malaysia. There is a road that was constructed under a PPP arrangement. The biggest volume of that private enterprise and the agreement didn’t meet the expectations of the people but Government was still obliged to pay as a subsidy and where did they get that money? They had to borrow money from the Treasury. They had to go to Parliament and request for that money.

PPP is equity – what the government will provide and what the private party will provide and if Government doesn’t have money, it must borrow. And the process of borrowing is clear; Parliament must give approval. All loans that are borrowed from the World Bank – not until Parliament has given a resolution, there is no way a country can access that money.

So, that is why we need to put a provision requiring every accounting officer, before all agreements are made, to come for approval from Parliament. If not, they shouldn’t continue.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Friendly information from hon. David Bahati. (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We might disagree on a number of issues on whether Parliament should vary or not. However, we need to agree on this one. The way the minister is putting it is not the way we perceive it – that you have a scanner in the hospital and it has to be approved by Parliament; that you are talking about a photocopier at Makerere University or a one kilometre road in a local government – that is not what we are talking about. We are talking about big projects because somebody can rent space at Mulago Hospital and put a photocopier or a scanner; that is not what Parliament is debating today. So, I thought that the minister should really – we should agree on that but we have forgiven him.

Madam Chairperson, we have approved that Parliament shall approve the agreements. The debate is: when the Executive varies these agreements, should it also come to Parliament for approval? And I think the Attorney-General can guide us on that. We have already approved that Parliament will approve agreements. Now if the Executive varies these agreements, should that also come back to this House?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MR BAHATI: Yes, because that is what we have done. Thank you, hon. Paul Mwiru, for that taking the friendly information.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. As I conclude, I want to state that Parliament is not questioning the approval; we are not even looking at the role. Let me give the last example. Sinohydro came on board for equity financing of the Karuma Hydro Power Dam where they presented that Uganda would bring 15 percent or $253 million and the Sinohydro would bring 85 percent. Even the President intervened and there was no procurement process taken. They did not follow the PPDA. We single-handedly picked Sinohydro. They even launched and the President officiated at the launch but when they went to pick the money, they said, “We can’t give you the money because we don’t have it.” They have now turned into contractors and are now telling us that we should give them our 15 percent and they start on the work and when they fail, we can get into a PPP.

Madam Chairperson, I wrote a brief on Karuma and sent you all those documents on your iPad. What we are saying is that the person that first took us into that PPP arrangement for Karuma would have done the due diligence to know that Sinohydro came for equity financing. As we talk, they are calling themselves contractors and telling us to first give them our 15 percent which is $253 million so that they can proceed to do the work. So, our challenge apparently is not about approval because the law provides for that. It is not even about the money because money cannot be taken out of the Treasury without it being appropriated but what is the interest of Ugandans? How did this transaction operate? How did we get in there and how do we get out, just like it was in Munyonyo?
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, are you saying that they duped us into believing that they had the 85 percent but now we should facilitate them by giving them the 15 percent so that they can start on the work?

MR MWIRU: Yes, Madam Chairperson. I have sent the brief and the relevant documents onto your iPad. The law provides for approval of a loan and it is very clear. When it comes to budgeting, that also is clear. So, our challenge is that. Thank you so much.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, earlier on, I had provided friendly information to hon. Paul Mwiru. However, I have been forced to stand on a point of order. Is it in order for the hon. Member to suggest that the Chinese who are developing Karuma duped the country when we all know, through the Ministry of Finance that the Exim Bank has already approved this money and they are ready to start? Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I don’t know; I think let me first hear from the Government.

MR KAJARA: Madam Chairperson, the position for the financing of Karuma Dam is that it was agreed that the Exim Bank of China will provide 85 percent of the financing and Government would provide 15 percent of the financing. The actual information we have is that the Chinese Exim Bank is processing the 85 percent financing to finance the Sinohydro Company which is going to construct the dam. Government will be required to provide the 15 percent as has been agreed. So, there is nobody who has duped the other, the process is on-going; the loan will be procured by Sinohydro and the process will start as soon as the holdup is finished. 

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Chairperson, the information I want to give to this House is that last week on Tuesday, I returned from China. I met the Ambassador, who is my relative, and he told me that the Exim Bank has agreed to provide funding for Karuma. They are funding three projects - Isimba, Karuma and Ayago but for Karuma, the money will be ready in August. He said it is only the Government of Uganda and Parliament which delayed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Wamakuyu, did you agree with your relative that Parliament is delaying, really?

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Chairperson, the information he gave me is that they are only waiting for commitment from the Government of Uganda and approval by Parliament. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Wamakuyu, do we have those loan requests? They are not here. 

MR MUKITALE: For record purposes, just this afternoon, the Ministry of Finance has brought three loan requests which according to their reports that I received today from the pigeonhole was brought to Parliament after Cabinet approval on 21st and by Budget Day, the loan requests were in Parliament. But actually, they were laid today by the minister but Parliament is now being blamed for the three months delay for what has never reached Parliament.

But on the point of this PPP, I want to give information first of all, that not all PPPs are 100 percent financed by the concessionaire or the other party; it will depend on the negotiation. There is already an aspect of Government; it could be 60 to 40 percent and it depends on how it is. Aware that we are doing that, I want to request the minister to be down to earth. The contractor financing 19 roads, the President announced in 2011 and they never took off, awaiting this PPP - they have turned into commercial loans.

The recent debates on the standard gauge railway in Nairobi, Kenya committed $13 billion. Ours is waiting for this; so, it is wrong to talk about this. The refinery lead contractor is waiting for this. The Karuma – I am actually surprised to hear somebody say that they are processing the money. The China Government cannot process the money without parliamentary approval. So, we want to bring the actual picture; the level of commitment this country is about to get in when we have this important PPP arrangement. That is why I do not want us to trivialise it to a hospital machine which we can get. It is important that we understand the pipeline, the refinery, the Airport. We have negotiations in high gear of the Airport - and the minister is aware - worth a lot of money which are in the pipeline, pending the PPP.

So, Government should have been more open to Parliament. If they told us about the PPP projects, over $40 billion is about to come with PPP then we would understand and that is where some of us pushed without UDC, without state participation; I don’t see how we would proceed without a government fall-back position.   

MS ALASO: I was only extremely bothered but I think that hon. Mukitale and hon. Bahati addressed my concern. What we are talking about here is not those little things that district councils can do; of the one-kilometre road or what the university administration can do to bring a photocopier. At the start of this discussion at the general debate, I did ask a question here which the minister did not bother to respond to. I asked what type of PPPs we are talking about. Is it a situation where 100 percent funding would come from the private sector? Is it a situation where we would be putting in our money? Is it a situation where we would be guaranteeing borrowing by the private sector and that question was not answered here and I thought it had a fundamental bearing on how we engage as a Parliament in regard to the PPP?

And so, I do not think it is even proper for the hon. Minister of Finance to try to take this Parliament back. Given the provisions in the Constitution, it would be very unconstitutional for us here to pass a provision in the PPP which removes the mandate of this Parliament to authorise or approve any form of borrowing. You already have disasters; the concession of RVR was a disaster. We have talked about the PPP with Quality Chemicals and other disasters. Why does the hon. Minister want to continue on a path that we have failed to check before?

But the information I was screaming across and hon. Wamakuyu said he had information regarding Karuma – the additional information which we also have from our relatives –(Laughter)– is that the 85 percent funding that the Exim Bank is availing to Sinohydro, 45 percent of it now Exim Bank is availing at a commercial rate. And it should bother this Parliament that we are going to get such a huge loan at a commercial rate, guaranteeing it and our children are going to pay heavily. So, Madam Chairperson, I think it is even clear; the whole House has agreed on this matter. Who does the hon. Minister expect to support him on this matter? We have all agreed that Parliament has a role and if I had to be mean, I would actually ask that the Chairperson puts the question on this. 

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This debate has brought out something that is so critical that I pray that at some point we could get a comprehensive address particularly on the matter of Karuma. It is true that Sinohydro had pledged and committed in agreement to avail 85 percent. It is also true that Government had also committed to avail 15 percent. What is transpiring and why we need a very critical and comprehensive address as Parliament on behalf of Ugandans is that so far, whereas Government has said it is okay we shall provide the 15 percent, at some point somebody asked that who will actually guarantee that money? What if we give you the 15 percent and you walk away with our money? 

Actually, Exim Bank said, “No, we can guarantee that.” Up to today and I pray we get this in writing, Madam Chairperson, the bank is still hesitating to guarantee the 85 percent because they are not sure of what is happening concerning this very project. Let us get a comprehensive address from the ministry. Let them not say, they are still processing. They have been processing forever. This is a very critical matter and this Parliament deserves a comprehensive address on Karuma. What is happening? Are we also losing the 15 percent?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, this House has got powers to make law, to amend and so on. I think let us put the question. If it does not work, we can amend. So, I put the question that this House do approve the amendment as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 24

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, clause 24; unsolicited proposals. In sub-clause 3(a)(ii), we propose to redraft the sub-clause to read, “A feasibility study of the project as provided for in section 14(2) of this Act.” Madam Chairperson, section 14(2) spells out procedures for generating feasibility studies and the justification for this is for consistency.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you proposing to delete?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, we are proposing to redraft.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Read the new provision.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, sub clause 3(a)(ii). Initially this clause was saying, “A feasibility study of the project which establishes the affordability and value for money is carried by the proponents of the unsolicited proposal.” The committee is proposing that we redraft the sub-clause to read, “A feasibility study of the project as provided for in sub-section 14(2) of this Act” and the purpose is for consistency.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 24 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, clause 4 is on interpretation. (1) Definition of a contracting authority; delete the words “But does not include a local government.” The justification is that local governments are essential in designing, contracting, maintenance and operation of infrastructure or services that are developed in their areas of jurisdiction. As such, they should be allowed to use a private party if they deem it feasible. 

(2) 	Definition of a Public Private Partnership agreement. Substitute for the words “Contracting party” with the words “Contracting authority” and insert the words “Made under this Act” at the end of the definition of the PPP agreement. The justification is to correct an error and ensure clarity.

(3) 	Replace the definition of a transaction adviser as follows: “Transaction adviser means a person appointed in writing by a contracting authority who has the appropriate skills and experience to assist and advise the contracting authority or the department on matters related to a Public Private Partnership including the preparation, accession and conclusion of a project agreement and the financial clause.” The justification is the definition of a transaction adviser is not definitive enough.

(4) 	Insert new words as follows: “Project team means a project team constituted under this Act. Unit means the Public Private Partnership Unit established under this Act. Special Purpose Company means a company incorporated under the laws of Uganda by the successful bidder, the sole purpose of which shall be to execute the Public Private Partnership contract awarded.” The justification is for clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, that is the interpretation section. I put the question that clause 4 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Public Private Partnership Bill, 2012” and passed it with amendments, particularly clauses 4, 7, 8, 10, 13, 17 and 18. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP BILL, 2012

6.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I want to beg the indulgence of this House that we do not go to the Third Reading because I want to go and consult. I would like to have one clause recommitted. So I pray.

THE SPEAKER: Which clause?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Clause 18, the one we have just been debating. I would wish that I recommit one particular – (Interjections) – yes, I want to make consultations so that I can recommit this, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, Attorney-General.

6.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I know of course and I respect the views of members of Parliament on the mode and the way we handled clause 18 but you will bear with me that even in its debate, there were fundamental views on either side differing in one way or another. You see the thrust of clause 18 talking about Public Private Partnership agreement is on the execution of an agreement. 

The debate that ensued – you heard hon. Kiyonga and hon. Oboth talking about the existence of laws in place already where for instance money has got to be drawn from the Consolidated Fund. Money to be drawn from the Consolidated Fund must be approved by Parliament; money which is borrowed must be approved by Parliament under Article 168. The missing link, Madam Speaker, was what hon. Kiyonga termed monitoring the inefficiency in the project process.  

Now, when you look at the succeeding clauses, for instance, clause 19, it talks about monitoring of Public Private Partnerships. Clause 20 talks about auditing. 

The idea was to introduce a clause which, for instance, would say that the Minister shall, at least in every six months, make a report to Parliament on the execution of Public Private Partnerships. This means that you leave the role of executing the Public Private Partnerships to the Executive and we actually concentrate on the monitoring aspect. 
That is the idea that we want to consult on and come back together really and we move because we may actually create a complete impasse in the execution of these PPPs. 

So, if you could just give us this indulgence on this particular clause to consult and then come back when our hearts are at peace with each other so that we are at one with each other. 

6.31
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek to recommit clause 15(5) by deleting the words “Restricted bidding”. The justification being that this will promote open and competitive bidding which should be used in PPPs. The other reason is that when we use restrict bidding, we would be limiting the spectrum of competition and may create gaps for corruption. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Has the chairperson understood the rationale now? Have you understood the rationale for recommittal? Yes, hon. Mukitale.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I can understand the spirit with which hon. Mwiru is moving but in procurement practice, Triple A projects of that nature are not for every Tom, Dick and Harry and actually, in the big multi-nationals that even have more money than our budget, they do not even use open tender but solicitation. Solicitation goes for proven performance.

If you want a dam, you do not call all companies to come to Uganda. You say that the best done dam in the world is Three Gorges, the second and the third one – so whereas it sounds very plausible in terms of competition and being transparent, you may end up with a quack and non-performing company because you may cause a problem of doing due diligence on non-compliant companies which actually by solicitation, will not even qualify. 

So, it is quite a detailed debate and how I wish we could –(Interruption) 

MR BALIKUDDEMBE: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. Like you have clearly put it, when you become restrictive on who is supposed to bid or not, then you will get the quacks. When you open up, it is when you won’t get the quacks. 

MR MUKITALE: On the contrary, I am talking of proven performance. This means that over the period of the last 20 years, there is a giant project of that capital financing and technology requirement which you have exhibited and delivered in time and you had the funding; so that you do not get briefcase companies which then tomorrow – what you are hearing that they are looking for the money after getting a contract. I can give way for information.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, we have just been reviewing the PPDA Act and we have provided for provisions for restricted bidding and it is a common practice in procurement. So, for us to deny that well-documented international practise of restricted bidding in this process will be denying us a very viable option. Like for PPPs, these are big projects and we want somebody who has proven practice, has built a dam of similar capacity and we narrow down to the experienced company and that is why we provide for restricted bidding. I thank you.

MR MUKITALE: Finally, Madam Speaker, even in the mineral sector, before I talk about the oil sector, it is because of that open bidding that brief case companies got licences for what they will never work on. And in oil and gas – that is why you started with brief case hunter gatherer companies who only know exploration and not development and production. That is why they are phased out later because they were bought by the serious companies you did not go for. If you went for a serious company from the beginning, you are better off than starting with hunters and gatherers and then allowing speculation in between.    
    
6.36
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Madam Speaker, we appreciate the view of hon. Mwiru. But I think that we also debated this issue for a long time and we said that the law on procurement allows the two methods. Even if you took it to a simpler measure of procuring human resource, there are even times when outsourcing is important when you are looking for a specific expert. The reason we normally allow competition in procurement is that we need value-for-money; that is what we are looking for in procurement. We want efficiency. It does not necessarily mean that open bidding will always deliver you value-for-money or efficiency. So, I think it would probably not be right for us to really close and close to open bidding alone when actually even the law on procurement allows restricted bidding and some of these issues that we are talking about in PPP are very unique things. For example, a company that is going to go into road toll or a company going to put up a specialised hospital - you do not find them anywhere like any other selling photocopiers or something like stationery. They are very unique and specific. 

So, hon. Mwiru, I think that you will really do us a service if we maintained our earlier position. We debated this issue and this issue is very important for us to have restricted bidding in situations that are very difficult. Thank you.





6.38
MR FOX ODOI (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like my colleagues before, I also understand where hon. Mwiru is coming from. His concern is that if we maintain restricted bidding, we would then do away with competition. But that particular concern is addressed in the clause itself. A reading of the clause allays all his fears. If I may take the House through it, the entire sub-clause provides: “Where open bidding or the restricted bidding procurement method is to be used, the contracting authority may prior to issuing the bid document promote the project to the prospective bidders using any method that does not limit competition”. That is the emphasis; the method used prior to issuing the bidding document must not limit competition. So his concerns are well taken care of in that sub-clause. 

Secondly, hon. Kiyonga argues that when it comes to procurement of a security nature, say the Ministry of Defence wants to do a PPP with a Chinese company, and God forbid – (Laughter) – it would be unfair of us to tie their hands only to open bidding. We need to give them a new way to do restricted bidding. I request my learned brother, hon. Mwiru, to withdraw his motion. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, this matter we are debating, I was one of those who had a problem with this clause and I do not know how it escaped. This was the only clause I had a problem with. The hand that restricts should also open. What is the danger of allowing both to apply in the circumstance? What danger is it to this country to say that under PPP, we should have both – just like my name sounds – the restricted and open? (Laughter)

We made elaborate submissions on this matter. Restricted – this is assumed that the same Minister of Finance shall be the same; we shall have the same Speaker, the same President, the same everyone. There are people who can benefit from this by handpicking a few individuals and they will use the law and even the purpose of that project will fail because of handpicking individuals of individual companies –(Interjections)– is that intimidation –(Laughter) Madam Speaker, what can be closed should also be opened. 

THE SPEAKER: So, in relation to the clause, what are you saying? Because it has both –(Laughter) 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have had the opportunity to listen to my colleagues and actually the argument they advance supports my position. But in the spirit of moving on with this, I withdraw. 

THE SPEAKER: okay, thank you very much. Now, honourable members, this is an important Bill and I think we want to make a good law that will stand the test of time. So, I think an adjournment of 24 hours is probably not too much to give. We can take the third reading tomorrow. So we defer the third reading to tomorrow so that Members can go and read so that we can do the final submission tomorrow. 

I am told the minister would like to borrow the brains of this House; he would like to consult with hon. Lugoloobi, hon. Oboth, hon. Mwiru, hon. Bahati, hon. Musasizi, hon. Ssasaga, hon. Ruhindi, hon. Kiyonga, the chairperson and I think the vice-chairperson of the Committee on Finance, hon. Fred Mwesigye. You are taking all my people anyway and hon. Ssasaga. The minister would like to consult you so that he is at peace with that proposal – (Interjections) – he will decide when to meet you. Honourable members, thank you very much. The House is adjourned to tomorrow afternoon at 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.44 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 10 July 2014 at 2.00p.m.) 
