Wednesday, 13 July 2011 

Parliament met at 2.14 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.
 
PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this being my very first time to chair after our Parliament is fully constituted - (Applause) - may I take this opportunity to congratulate all of you for finally assuming your seats! I congratulate the honourable ministers for taking their positions. I congratulate the chairpersons of committees and members of the committees. Now that you are in the committees, I know you are going to have the public of Uganda have access to this Parliament. The only way the public of the Republic of Uganda can access this Parliament is through the committees. So, I will feel very encouraged if chairpersons and members of the committees will have more engagement with the members of the public so that matters that come before the assembly are brought to the attention of the members of the public and deliberated upon; and the matters that finally come out of this assembly are not just what is contained in the statement of the Executive, but also is blended by the real desires and aspirations of the people of Uganda. So, I encourage members of the committees to work hard and open this Parliament up to the public of Uganda. Congratulations! (Applause) 

Let me also announce at this time that the policy statement for the ministry of works has not been put in your pigeonholes because they are full. So, hon. Members, you should endeavour to empty them so that you can have all these things put in. They are somewhere in one of the waiting rooms for distribution to the Members. And may I ask the clerks to these committees to pick these papers and get them also sent to the hon. Members?

Hon. Members, in the distinguished strangers’ gallery we have hon. David Amour Majal, SPLM Member of the Liberation Council for the Diaspora, William Ador Miabek, acting Head of Southern Sudan Mission in Uganda and Ms Pamela Albert, PRO/Protocol Government of Southern Sudan Mission. Is it “government” still? I thought it had changed. Is it still GOSS? I thought it had changed but now they are putting here GOSS Mission. I thought it was now the Republic of Southern Sudan. Please, join me in welcoming them as they witness our deliberations today. (Applause) You are very welcome and congratulations! 

2.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to congratulate you for sitting in that big chair for the first time. We have a lot in common: we were together in the Seventh Parliament; we have worked together in several committees, and I have no doubt you have got the stamina and the capacity to steer this House. I thank you very much. (Applause)

2.21
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I would like to join the rest of my colleagues in extending similar fraternal congratulations, for first of all performing so well during the induction workshop and now occupying a chair of prominence in Uganda’s history. We, from the Opposition side, thank you and wish you the best. (Applause)

2.22
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also add my voice to congratulate you. I am rising on a matter of national significance, which I feel has been catching your attention, that is, the recent crisis we had in the transport sector of UTODA versus the drivers and associations. 

The drivers and conductors came to me this morning complaining that they are being beaten, arrested and harassed and yet there was a meeting that took place between the Vice-President and the association of the drivers and conductors and we thought they had suspended the welfare charges that they have been charging these people to the extent that UTODA should pay it and should not molest or even deal with them with impunity. But what we have seen and the reports we are receiving is that they are being beaten and some have already been injured and have been hospitalised. Others are arrested and taken to places, which are not known. 

I am calling upon this Government to tell us exactly what it is doing. First of all, who are these forces that are beating up the drivers and conductors? Which mandate do they have to do this because we thought this is the mandate, which falls maybe under the Police or city council? 

Secondly, we know it is Parliament which is authorised to issue and even legislate on imposing taxes. This tax of welfare is not known. Maybe the Local Government Minister could come in or maybe that of Internal Affairs or we could have your intervention to save the situation because what we heard is that this has been suspended pending further talks between UTODA officials and the conductors and the drivers. Otherwise, it may get out of hand and yet we Members of Parliament are supposed to represent the interests of our people like you have just said. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe we have the Minister of Works or Chief Whip? (Laughter) No, the Minister of Works - I am not making a mistake here. The Minister of Works also stood and since that was in his sector, I thought it would be - yes, hon. Nasasira.

2.23
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me also use this opportunity, since you are sitting in that chair for the first time since we elected you, to congratulate you and to wish you all the best in managing the proceedings of the House.

I rise on procedural matters. I think it is becoming - I do not want to call it a culture of honourable colleagues rising on matters of importance, I suspect under rule 35. But as you know, our rule 35 says that a question shall not be asked without notice unless it is of an urgent nature, relating either to a matter of public importance or the arrangement of business; and questions without notice shall only be asked with the prior leave of the Speaker. 

I wanted, for the future and for us, to have orderly business and responses that even when it is an issue of public importance, if an honorable member contacts the Speaker and hopefully the Speaker allows him/her to speak, it would be nice for the honourable member to contact the minister responsible so that when this matter is raised, the minister is prepared to give a reasonable answer so that the business in the House can flow; rather than ask about something of public importance and the sector minister is not aware, and then when the sector minister promises and so on, the minister is accused of not being prepared or not giving answers -(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, these are issues which are of emergency; sometimes they may not wait. And they have been in the media and we saw a strike where people were forced to walk, and I know most of the ministers are aware. We are trying to preempt and nip the situation in the bud before it can get out of hand. Already the Vice-President was involved in this. What we want is to arrest the situation before it can escalate into reprisals, fights and even affecting the people who are not concerned in this. The situation is almost getting out of hand.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: May I comment on what the Government Chief Whip has said? Indeed, the rules are very clear on these matters. If you are going to raise a matter of urgent public importance, the Speaker must be given due notice and the Speaker’s consent must be granted. That is the general rule and I have asked all Members to observe this strictly so that conduct of business in the House can be orderly. However, in this particular instance, the hon. Sebuliba Mutumba actually raised the matter with the Speaker and in the presence of the Minister of Works and Transport. So, this matter raised by him is properly before this House and since the minister was earlier briefed, he can make a statement.

2.27
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate you, first upon being elected Member of Parliament and also being elected Deputy Speaker of this Parliament. I have no doubt that you are going to do a tremendous job.

Turning to what hon. Sebuliba Mutumba has talked about, Government is fully aware and is handling the situation effectively. Government ministers have been fully involved in this issue: the Minister of Security, Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Works and Transport, we have been following this issue very closely and like he said, the Vice-President handled this issue. This was between UTODA and the striking drivers and conductors, and we agreed that we suspend payment of non-receipted moneys. We also agreed that the strike be suspended and that each side should respect the other.

What hon. Sebuliba Mutumba is talking about happened early this morning, and I have been in constant touch with the Police. The beatings were from both sides – it was not only from UTODA. However, we immediately requested the Police to move in effectively and this was stopped. As I talk now, you will not see anybody being beaten or even harassed. Moreover, we asked the Police to stay around to ensure that non-receipted moneys are not collected. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.29
MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): I join my colleagues in congratulating you. There are two issues for which I am seeking clarification from the minister and Government: 

The first is the growth of private armies (militia). The UTODA group operates a militia, which has been arresting and beating up people before throwing them into various police stations – and they speak very proudly about it on radio stations. We would like to ask Government to tell us whether it has now allowed some groups to recruit and keep private armies in their own defence? 

The second issue is that of the strike.  Why can’t the local government be allowed the opportunity to handle a matter that is within its own jurisdiction? Why must it be the Vice-President or the Minister of Works and Transport to handle it? Why don’t they concentrate on issues that are immediate to them – issues of security of Ugandans who are being beaten and tortured by UTODA – and leave the administration of Kampala to the people who are elected to do that job? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, too. Hon. Minister, do you think you can make an appropriate response to these issues or would you want to come back with a more comprehensive response to this?  

2.32
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Mr Speaker, the question which has been put across is very simple and I can answer it right away. UTODA does not train and does not have a militia group; they have security people within their organisation who handle security-related issues like lost luggage, or people being harassed by thieves. 

Secondly, hon. Semujju asked why we do not leave it to the local authority to handle, but these are transport issues, which are handled by the Central Government and not local authorities.

2.32
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister has ably told us that the issue of UTODA is a national issue, which will be dealt with at the centre. However, when you look at the contracts, which are made to run these businesses, they are made between these service providers as “tenderers” – for revenue collection – and the local authorities. In Mukono, for example, the agreement to run that tender was made between Mukono Municipal Council and UTODA. In Kampala, it is between Kampala City Council and UTODA -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do the agreements include situations like strikes of this nature, which have happened? I imagine this is a situation, which might not have been anticipated. If you have information to that effect, please tell us.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, these disagreements originate from the problem that the contract made between UTODA and KCCA, which was formerly KCC, is being disputed. There is an argument going on that UTODA doesn’t even have a valid tender with KCCA. The problem – (Interruption)

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for the Speaker to ask a question whether the agreement included strikes and the hon. Member thereafter continues telling stories? Thank you very much. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I was just seeking the advice of the hon. Member holding the Floor on whether strikes were also regulated in the agreement. I was just seeking her opinion on that. Please, continue. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The colleague is called hon. Katoto – the problem is with the agreements between UTODA and the various local authorities and that is where the genesis of these strikes is. The contract between UTODA and KCCA is contested yet its details are with KCCA, which is the local authority.  So, I wonder how the minister will tackle this problem without involving the local authority. 

The problem we have in Uganda is that, everybody who has a problem runs to the President even on petty issues, which would have been resolved at the local level. I am, therefore, requesting that the issue of UTODA be investigated by this House through a select committee because the problem is spreading. 

In Mukono, for example, UTODA last had an agreement with Mukono District Administration in 1997. I have a copy of the agreement between UTODA and KCC, which ended in 2010 here but up to now you hear that UTODA doesn’t want to leave the taxi park, they don’t respect the local authority supposed to regulate them and neither do they respect anybody. It seems UTODA is a very powerful organisation which is above all other institutions.  

This is not a simple matter since money is being collected from our drivers in the name of “welfare” but I don’t know whether private people like UTODA are allowed to run a public welfare fund like the one they claim to be running. People are complaining, so we should not sit here and say, “No, this is not a problem at the local level.” It is high time this Parliament set up a select committee to extensively look into issues to do with UTODA and its operations. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will have just two comments on this issue and then we wind up because we have business pending.

2.38
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have cautioned us against working against the Rules of Procedure like bringing a question here before coming to you. However, my observation and experience here is that it is prompted by the ministers who are somehow irresponsible. There are issues of national importance that happen in this country and ministers wait for Members of Parliament to raise questions on the Floor of Parliament. Really, there are those issues that one should know that you need to come here and address the nation on before even a question is raised. So, we must change the culture; when there is a serious issue, you come and explain.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I think it was very clear from the Chair; there is nobody who is prohibited from asking a question for oral answer on the Floor of this Parliament. The issue was only procedural; how to bring the question on the Floor, which is by first informing the Speaker and then the Speaker, together with the Member that is going to raise the question, contact the minister concerned so that a satisfactory answer is put across to the Members of Parliament. But I didn’t hear anybody saying, “No questions are supposed to be asked on the Floor,” which is not procedurally right. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It seems you had allowed the hon. Member to give you information. 

MS NEBANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Today, as I was boarding a taxi from Katwe to Kampala, a UTODA man started asking the taxi conductor for money and telling him: “This is my passenger, so you are not going to take her without giving me money.” I wondered because I did not leave my home with him; he did not bring me up to the stage and yet he was asking the conductor for money so that I could get aboard the taxi to come here! This matter is very important because the last time we were here, a colleague raised a matter about the ongoing inflation and we took it for granted. But you saw what happened. This matter between UTODA and taxi drivers has also come up, and I would beg that we don’t take it for granted - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have now given the information.  

MS NEBANDA: I am finalising. Let us not take it for granted. It is a serious matter that we have to sit and discuss because it is going to get out of hand. The people of UTODA seemingly have a lot of powers, and I don’t know where they get their powers from. When you hear them speaking on radio, you feel all their powers and yet they are in the wrong. Their contract ended. What they should do is to go and ask for another contract instead of collecting money, when it is not even statutory. In fact, I told the conductor not to give him money unless he was going to pay my fare up to Parliament. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Please, wind up. 

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What I meant was very clear; there are issues that happen in this country and don’t need Members of Parliament to come and ask. It should be the ministers to see that this is an issue of national importance and come and issue a statement even before it is asked for. That is what I meant. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you know, hon. Member, there are issues that are distinguishable. If a matter arose two or three hours ago, just before the House started, that qualifies to be a matter of urgent public importance and falls within the category of these Rules of Procedure that the hon. Member used. But if it is a matter that has been going on for a while, then either you raise a parliamentary question and direct it to the minister, and if the minister is inactive or doesn’t seem to be taking action on the matter, you can raise it under the rules that are provided for.  

However, the rules that govern this one are different and that is why I allowed the hon. Mutumba to raise it, because it is about things that have happened this afternoon shortly before coming here. He didn’t have time to prepare a parliamentary question and give sufficient notice and all that is required. That is why he has been allowed. So, are we still going on with this or should we close it and move on to other items? I think let us ask the minister to make a final statement on this and then we move back to the Order Paper, please. 

2.43
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank my colleagues for the concern shown in as far as this matter is concerned. And I also thank hon. Kagwera for the advice he has given to Government, and I can assure him that we have been in the media informing people and that is how they know that the Vice-President has been handling this matter. 

Let me also take this opportunity to inform my sister, hon. Nambooze, that to us in Government, this is a simple thing. Don’t think that it is very complicated; don’t get worried. We shall be able to handle it but very effectively – (Interruption) 

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, on Monday the drivers went on strike. All sectors were paralysed; patients did not go to hospital, children did not go to school and offices were closed. You could pass through the city and find as if the country had gone on leave. Is it in order for the minister, who once worked with KCC as an engineer and knows the problems concerning the city and how important it is, to come here and say that this is a very simple matter when it resulted into a strike that affected the whole country? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the Member is concerned that you are saying it is simple when it is actually complicated. Please, finish your statement.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My sister thought this was a very complicated thing and I was just responding that Government has the capacity to handle it.

Responding to hon. Nabbanja, if she were here when I started she would know that I said in the morning that there were some problems from both sides: UTODA and the other group but all these have been handled by Government and the situation is under control.

I know hon. Nambooze was dragging in the local authorities, but she should remember that Central Government has a supervisory role over the local governments. We cannot sit back and wait because of local authorities. These taxi operations are just a sub-set of transport and the Central Government is in charge of transport. 

Concerning this allegation on contracts, I don’t know who to believe but I believe the chief executive of the authority because she said very emphatically that there is a running contract.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we go back to the matter before - I will stick by the rules, we will do it tomorrow, hon. Anywar.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT CONGRATULATING THE PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTHERN SUDAN UPON THEIR ATTAINMENT OF INDEPENDENCE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have also seen a copy of a report from the parliamentary delegation that participated in the function in Juba. They wanted to present the report. I am now using my powers to merge these two so that the motion can be presented and the report also presented in the course of the discussion of the motion. Is that proper? So hon. Obua -

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thought that we would do it the other way. First, we get a report then the motion concludes the discussion on the report. I thought it would be the report to inform the motion. Is it possible to have it that way?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Because it was not on the Order Paper, unless we are amending the Order Paper to accommodate the report first before we go to the motion; in which case we will do that. I amend the Order Paper to bring in the issue of presenting the report first and then we go to the motion. So be it.

REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO THE SOUTHERN SUDAN INDEPENDENCE CELEBRATIONS HELD AT THE DR JOHN GARANG MAUSOLEUM IN JUBA CITY ON 09 JULY 2011

2.48
MR BENSON OBUA (UPC, Moroto County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, permit me to first of all congratulate you upon your elevation to the post of Deputy Speaker. I am privileged that I am speaking when you are also sitting in your chair for the very first time.

Yesterday, this matter was resolved. The motion was supposed to be tabled yesterday but it was deemed that this report was necessary to come first so the motion was deferred to today. Therefore, we are not making any mistakes here.

When I was preparing this report, in my mind it was that the Speaker was going to sit in the chair so you will forgive me if at any one point I mistakenly refer to you as “Madam Speaker”. Take no offence, Mr Speaker.

I beg to present this report in accordance with rule 30 of our Rules of Procedure, regarding delegations abroad. As we are all aware, the Southern Sudan Independence celebrations were held at the Dr John Garang Mausoleum in Juba city on the 9th of July this year.

Following an official invitation from the Government of Southern Sudan to our own Speaker, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, the following were nominated to be on her delegation:
•	Hon. Benson Obua Ogwal, Moroto County, Alebtong;
•	Hon. Kadogo Veronica Babirye, Woman Representative, Buyende;
•	Hon. Semujju Ibrahim Nganda, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso;
•	Hon. Lt Amodoi Imalingat Cyrus (Rtd), Toroma County, Katakwi; 
•	Mr James Bamuwamye, Protocol Officer.

While in Juba, we were also joined by our colleagues: hon. Hassan Kaps Fungaroo, Obongi County; and hon. Gilbert Olanya, Kilak County who also decided to go for the event.

The Southern Sudan independence follows a referendum for cessation, which was held on January 9th this year in which the Southern Sudanese people voted 98.4 percent in favour of the cessation. This was made possible after signing a Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) between the Khartoum Government and the Southern Sudan Peoples’ Liberation Army and Movement. That was in 2005. This was after a long and protracted war that caused a lot of untold suffering.

Observations of the delegation -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, can I propose that you lay a copy on the Table and then give a summary of the report?

MR BENSON OBUA: Mr Speaker, I don’t have a spare copy with me right now but I can do that – I am very obliged to do the needful as you have requested. There is a full report that the delegation has prepared and it is entitled, “The Report of the Parliamentary Delegation to the Independence Ceremony of the Republic of Southern Sudan in Juba on 9th July 2011.” I beg to lay it on the Table.

In summary, in terms of transportation, the delegation had to leave on the 7th because the airspace of Southern Sudan was destined to be closed to commercial flights thereafter. Therefore, our own Speaker Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga couldn’t come with us owing to the fact that on that day and the following one, there were serious matters that she needed to attend to here, and as you know, Mr Speaker, you were not in the country at the time.
 
Our delegation was welcomed in Juba together with that of EALA, which was headed by the EALA Speaker. 

There was a problem with our accommodation but our mission in Juba worked hard and secured space, which was good but very expensive. We can help the situation by investing in Southern Sudan. They have called us as a country to go and invest in their country. 

We arrived at the celebration venue at 8.30 a.m. and we settled in accordingly. There were hitches here and there because of the huge delegations from all over the world. Given that Sudan is a very young nation, their preparations had challenges. Most of the VIPs almost failed to get seats and those who came late could not get seats whoever they were.

I wish to be given ample time to summarise because there is a lesson in here for Ugandans. When foreign guests were standing, an announcement was made for people to vacate seats for them; it was sobering to see so many army generals being the first to quit their seats for guests. They were applauded by members of the audience. I would like to go on and describe what I saw together with my delegation.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I have run through this statement which is being presented. With due respect to my brother, I term it as a report full of storytelling. This is Parliament, which means that these are documents, which will remain here for posterity. The hon. Member should put aside the details of the report and only tell us the important highlights. How shall we be judged as a Parliament in future if we go by this? Procedurally, I seek your guidance as to whether the contents of this report should go to the Hansard.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have a report that is being presented and I will ask the hon. Obua to summarise it and then we go to the motion.

MR BENSON OBUA: As I summarise again, it is important to note that we met the Speaker of the Southern Sudan Legislative Assembly. We discussed matters of serious bilateral concerns and one of them was to strengthen the co-operation between Uganda and the new state of Southern Sudan. We also talked about the support Southern Sudan needs as a new country. 

Southern Sudan is very grateful for all the good things that Uganda has been doing there in terms of investments and they hope to get more of such investments. One particular issue that they raised with the delegation is that they need teachers to transit from the Arabic curriculum that they have now, to the English one.
 
We came up with some recommendation for the Government of Uganda. We recommend strongly that Government should immediately begin constructing our embassy in Juba. This is because we have a good piece of land that was given to us in 2005 to build our embassy. We hope that Uganda will not lose this opportunity because rent in Southern Sudan is very high. We are paying US $5,000 per month. We would reap big if we constructed a five storied house there. 

We also recommend that a study be undertaken to know the existing trade and investment opportunities in Southern Sudan, which are really vast. We also recommend that Government should explore and exploit the employment opportunities that the new nation is offering especially in the area of teaching. 

Government should give a full briefing to the House about what it has done in planning to take the vast opportunities in the new Southern Sudan.

The delegation would like to thank the Speaker for offering us this opportunity and giving us all the facilitation that we needed to be there. I beg to move.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I propose that we go straight to the motion and then we have a general discussion on both items after that.
 
MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT CONGRATULATING THE PEOPLE AND THE GOVERNMENT OF SOUTHERN SUDAN UPON THE ATTAINMENT OF INDEPENDENCE

3.03
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): In conformity with rule 43 of our Rules of Procedure, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament congratulating the people and the Government of Southern Sudan upon the attainment of independence. 

MS BETTY AMONGI: I stand to second the motion. 

MR HAMSON OBUA: Mr Speaker -
“WHEREAS the foreign policy objectives of Uganda under the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy XXVIII (3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 as amended empowers the state to promote regional and Pan African cultural, economic and political cooperation and integration;  

AND WHEREAS as on Saturday, 09 July 2011, the Republic of Southern Sudan, the world’s newest nation was born;

AWARE that the people of Southern Sudan went through more than two decades of a devastating civil war between Sudan’s North and South;

NOTING that the Southern Sudanese exercised their sovereign inalienable and inherent right to self determination, freedom and independence through a successful January 2011 referendum, following the signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement on 9 January 2005;

COGNISANT of the moral and logistical support offered by the Government and the people of Uganda to the liberation struggles of the people of Southern Sudan;

FURTHER cognisant of the cordial relationship existing between Uganda and Southern Sudan cemented by increased economic, social and political integration existing among the two states;

AWARE of the fundamental mediation role played by Southern Sudan during the Juba Peace Talks between the Government of Uganda and the Lord’s Resistance Army;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this august House that:
(i)	The Parliament of Uganda collectively congratulates the people and the Government of the Republic of Southern Sudan upon the successful attainment of Independence on 9 July 2011.
(ii)	The Parliament of Uganda collectively commits itself towards widening, deepening and strengthening the existing relationship between the Parliament of Uganda and that of Southern Sudan.
(iii)	The Parliament of Uganda appeals to the African Union, United Nations and the international community to do everything within their powers to ensure peaceful resolution of any outstanding disputes between the Republic of Sudan and the Republic of Southern Sudan.
(iv)	The Parliament of Uganda wishes the people and the Government of Southern Sudan peace, unity, stability and prosperity.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The seconder? Make it a short statement. 

MS BETTY AMONGI: I do not know whether I should first leave the mover to justify and then I can come in later to substantiate.

THE SPEAKER: Briefly justify your motion.

MR HAMSON OBUA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. From the onset, I would like to say this motion is premised and moved in the Pan African spirit. We are all Africans and it is important for us to act in a Pan African spirit. 

When I watched what transpired in the capital of the Republic of Southern Sudan, it reminded me of the story of the independence of Uganda as told to me by an old man who witnessed the lowering of the British Union Jack on 09 October 1962. I must say that when I watched it, it was more of a turning point, a milestone and a beacon of hope to the people of the Republic of Southern Sudan. 

To the Southern Sudanese, it is important for this Parliament to note that independence affirms the right of self determination. To them, independence means peace, freedom, justice, unity, stability and above all, prosperity. I think this is what the people of Southern Sudan have been fighting for - for more than two decades.

The independence of Southern Sudan, in my opinion, is to some extent meaningless without mentioning the character, the late John Garang. He is regarded by the Southern Sudanese as the father of their nation. This Parliament has both Christians and Muslims but in the Bible; this reminds me of the story of Moses and Joshua. Moses who led Israelites died before reaching the Promised Land and in my opinion, the late John Garang is Moses of the people of Southern Sudan.

Joshua, who took over from him in my opinion, is none other than His Excellency, Salva Kiir. It is indeed public knowledge that Uganda supported the liberation struggle of the people of South Uganda –(Applause)- this is something we cannot hide. 

I must thank the President, who is the Fountain of Honour and the Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces for the help that was rendered on behalf of the people of Uganda to our friends, brothers and sisters in Southern Sudan. (Applause)

It is also meaningless of me to recognise the contribution of Uganda to Southern Sudan and fail to recognise their contribution to Uganda. At the time when lawlessness reigned supreme in Northern Uganda, when the hopes and aspirations of our people were slowly but surely dying, Southern Sudan offered a mediation role in the Juba Peace Talks between the Government of Uganda and the Lord’s Resistance Army. I must say we are very grateful to the new Republic of Southern Sudan for this role.

On that note, let me salute the leader of the Ugandan delegation, hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, who is present with us. (Applause) He fought tirelessly to ensure that the conflict was resolved in a peaceful manner. 

Let me end by saying that this Parliament should pass this motion. It is a very important motion and a show of solidarity between the two parliaments and we shall really show to them that we are their African brothers and sisters. 

I wish to thank the Speaker for according us an opportunity and also thank the honourable members and urge them to support the motion. I also want to thank the delegation from the Embassy of the Republic of Southern Sudan in Uganda headed by the acting ambassador. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to thank you once again and say God bless the Republic of Southern Sudan, God bless Africa and God bless the world! I thank you so much! (Applause)

3.12
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): I stand to second the motion. Decades ago, Martin Luther King made a great speech. In his speech, one of the greatest in the world called, “I have a Dream” he stated, “I have a dream that one day, the people of this great nation shall not be judged by the colour of their skin neither by their religion nor their tribe but by the substance of their character.” 

Years later, we have witnessed Barack Obama being the first black President of the USA. We have seen history in the making. Nelson Mandela stayed in jail on the same premise of “I have a dream” - that we should not be judged by the colour of our skin and indeed the people of Southern Sudan determined that they should not and must not be judged by the colour of their skin, but by the content and the character their people.

Sixteen years ago, they went in for a guerilla struggle and on the 9th of July we saw the self determination actualise itself. This is a great history for not only the people of Africa, but also for those in the world. The message is that we should do away with the thinking based on colour, ethnicity and religion; that we should look at the people in terms of the content and substance that they offer this great continent and the world. I want to congratulate the people of the Republic of Southern Sudan for getting their independence.

Mr Speaker, I, and you, were part of the delegation that stayed in Juba with Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda. While there, we experienced their courtesy at a time when the Republic of Southern Sudan was still in a transition period; they were not a government yet. With you, we slept in tents because there was no infrastructure; there were no hotels. At least this time, the delegation that went for the independence celebrations had where to sleep. That is the kind of determination that the people of the Republic of Southern Sudan had. Irrespective of how poor one was, what mattered was justice, equality and freedom.
 
I want, in that regard, to congratulate them for becoming independent; they will have some office where to operate from. For example, we already have a Sudan Consulate in Uganda. We have been joined by the 54th State of Africa; the Republic of Southern Sudan. We must indeed congratulate them! (Applause)

Let me take this opportunity to thank the Government of Uganda for the support they have rendered. If you go anywhere in this country, you will find Southern Sudanese peacefully living in here. They are receiving education from here; no wonder those in Gulu celebrated their independence so much! Those who were at Acacia Avenue even shed tears of happiness. Once again let me thank the Government of Uganda for that support.
 
In the same vein, I want to thank the Government of Kenya and welcome the Republic of Southern Sudan to the East African Community fraternity. I hope they will soon apply for membership to the Community. I also hope that they will soon become members of the African Union. 

Further, I hope that the inter-relations that have been developed over the years will become stronger. Now that we have a stable government that will focus on nation building; that will work quite well. Look at the infrastructural and democratic developments and build this great nation that we are very proud of. And through self-determination and the sacrifice of two million people who died during the guerilla warfare with the late Dr John Garang – today we stand here to say, congratulations! I beg to second the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, mover and seconder of the motion. Hon. Members, the motion is that Parliament resolves to congratulate the people and the Government of the Republic of Southern Sudan upon the attainment of independence. The motion is now open to debate. I will limit contributions to only 20 minutes and three minutes for every Member who speaks to it. So, please put your best foot forward so that you can say everything in three minutes. We will be strict on time.

3.18
MR HUSSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to salute all the hon. Members but above all, let me take this opportunity to thank my comrade, hon. Hamson Obua, for moving this motion. I would like to support it on the grounds mentioned below.

One is about brotherhood. If you look at it from the Pan Africanism angle, the highest level of state-to-state relationship down to the people some of which may not know the meaning of the word “state,” you will realise that they call each other brothers. For example, the Madi community in Uganda has brothers among the Madi community in the Republic of Southern Sudan; and the Acholi community in Uganda know that they have their brothers, the Acholi community in the Republic of Southern Sudan. So, to that level, the people of Uganda particularly those from the North feel that there was something good happening to their brothers across the border. Therefore, I would like to thank those brothers for supporting the struggle in the Republic of Southern Sudan to the very last minute when they got independence.

About what was said here on the delegation that went to the Republic of Southern Sudan, I would like to say that it was a delegation from this Parliament. Also, I would like to say that many more people went there during that time and not only to Juba. For example, there were people, including district officials, who moved from Moyo in Uganda to Kajokej in Southern Sudan. That was about doing the same work at the local level, and we need to recognise that. There were also people from Amuru District in Uganda who went to Torit in Southern Sudan. And from Arua in Uganda, there was a group that went to Kaya and Yeyi in Southern Sudan. Those are all signs that we, the people from Northern Uganda, have been closely moving together with our brothers in Southern Sudan. We stood by them during their struggle. For example, there were people who gave assistance without having to record it anywhere. You can trace a record pertaining to what, for example, the Government of Uganda and that of Kenya did, but there were people at the Uganda/Southern Moyo border who gave a pumpkin or a cup of water to the refugees fleeing from Southern Sudan. 

And by the way, if the late Dr John Garand were alive, he would tell you that he slept in Moyo and planned for the struggles from there many times. Yes, we cannot talk about that so much, but there is need to recognise that we are all brothers; we stood by them and they stood by us. For example, in the 1979 war when Uganda was also in flames, we took refuge in Southern Sudan –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, your three minutes are up.

MR FUNGAROO: As I summarise, I would like to say that we pray for the Republic of Southern Sudan because the challenges ahead may be bigger than the ones that they have overcome. It is now about the challenge of state building and healing the wounds, but the comrades who stood by the people of Southern Sudan who are still left in the disputed areas of Southern Blue Nile, Abyei, Geb-Nuba – the justice that has been done should be applied to all the people of Southern Sudan so that those in the North remain peaceful too.

3.22
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is the African custom that when a new baby is born in a family or a community, people celebrate and families jubilate. In the African context, a new baby has been born in the name of the Republic of Southern Sudan. We wish to congratulate them and associate ourselves with the pride of the people of the Republic of Southern Sudan.

However, I wish to note that when a new baby is born, it comes with responsibilities. For example, in reference to Southern Sudan, our businessmen who trade between here and there have been having challenges. (Applause) I would like to call upon the Government of Uganda to initiate bilateral ties that will ensure freedom and peace for our businessmen who trade between here and Southern Sudan.

My Speaker, you also know that there is a saying that the early bird catches the worm. You also know that Southern Sudan is a very big opportunity for the people of Africa to do business. Right now, there is a big challenge because already Kenya is intending to build a railway line from Mombasa, via Northern Kenya, to Juba. We also have an opportunity to extend our railway line from Pakwach to Southern Sudan and also enhance the capacity of the railway that we have. Let us begin by quickly putting funds and bringing partners to ensure that Uganda can exploit this. 

We have also been looking at Ayago A and Ayago B and Karuma power stations. I was a Member of the Natural Resources Committee for some time and at one time, the then Minister of Energy argued that if we produced a lot of energy, it would not have market anywhere. The creation, or the birth, of Southern Sudan gives the people of Uganda an opportunity to develop even bigger power stations because we have an opportunity and a market to sell it to. 

Finally, I want to state that Uganda is the Pearl of Africa because we have good, fertile soils and good waters. Southern Sudan, with a smaller population, is almost three times bigger than Uganda and although Uganda has been a food basket for many African nations, if we do not hurry to invest, given our population growth, this opportunity is going to diminish and it will be taken over by Southern Sudan. Given the rate at which the foreign investors are coming up to take land –(Member timed out_)

3.25
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Once again, I congratulate you on chairing your first session. I want to join the mover and seconder of the motion in congratulating the people of Southern Sudan upon the attainment of independence. As my brother from Obongi said, he joined the people of Southern Sudan on his own because of the bondage and the suffering that we did witness, together with the people of Southern Sudan.  

I will go straight to the challenges that we envisage. Hon. Emmanuel Dombo has already alluded to one: our traders. We have brothers and sisters doing business in Southern Sudan as we speak, and it is now an opportunity that we have a nation in place, with full responsibilities, that we can hold accountable when something goes amiss. To date there are brothers and sisters whose bodies have never been retrieved for decent burial from Southern Sudan. There are brothers and sisters who lost their goods and property and have never been compensated and in the brotherhood spirit, we would say that we forgive them for what happened because that was a period of confusion. However, I implore the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to take interest in having a comprehensive study, together with the Government, to remedy some of these challenges that our people have already encountered, in order to come up with solutions such that we safeguard against these issues. This is the youngest nation and it is going to need orientation, a number of trainings in very many aspects of security, trade and others. So, this is an area that I request our Foreign Affairs Ministry to seriously look into so that when we engage fully in doing business with this new nation, we do not fall back to those circumstances where we lost our brothers, sisters and property. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.29
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. After clearance from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs at local level, a power delegation left for Kajo-Keji where we were welcomed by the commissioner of Kajo-Keji County and in that delegation was hon. Anne Auru, I and other district officials. 

Just like the parliamentary delegates that went to Juba, a number of issues were discussed in Kajo-Keji, like peaceful trans-border trade, investments, peace and security across the borders, dialogue discussions and consultations. My constituency borders Southern Sudan and there have been pending border issues and while in Kajo-Keji, we agreed that these issues should be resolved amicably and peacefully. 

About two years ago, His Excellency Salva Kiir of Southern Sudan, and His Excellency the President of Uganda, came to Moyo on what they called an on-spot check. They discovered the problem and said that the issues would remain pending until after the independence of Southern Sudan. Congratulations, Southern Sudan! Now that you are independent, I request the two presidents to come down to Moyo District and solve the issue of border conflict. Otherwise, congratulations, Anyanya I; congratulations, Anyanya II and congratulations SPLA/SPLM! Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members. I do not see any views to the contrary. Maybe we should prepare to take a vote on the matter and I am going to use my prerogative to invite the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs to make a statement and I will ask hon. Ruhakana Rugunda and the Minister of Foreign Affairs to make a statement. 

3.32
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND REGIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Jack Wamanga-Wamai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and to congratulate the people of Southern Sudan for achieving a very hard-earned independence. For 57 years, the people of Sudan have been struggling and the struggle for independence wasn’t an easy one at all because you know what those people went through. The late Dr Garang traversed this world campaigning and seeking support to get his people free. Unfortunately, by the time of independence, Dr Garang is no more. 

For one to appreciate the independence of Southern Sudan, one should have lived in the North; one should have been to Khartoum and one should have been to that part of the world, then one would feel how an African is treated in Northern Sudan; how an African is called kafiir! And when Southern Sudan was free at last, we jubilated because we, as Africans, were one be it in Europe or the Arab world. There was jubilation in all of Africa. We welcome Southern Sudan to the African Union –(Interruption)

MR KAKOBA ONYANGO: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way and I would like to thank the Speaker. The information I want to give is just to supplement what the Shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs and Regional Affairs has said. The independence of Southern Sudan is not only good for Southern Sudan but for Africa and the region. As far as security is concerned, you realise that we have been having a lot of instability within this area. One of the reasons is that the area has been having a vacuum. Now that we have a government in Southern Sudan, we believe the security problem within the Great Lakes region will be solved and we shall achieve stability and development for this country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The hon. Member got himself a speech. Please, proceed.  

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. With very little resources and capacity to host and organise talks, the Southern Sudanese people played a very big role in holding talks to which hon. Ndugu Rugunda led a delegation. That was under very difficult conditions. 

We want to ask the Government to take the opportunity now - Uganda being the closest to Southern Sudan – and exploit the chances of trading, promoting and developing our mission to full diplomatic relations. We want an ambassador to be sent to Sudan. You know, our consulate in Sudan has CD number plate one. We want to strengthen the mission in Sudan, we want to strengthen trade, and we want to strengthen co-operation with Southern Sudan. 

I want to thank the people of Uganda for having extended a hand of friendship for many years, 57 years! From 1954, Sudanese were integrated into Uganda. As you know –(Interruption)

MS LEMATIA: It is not 54; the first gun went off in Sudan in August 1955. Thank you very much.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, the struggle in Southern Sudan started in 1954. You can check in the history books. It is now about 57 years.

I was saying that the people of Uganda are very hospitable. They welcomed the people of Southern Sudan with open hands. The people of Moyo, the people of Bombo, the people of Entebbe, everywhere - even in Mbale we have got people from Southern Sudan.

I want to thank all governments of Uganda from 1962 who supported the Sudanese people in Uganda. They studied on Ugandan scholarships. Some of them will never forget the hospitality extended to them. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.38
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and add my voice to those who have congratulated the people of Southern Sudan for achieving their independence after a long protracted struggle. I would like to salute, among others, the SPLM and the people of Southern Sudan, for leading this struggle.

Let me also congratulate IGAD and the members of IGAD who led the negotiations for this Comprehensive Peace Agreement whose ultimate fruits we have eventually seen. I would like to congratulate His Excellency, the President, for his key role in this region and in our country where the people of Southern Sudan, during their struggle, were not seen as refugees but as Africans. It has been the policy of the NRM that when Africans have problems in their countries and move to Uganda, they are seen as Africans and they remain as Africans. No wonder the people of Southern Sudan have lived here, studied from here, done business from here and they take this country as their second home. We should encourage that policy in Africa.

I have been to Southern Sudan a number of times but I had two opportunities - one, as part of the delegation to the new site as soon as the Comprehensive Peace Agreement was signed - you could see a determined and united people. But most importantly, I was given the opportunity to chair the commission of inquiry into the crash of the helicopter in which the leader of SPLM lost his life. That was a very difficult time, but what I would want to constantly remember the people of Southern Sudan for is, when this joint inquiry involving the Republic of Sudan and the Republic of Uganda - when their delegation came here, in spite that tragedy, we worked together as a team until we finalised that report. I did not see what I see here sometimes. When you have a tragedy, it is important as a nation to remain together and keep the cohesion to deal with the tragedy. Despite that tragedy, the leadership of the SPLM and Southern Sudan continued their struggle until now when they have led their country to independence.

Given the short time that we have, I hope and pray that with the achievement of independence by the Republic of Southern Sudan, together as neighbouring countries, we shall keep on being comrades in the struggle to liberate ourselves economically. I am hoping the future will see Southern Sudan in the East African Community, trading amongst ourselves, developing the infrastructure together and making sure that our region remains peaceful. I wish the people of Southern Sudan success as we move forward together!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Nasasira. These papers I am receiving are petitions against first of all, the timeframe I had set of 20 minutes. There are other petitions, which I will not have an opportunity to go into because some of them amount to things that might not be things one would say out loud. Given the importance of the matter we are discussing this afternoon, the independence of the Republic of Southern Sudan, I am going to use my prerogative and increase the time for discussion and allow more Members to contribute, especially - I am being told - the ladies. Some of them have written to me notes that are – well, we will not go into the details.

3.44
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Following the migration stories we all learnt in senior one and senior two in history, there are many things we have in common with Southern Sudan and it is on this basis that I want to thank the movers of this motion for having the spirit of brotherhood.

Southern Sudan played a very big role in the peace process that brought relative peace to Northern Uganda. The people of Northern Uganda in particular, of course, I know the entire country of Uganda is joyous but the people of Northern Uganda in particular are really very happy. On their behalf, I believe I am able to pass on their congratulatory message to the people of Southern Sudan. 

Mr Speaker, a Member of this House, the former Minister for Northern Uganda, hon. David Wakikona, used to call me and still calls me, Ms Southern Sudan. (Laughter) I wish he were in this House now, I would be very happy to tell him that I am the happiest today and I am very glad to have my second mother born, just a few days ago. So, hon. Wakikona, thank you for calling me Ms Southern Sudan because I know I have a lot in common with Southern Sudan. My district borders Southern Sudan and we have benefited a lot. 

I want to wish Southern Sudan good governance, peace and God’s blessings. Thank you very much.

3.46
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you. Mr Speaker, last August I was in Sudan and I had an opportunity to train the newly elected Members of the Sudanese Parliament.

I remember a very brief moment I had with the Vice-President and all I could tell him was, “Mr President, you need to have your pool of resources out there, come back home and begin the process of recovery, programming and development.” This is pertinent to us. Some of us share blood. And when things erupt in Sudan, we are passionate about it. It is my humble prayer that this independence brings the much needed joy in the hearts of women on whose bodies the war was fought. 

Today, Sudan has the highest number of maternal deaths in the world. I remember telling the Vice-President that there is nothing more he needed to do than to sort out issues of education, health, infrastructure, communication and above all, good governance. Southern Sudan cannot afford another state of lawlessness. It is pertinent upon the Government of Southern Sudan to bring in the rule of law. They need to bring in the expertise from abroad; their children in the Diaspora, to come back home and reconstruct the nation. Uganda paid a very heavy price in terms of human beings and resources. It is important that the Government of Southern Sudan recognises this in our bilateral relations. 

Another pertinent aspect is trade. Mr Speaker, at times when we get stories of Ugandan traders being mistreated in the capital of Juba, our hearts bleed. For example, there was compensation from Southern Sudan to business people here but it ended up in the hands of the most prominent, ignoring those who took the first step to give essential commodities to the people of Southern Sudan. At an appropriate time, I will bring a report here and we discuss it. It is pertinent that we realise the relevance of those not-so prominent people who helped in the supplies of essential commodities to the people of Southern Sudan.

Finally, it is one thing to get independence; it is another for the people to really be independent -(Member timed out_)

3.50
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (NRM, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you. President J.F. Kennedy stated that, “Let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe, in order to assure the survival and the success of liberty.” 

Mr Speaker, Ugandans lived up to their expectations. They did bear the burden and they supported Sudan during a time when all nations looked away. This, as we congratulate the Republic of Southern Sudan upon having attained independence, should ring in their minds that a friend in need is a friend indeed. We request Southern Sudan to reciprocate in form of supporting Ugandans in any way during their hardships. 

Let me use this opportunity to also echo the fact that there are very many other countries today that are still oppressing others. The people of Palestine have been fighting tooth and nail to attain their independence as the whole world looks away, as bulldozers traverse their homes, as children are killed at school with impunity. The Government of Uganda should come out clearly and state its position, and support the people of Palestine to attain their independence. 

I would also like to inform the new member of the African Union that as we attain independence, there is a lot of bullying coming in from the other European nations who have arms to suppress our independence. This has been witnessed in Libya where a legitimate Government, having witnessed demonstrations, has been overwhelmed by the firepower of European states under the umbrella of NATO and North America, because it cannot ably defend itself. Southern Sudan should build a formidable force and know that detractors of peace are not very far from them. And that should remind Africans that as we build a strong African Union, we must build a standby force in order to –(Member timed out_)

3.53
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you very much. I also rise to support the motion to congratulate our brothers and sisters of Southern Sudan. My concern, however, is about the way Africans are dying. We are here today congratulating Southern Sudan but many of our sisters and brothers shed their blood. The world should be informed and we Africans should devise means of resolving issues, not through war. When you listen to the news today, the whole of Africa and very many nations are at war. Out there, people want to come to power through the use of guns and guerrilla warfare. This should be the last guerrilla warfare in Africa. We should come up with peaceful means to resolve our issues and not use the barrel of the gun.

The issues of the business community should be re-opened. I know as Africans -(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: The information I would like to give to the hon. Member is that it is difficult to predict the extent of guerrilla warfare. For as long as many people are still oppressed, guerrilla warfare is bound to continue and I am one of its supporters. (Laughter)

MR KIWANDA: Thank you, hon. Member for giving the information. But the hon. Member is a well known, peace loving Ugandan and whenever you want to confront some power, at least hit somewhere. (Laughter) That means he does not support the issue of guns and I know in his heart he supports a peaceful way of resolving our issues as Africans and not the use of guns because we have shed a lot of blood.

I also call upon our brothers - we invested - I also thank them for the support they gave us during the peace process in Northern Uganda. However, Mr Speaker - (Member timed out_)

3.56
MR YONA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in congratulating the people of Southern Sudan upon attaining that important day, the Independence Day. I know many of us could have contributed in one way or another to their liberation. I have heard many people talking about the co-existence and the mutual understanding between Uganda and the Southern Sudan Government. We are suggesting railways and roads but my worry is, even the few developments which were agreed upon in the Eighth Parliament, for example, the market which this Parliament pronounced itself on to construct in Juba, is not yet there and I do not know whether it will be there. The other time I brought it to the attention of every Member here. That is the point that should be taken up by the relevant ministry.

I would also like to say something about the torture, the brutality, the suffering, the rape, the death and the murder that are happening to the Ugandan traders in Juba. It is time that - I would like to stress it more than any other person could have because I have witnessed it. If I were protected by you, Mr Speaker, I would have removed my shirt so that you see my scar. I was knifed in Juba Market by the Sudanese and the reasons were not genuine. 

We have liberated these people politically and I pray that this Government, with the mutual understanding we have with the people of Sudan, should go on to liberate them socially. We need to teach them how to live with people. We know they have been at war for 20 years and we may not blame them -(Member timed out_)                                            

3.59
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, I will be brief. In congratulating the Republic of Southern Sudan on attaining independence, there are three issues, which should concern us.

The first one is to appreciate that our relationship with Southern Sudan is ordained in heaven. We are one blood. If you were to carry out a DNA test in this very House, you would find that our relationship is sealed in blood. Therefore, what happens in Sudan clearly affects us. 

Furthermore, as we celebrate independence, the challenges on the horizon are real. We have heard Anyanya I and Anyanya II; the empirical evidence we have is that countries, which have gone through civil war have a high propensity for doing it again and if hon. Wadri were here, it is not a joke if he talks about Anyanya III. It is simply an earlier warning that the prospects of another civil war are real. So, the one way forward in celebrating this is that we should call on the Republic of Southern Sudan to embrace regional integration. They should as quickly as possible embark on a programme for integrating the new republic with the East African Community as one way of ensuring their own security and stability. 

In addition, for us a country which has sacrificed much, I can tell you it is a sacrifice - just like blood is thicker than water, but it has a very low boiling point. Once you begin to quarrel with friends, it can be terrible. You want to move as quickly as possible to put in place infrastructural integrating structures that bring the economies of these two countries together. What I have in mind has already been alluded to; a railway line to connect us, a tarmac road, a technical assistance programme to the Republic of Southern Sudan, technical assistance programmes from Uganda whether in Police or the Army or the civil service for teaching English. Only then are we really uniting and preventing future calamities, which are real if we do not take these measures.

Once again, I congratulate the Republic of Southern!

4.02
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do not want to spoil the party but marriages that have lasted are marriages where couples listen to counseling on the wedding day more than merrymaking. As you all realise, our brothers in Southern Sudan are the newest. Many African countries have had these moments and there have been moments of joy and moments of hope. But something terrible has happened along the way. So, as our brothers in Southern Sudan celebrate, remember the fate that has befallen many of our other brothers. 

The challenges you have of nation building are immense. You are going to fight, cancers which have affected many of your colleagues; the cancer of corruption, of sectarianism, nepotism; mention it! All these countries that are congratulating you have been victims; take note and look out!

Two, there is still this contested area of Abyei. According to the CPA, there is another referendum. That is where we should call upon responsibility on the part of our new state brother and also Khartoum to make sure that it does not degenerate into another conflict. Many lives have been lost; the people of Southern Sudan do not deserve a situation where more lives should be lost. You need to sit down and resolve this problem in a peaceful manner.

I know there are many countries that contributed to the independence of Southern Sudan but let our brothers crawl and learn to walk on their own; do not patronise them. Do not say, “If it was not for us, you would not be independent” because it has happened before. Do not call them “boys” – where I come from, there is a saying that, “Where there is a leper, do no fold your fingers” because he feels very uncomfortable. (Laughter) The point I am making is this: here is an independent country and we need to support it for our mutual benefit. Should we take the “big brother” attitude, we will cause problems. 
 
Furthermore, that conflict has lessons for us to learn – of religious and tribal chauvinism, racism and all that – but at the end of the day, Africa belongs to all of us, blacks like me and Arabs inclusive. Those Arabs are actually Africans. So, if you are talking about Pan Africanism let us not look at the skin colour. In fact that is what Southern Sudan was fighting against. They said, “Do not look at the colour of our skin and do not look at the colour of the Arabs’ skin.” 

I have had an opportunity to work in Sudan for a number of years in another volatile area, the Darfur region – (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker and my colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give is that the situation my colleague is describing that happened in Southern Sudan is ripe all over the continent. The question is: how do we avoid it? Our country should not turn a blind eye to what we are also undergoing. Some of us from Northern Uganda are referred to as “Anyanya” and this disparity and inequality is right here and some of us still have a dream of “The Nile Republic”. We had better mend the fences very fast to avoid what has happened. Otherwise, I congratulate Southern Sudan. (Laughter)

MR KATUNTU: I do not know whether – well, for purposes of record, I do not share the views of hon. Beatrice Anywar. (Laughter) But apparently, the point is clear that these prejudices affect our national development. If that sort of issue can even come out in this House, you can imagine what it is happening among our people out there. We need to congratulate our brothers and caution them about their responsibilities ahead. The honeymoon is not yet here. What you have to do is to brace yourselves for the biggest challenges you will have in nation building. (Member timed out_)

4.09
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank hon. Benson Obua for moving this important motion. I join the House in congratulating the people of Southern Sudan upon their independence and also in having waged a successful people’s struggle that led them to independence. I also salute their leadership, especially the SPLA and the SPLM and their leaders, especially the late John Garang, and President Salva Kiir, who have been the helmsmen. 

Reference has already been made to the hospitality of the people of Southern Sudan. It is true that as soon as they embarked on forming their government in Juba, they spared no time but organised contacts with Kony and offered to host talks between the Government of Uganda and the Lord’s Resistance Army. Initially, all of us were extremely skeptical but eventually meetings took place and the leadership of Southern Sudan spent resources, time and all, to push for the success of these talks which were chaired by their Vice-President, Riek Machar. Our delegation, which I led with the assistance of my brother, hon. Okello Oryem and other Members in the House, was facing David Matsanga and my friend, hon. Ayena on the other side. (Laughter) I am happy that we are speaking the same language today about the victory of the people of Southern Sudan.

Mr Speaker, I take this opportunity to salute you personally because you, and many other colleagues who fully participated in these discussions. I will not name individuals because they know themselves; many of them are here. This young country with a new government, even before they became independent, offered to host, not only our delegations but also to accommodate the LRA fighters in Owiny Kibul and Ri Kwangba. They did splendid work -(Mr Semujju rose_)- in the interest of time let me complete my short contribution. So, we are extremely grateful to the leadership and the people of Southern Sudan for having prioritised Uganda and the peace process in Uganda even when they had their own great problems, and very limited means. They set a great example -(Mr Lukyamuzi rose_)- Ndugu Lukyamuzi, time is a constraint. 

Mr Speaker, they set a great example that even when you have your own problems, you should support other Africans who are in need. Indeed, this is what Uganda is doing by providing forces to stabilise Somalia. We have our own problems but we are making a Pan African contribution -(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, with due respect to the hon. former Ambassador of Uganda to the UN, I beg to intervene on a point of order. It is on record that the protracted war between the LRA and Uganda would not have ended without the contribution of this Parliament. It is also on record that it was John Ken-Lukyamuzi who moved a motion -(Laughter)- on the Floor of this House to urge Government to go and talk to the LRA outside Uganda, in Juba. Is the hon. Member in order to articulate all that he has articulated in the absence of recognition of John-Ken Lukyamuzi’s contribution? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the hon. Minister was very clear. He said, “... and many of you who I cannot now mention individually.” I think you fall in that category. (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also commend Ndugu Lukyamuzi for having played that role. (Laughter) Let me just mention one thing: when Uganda became a member of the Security Council at the beginning of 2009, we found that the Security Council was divided over Sudan. One part of the Council supported Khartoum whereas the other was supporting the SPLA or Juba. I must say that Uganda made a contribution to the Council such that by the time Uganda left the Council, it had one united position over Sudan.

I would also like to thank the United Nations Security Council for having voted for a new force of 7,200 soldiers as UN forces to support the people of Southern Sudan. 

The role of Africa has been critical on the question of Sudan. Apart from IGAD, which played an important role as Ndugu Nasasira has said, the role of eminent persons led by President Mbeki has absolutely been decisive, especially in handling outstanding issues. President Mbeki; the former President of Nigeria, Abdu Salaam; and President Buyoya have been generous. So, Sudan has demonstrated that the African people are determined to resolve their problems. 

So, let me also commend this House. This House has consistently taken one united position over the issues of Sudan and I am glad that in the motion, there is support from both sides of the House. (Applause) This clearly demonstrates that the people of Uganda are united in support of their brothers and sisters in Southern Sudan. I do agree that the critical point now is the way forward to consolidate this unity and to develop it so that there is mutual benefit for both the people of Southern Sudan and those of Uganda and indeed the people of Africa. 

The question of patronisation does not arise. The caution is well taken but as far as we are concerned, Uganda is determined to treat our brothers in the Sudan indeed as absolute equals, as independent brothers and we will work purely on the basis of equality and for mutual benefit. 

We also have confidence that the people who have fought for their independence in Sothern Sudan for so many years and lost two million people have the capacity to nurse their independence; to build their country; and to become a country that is going to be envied by many. 

Finally, I once again congratulate the people of Southern Sudan upon achieving their independence!

4.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Henry Okello Oryem): Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I take this opportunity to join colleagues in congratulating and supporting the motion on the independence of Southern Sudan. The independence of Southern Sudan did not come at a cheap price. It came at a very high cost; loss of lives, limbs and friends among others.   

Uganda’s contribution to the struggle was enormous but this was done because these are our brothers; these are our sisters. I come from Northern Uganda and the separation between Uganda and Southern Sudan was by the acts of drawing an artificial line and if that line was brought one degree further down, I would have been in Southern Sudan by now and would be called a Southern Sudanese. However, those who chose to draw the line chose it to be higher and hence I ended up being in Uganda. I am proud to be a Ugandan and also proud to be a neighbour to the Southern Sudanese. 

His Excellency President Museveni led a delegation to the celebrations of the independence of Southern Sudan. Amongst them was the First Lady, I was there and my colleague, hon. Sam Engola the Minister of State for Housing. The President on arrival delivered a note for declaration in recognition of the new independence of Southern Sudan. 
 
We hope the United Nations will officially welcome Southern Sudan as a new nation amongst the members of the United Nations and congratulate it on being a nation amongst others. 

Uganda hosted many refugees during the difficult days and our friends are ambassadors on the other side. Uganda will continue standing by the new, independent Southern Sudan as a partner in equal development. We will be with them throughout the struggle to ensure that the comprehensive peace agreement is fulfilled to the letter. We will also stand beside them in the development of each stage in education, health and infrastructure, among others, as equal partners. 

The Government of Uganda has plans for a railway line from Gulu to Juba. We also hope to help them in the development of their oil fields and hopefully they will also be partners in joining their petroleum pipeline to come through Uganda.

There are plans to develop the road from Gulu to Nimule to a first class tarmac road to improve trade between the two countries. We already have several airlines flying between the two countries and hence promoting the relationship between the two countries. 

We pray for the leadership of Southern Sudan through His Excellency Salvar Kiir, to be firm through these hard times and as somebody said, “The honeymoon is not yet here”. The hard work of looking after the family begins now. God bless Southern Sudan; God bless His people! I thank you. 

4.22
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in congratulating the people of Southern Sudan and indeed, the Government of Southern Sudan upon attaining their independence. 

Three people come to my mind in regards to this independence; first of all the children, but I will not talk about them because they turn out to be the victims of this struggle. Secondly, the women and I will talk about them; thirdly, the fighters. 

The reason I want to talk about the fighters is that having made such an enormous contribution, I would like to make a special appeal to the SPLA/SPLM not to hold their baby hostage. After giving birth to an independent Southern Sudan, they should be the last people to ever hold that country hostage. They should be able to free Southern Sudan to go and attain the maximum it can attain in terms of democracy and good governance. This historic fever some of their neighbours suffer from should not be exported to Southern Sudan. (Applause) That is why I appeal to the fighters there who showed humility on the day of independence by even forfeiting their seats to the guests. I commend them but I pray that they will not hold their baby hostage.

Secondly, to the women of Southern Sudan who pay the full price of every struggle there is on earth - Mr Speaker, my prayer to the Government of Southern Sudan is to bring the women at the centre of the post conflict recovery efforts. This will ensure that they move on. This is also in line with the UN Resolution 1325, of which a decade of its celebration was marked last year. That is my prayer and I hope that the Government of Uganda will make every effort to ensure the safety of Ugandans in Southern Sudan as has already been articulated by my colleagues. Thank you very much.

4.24
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya): I would like to join my colleagues in supporting this motion because it is very important. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for extending the time for our debate of this matter.

First, the success of the people of Southern Sudan is a historical achievement. If you have a good and just cause, you will definitely win at the end of the day. The people of Southern Sudan were fighting for a just cause, for their existence as people, to make sure that they exist as human beings in their own right.

Secondly, the links between Uganda and Sothern Sudan have been mentioned but I remember in our student days when most of these MPs were not around, we had Southern Sudanese at Makerere University. After graduating, they would be given jobs in Uganda and work as Ugandans so the links are definitely -

Third, the success of Southern Sudan’s liberation, as far as I am concerned - because we have been extending the boundaries of liberation and the contribution of Uganda - was not so much investment in business. It was to make sure that we have our brothers liberated and we have a territory, which is controlled and which befits all citizens.

If you put an egg and a stone in an incubator, the egg will produce a chick, a stone will not. The people of Southern Sudan had the potential to liberate themselves. Our assistance was merely to enable them to come out. I think this is very important, although some people were not happy about it. I have heard some voices say, “We have done so much for them, they should be grateful”. I think that should definitely not be heard because we have experience. Remember with Tanzania where we almost had a problem when they came here to tulibakombowa? If you assist somebody - in my view, our President and the rest were doing it as a duty to help our brothers and sisters in Southern Sudan but they had the potential to liberate themselves.

It is like the egg and the stone in the incubator. In any case, these people have been fighting since the so-called independence of Sudan. They have been at it; they have never given up, and they have sustained it in very difficult conditions given their level of education and the facilities in Southern Sudan; and they have made it up to this time.

In future, we need to help our brothers to – actually they should take it as a duty to maintain the unity of the people of Southern Sudan. I had a chance some time back to meet the former Prime Minister of Sudan, Sadiq al-Mahdi. I stayed and talked with him. When I was going away he said, “If we Arabs were not around, these Africans would slaughter each other”. He added that, “In fact, it is for us Arabs to be around to keep them together. If we leave, they will slaughter each other”. This is what he was saying and I do not think these forces of Sadiq al-Mahdi have given up the job. They will try to create disunity in Southern Sudan. We should be aware of this and I am sure our brothers in Southern Sudan are aware, that they have to keep our people there and their people united.

In addition, I think Ugandans should give unreserved assistance to the people of Southern Sudan in any field; training public service, police and other organs of the state so that they can have a strong state to guard their independence. I am very sure certain forces are already trying to see to it that they do not succeed, or to break it up.

Lastly, how do we ensure that they are cushioned or they have a buffer zone or fall back position in case of problems - because I do not think that Khartoum has given up the game? President Bashir was there but I do not think he was there with a good heart and there are other forces. The way we can do it in the East African Community as a block is that we should see Southern Sudan independence as our independence. We should protect and guide them and give them unreserved support so that they stand on their own. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.31
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and join my colleagues who have congratulated the Republic of Southern Sudan upon attainment of independence. Fortunately when you speak last, everything has been said and you more or less rise to move a motion that the question be put. However, before I do that I just want to say how happy we are as a Government that Southern Sudan has at long last attained independence. 

What does this mean? What is the significance of independence of Southern Sudan or any nation? It means freedom from control of other people. We always say that the real struggles for the dignity of the African person was the struggle for independence by the African nations from subjugation by European powers, the struggle of the black man and woman from control, racism by the white racists in South Africa and the last struggle was the struggle for the dignity of the black man in Southern Sudan.

I am happy to say that the dignity of the black man and woman, the quality of being worthy, of esteem and respect by others has been achieved in Africa all round at long last. In Africa now, we can say that all humans are treated as humans irrespective of their class, race, religion, political belief -(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you Rt Hon. Prime Minister for giving way. Picking from the words that, “At long last freedom and respect are here for all Africans”, I would like to tell you that the people of Darfur are not Arabs. The same question that was being asked in Southern Sudan is still being asked in Darfur and other places. If you say that all Africans are free, are you saying in Darfur people are not Africans? We are saying that the struggle should continue even if it is necessary to do it here we shall do it.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I am sure that my brother hon. Katuntu who worked with me closely on the question of Darfur would easily answer that. The struggle in many of these countries is not about racism; it is a struggle for freedom from oppression. The two are different. 

I am a very happy person and I would like to say that Uganda rejoices in the victory of the people of the Republic of Southern Sudan. Their victory is our victory. We identified with them in the armed struggle and I had the honour to participate fully for a long time. 

I should tell you that the struggle by the southerners was really not a racist struggle; it was a struggle for freedom. The struggles in the rest of Sudan have all been struggles for freedom and we fully identified with them all the time. 

I had the honour and pleasure to work very closely with the late John Garang, President Salva Kiir and other leaders of SPLM/A in their struggle. I am happy that their long held dream of being independent has been realised at long last. 

Uganda also acted as an honest broker when it came to seeking peaceful settlement of the war in Sudan under the IGAD arrangement. We were part of that effort by IGAD and one of the four countries that constituted the committee, which brokered the peace for the CPA. I was happy to participate in the initial negotiations that led to that when we adopted what was called, “The Declaration of Principles”, including the principle of self determination by the people of Southern Sudan. The Comprehensive Peace Agreement was as a result of this and then the referendum, which led to the independence of Southern Sudan on 9th July this year. 

On behalf of the Government of Uganda, I would like to register our gratitude to President Bashir of Sudan for his realistic approach to managing this issue of self determination by the people of Southern Sudan. We hope that remaining challenge of settling the question of Abyei will be equally handled and settled peacefully. Uganda offers its experienced hand of brokering peace in Sudan even in this matter. 

We welcome the Republic of Southern Sudan as the 54th of the African Union. We hope they will join the COMESA and be with their brothers and sisters to the North of the Republic of Sudan and the Republic of Egypt. We welcome the Republic of Southern Sudan to join the East African Community and join the political integration process of this part of Africa, which as the President says will at least offer the hope of survival of the African race by consolidating our numbers and resources to form a powerful race to defend the African people against any threat from any part of the world.

We offer to give the people of the republic of Southern Sudan support as we did in the armed struggle to build their new nation. In this we will work hand in hand as comrades in the struggle to achieve total transformation of our societies and nations. As usual the people of Southern Sudan can count on us Ugandans, especially under this Government of the NRM. We shall stand with them in their moments of happiness and in their moments of challenge.

We believe in the liberation struggle of the African people. Liberation does not end at attaining political control of our people’s destinies. Liberation means transforming our societies to catch up with the rest of the world. They can count on us as a liberation movement and people of Uganda as a whole, including the Opposition. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you Rt Hon. Prime Minister for giving way. The clarification I am seeking is that you gave the same assurances to the Republic of Rwanda but ended up fighting them in Kisangani. Is this an honest assurance to the people of Southern Sudan? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I must say that I am grateful to my brother, hon. Ibrahim Semujju Nganda representing the metropolis of Kyadondo East. I hope as a leader now he will acquire the skills to manage society in its entire diversity. I would like to put on record the contribution of the people of Uganda and that of the NRM to the liberation of Rwanda. I would like to say that this country and the NRM participated fully - (Interruption)

MS ALASO: I appreciate the depth of information the Prime Minister is giving, I am wondering whether with that detail, there will be an opportunity for us to respond to the presentation by the Prime Minister?

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please wind up.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I was placing on record an answer to my brother, hon. Semujju Nganda about the role the Government of the Republic of Uganda played in bringing an end to the shameful state that was in Rwanda when genocide occurred while the rest of the world looked on. It was Uganda that brought end to it. (Applause)

I would like to inform this House that our relationship with the Republic of Rwanda today is warm and excellent -(Applause and Interjections)- -(Ms Nambooze rose)- it is true! I find it difficult to resist hon. Nambooze –(Laughter)- Mr Speaker, I will give way to her.

MS NAMBOOZE: I thank you for giving way. The clarification I am seeking is that in 1990 when Rwanda was invaded, we are on record as a country for stating that we were not part of the group that invaded Rwanda. The Prime Minister is now putting it on record that indeed it is us, Ugandans, who invaded Rwanda -(Interjections)- by saying we offered them all the support. The clarification I am seeking is: did we support the people who invaded Rwanda or we are still standing by our position that we were not part of that group?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Let me first finish with hon. Semujju Nganda.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you need to finish.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I will have an opportunity in the coming weeks to make a detailed presentation on these matters even in the course of the debate of the State of the Nation Address. 

Let me just give information to clarify to hon. Nambooze the point I made. I said Uganda fully participated at the time when we were receiving dead bodies floating down River Kagera. We have hundreds of them buried on the soils of Uganda; we participated in ending that genocide. (Applause) I did not say we invaded Rwanda -(Laughter)- please hon. Members, mark my words because I mean what I say.

Therefore, we stand with the people of South Sudan in their times of happiness and tribulations and as usual, they can count on us to support them. I thank you.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: I thank you. The information I would like to give [HON. MEMBERS: “To who?”] To this House is that accommodating and supporting refugees for 30 years and also –(Interjections)- providing a good environment for them, is enormous support -

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I finally hope that in the near future, I will have the opportunity to respond to my dear sister and good friend, hon. Beatrice Anywar on the point she made. I now move a motion that the question be put. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there is a motion that we come to the close of this debate and that the question be put. So, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I now put the question to the motion that this Parliament, by resolution, congratulates the people and the Government of the Republic of Southern Sudan upon their attainment of independence.

(Question put and agreed to.)
(Motion adopted.)

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY 7 JUNE 2011

(Debate continued)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am advised that many Members have contributed to this debate while a few have not. Those of you who wanted to make contributions to the issue of the Republic of South Sudan, will still have an opportunity to make a statement on that because the President’s statement has a whole paragraph on regional and international matters where Sudan is mentioned and so you can still find an opportunity to make those references.

We will now try as much as possible to only allow those Members who have not made contributions to this debate before so that they can make their contributions today. I will start with hon. Sam Otada – has hon. Otada spoken? (Interjections) My records show he has not spoken.

4.51
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): I do not know why some people do not want me to take the Floor. Coming from the regime of three minutes for each Member, I would believe that we will go back to the five minutes.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, it is strictly five minutes and so make your point quickly.

MR OTADA: Most obliged. I wish to thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity and also want to say that I rise in support of the motion. I thank the President for his State of the Nation Address. I also thank the Leader of the Opposition for his response. 

It has always been our practice that Parliament wants to have a say on what has been said in the State of the Nation Address and the response to it. We should also take cognisance of what has not been said, which ought to have been said.  

Coming from the debate and motion that has just left the Floor, I would like to draw the attention of honourable members to the fact that one of the things that I think ought to have been said in the State of the Nation Address is the state of the proliferation of guns in Uganda in as far as the context of peace and security is concerned.

Whenever I thank the Government, I thank the NRM Government for presiding over a growing economy from 1986 to date. I would like to say that peace and security may not be sustained if we do not do certain things the right way.

Some of our colleagues in this House contributed, in one way or the other, to mobilising the people or communities to fight insurgency and these were the renowned Amuka Boys, Arrow Boys and the renowned group that hon. Okello Oryem and Hillary Onek started in Acholi. But up to now, we do not know how many guns were given out at that point. We also do not know the state of the nation in as far as how many guns are still in the hands of private people. This is one of the circumstances, which if not checked will breed insecurity.

And we are not talking about small guns and civilian firearms; we are talking about assault rifles, which are owned or are in the possession of even some of our colleagues seated on the Front Bench – the AK-47s, which are also being licensed to some private, security firms. Really, which country does that? We even do not know the fate of licensed guns in the hands of private individuals. To me, when you talk about peace and security, I think we need to know and in fact, Mr Speaker, I intend to ask a question for oral answer of the Minister of Internal Affairs on that.

The NRM MPs are soon going to Kyankwanzi, so I have been told, but I would like to beg that when you learn the skills of how to fire that AK47, you should not come home with it. I would like to emphasise the demilitarisation of the country. Can we start seeing more of the civil authority presiding over other than thinking about the power of the gun?
 
I would like to say something about what the Leader of the Opposition gave in response - and I will comment on that part where he tried to apportion local government budget at 40 percent, education at 20 percent, 15 percent for health and 10 percent for agriculture. When you sum up that, you will have exhausted 85 percent of the budget in about only four sectors. So, where do you leave the others? I thought that the Leader of Opposition should take note of that. Anyway, I would like to thank him for that way forward that he proposed on pages 19 to 20.

On the health sector, hon. Sanjay Tanna raised the issue of the children’s intensive care unit in Mulago Hospital that we visited as a group of Independent Members of Parliament the time we went to visit the Siamese twins. The place just has two rooms –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, your time is up. Let us hear from hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi –(Interjections)- no, he has not spoken yet.

4.57
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Mr Speaker, it is on record that I have not spoken yet and the people of Rubaga South who I represent would like to listen to me as well. I bring greetings from the people of Rubaga South. One of the greatest political and conservative scholars of our times, Edmund Burke, once said that a Member of Parliament is not a delegate; he/she is a representative of the people. I am going to treat my response to the Address on the State of the Nation by the President in the Edmund Burke fashion.

We in the Opposition are very proud of our able-bodied Leader of the Opposition. His response that analysed the Address on the State of the Nation by the President is our pride. We are proud of hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s response; it was a very brilliant one.

In light of that we are now trying to respond to the core areas of that State of the Nation Address by bringing in data to prove that all is not going well. On 11 June the Daily Mail of London reported Lord Ashrof as saying that President Museveni had diverted a sum of British Pounds £30 million given to Uganda to address poverty alleviation from a total of British Pounds £70 million to buy a personal plane. I find this a very serious issue. That is why I would like the Leader of Government Business to tell us whether it is true that this money was diverted without the approval of Parliament. If it is true, then it will be a serious offence. 

Why am I saying so? It is because pursuant to Article 93 –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, is it a personal plane or you are referring to the presidential jet? Is that the one or there is another plane? You need to make that clear to the House.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, it is about the presidential jet. As I was saying, pursuant to Article 93(a)(iii) of the Constitution, the President would be in the wrong, if he did that. 

And in the same Constitution under Article 107 –

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, the hon. Member has put up a very serious allegation, an allegation that has been picked from the Daily Mail, which I understand is just a newspaper published in a certain country; alleging that the President diverted British Pounds £30 million. Considering the status of the President, I think it would be procedurally right for the hon. Member making the allegations to lay on the Table a document pertaining to that story.

In that regard, I do not know whether it is procedurally right for one to come to this House and start debating articles being published by journalists in London, Hong Kong and journals on the streets of UK and Katwe - or from Rubaga South in the wetlands that were occupied by hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence and guidance on this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, you are allowed to cite newspaper articles for purposes of bringing information, but not for purposes of making substantial statements of fact based on the stories in the newspapers. You can say, “As alleged by the newspaper”, but it should not be a matter of fact on the Floor of the House.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I now say, “as alleged”, and wish to lay on the Table the newspaper whose story I have quoted. Here is a copy of the Daily Mail of 11 June 2011. 

Pursuant to that, the Leader of Government Business owes us an explanation about what exactly happened. We are Members of Parliament and we have a duty to defend public money under Article 93 of the Constitution. I am surprised that the honourable minister in charge of works is far away from that constitutional fact.

Mr Speaker, I also would like to know whether it is true that the President diverted that money and whether the donor knew about this diversion.

The address of the President was not elaborate on the kind of Cabinet we now have. I expected the President to explain why we have such a big Cabinet. For 25 years now, the Government of Uganda has failed to convince us that it is going anywhere. Currently, we have a Minister in charge of Karamoja, a Minister in charge of Teso, there is a Minister in charge of Northern Uganda, and a Minister in charge of Bunyoro. Where is the Minister in charge of Buganda? Isn’t Buganda a peculiar case to address? This is a very important matter. 

One of the major problems facing this country – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, please, summarise. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: In conclusion, if this country is to settle, there is need to acquire a political system which will be a formula for the use of division of powers. Uganda needs a federal system of government to ensure that each region shares a cake in the national order, instead of going in for the creation of other ministries like Bunyoro Affairs; next time it will be Sebei –(Laughter)- so, we from the Opposition side feel that the time is now to have a federal system of government -(Member timed out_)

5.05
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to join my colleagues to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. However, in the interest of time, I will go through the issues that we still have as Kibaale District. 

Kibaale District has 33 sub-counties and four town councils, five constituencies, 276 parishes and 1,535 villages. This is the biggest district we have in this country and monitoring of service delivery, especially for the district woman representative, is very difficult. The President promised us districts of Kakumilo and Kagadi and I want the Ministry of Local Government to effect that because it was a presidential pledge and he pledged that it would start in July this year. 

My people in the village told me that we have a challenge because we no longer have LCs. LC elections stalled and maybe the Minister for Local Government can tell us why. 

We have a hospital in Kagadi but it is dilapidated. We do not even have an ambulance. We have Muhororo sub-county that has been in existence for so many years but has no health centre III or health centre II. So, the Minister of Health can help us look into that. 

Between 2008 and 2010, there was a contract given to Omega Construction Uganda. Omega was given many contracts in Uganda including that of Kagadi under urban roads. This contractor only poured murram as bitumen, and left. The Minister of Works should help us with that. 

We have an issue of land. You will realise that Kibaale District has got a very big issue. We do not own land titles in Kibaale and the people are wondering why the systematic land demarcation is taking so long. It started in 2006 and to date no land title has been issued. There are many things to talk about but I should summarise. 

However, we have a road problem from Mubende-Kakumiro-Kagadi. That road was clearly spelt out in the President’s manifesto but it is not in the budget. We have a road from Kyenjojo-Kagadi, Kagadi-Hoima, Hoima-Masindi-Kigumba. It is an important road because it connects so many districts and it has been planned for, for the last so many years but hon. Minister of Works, this road is not in the budget. We are very impatient and the people of Kibaale are yearning for development. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.10
MRS JOY ATIM ONGOM (NRM, Woman Representative, Lira): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportune time. I would like to draw the attention of the Minister of Finance and the whole House to the fact that Lira District, as one may observe, has got quite a number of problems. I do not know whether the Ministry of Finance connives with the Uganda Revenue Authority but so far twice, the Uganda Revenue Authority has grabbed funds from the district account. The first time they grabbed Shs 620 million, the second time it was Shs 520 million. These were funds that were meant for NAADS and for roads. I do not know whether it is the Ministry of Finance that connives with the URA to punish my district. I need an answer for that. It cannot take the Uganda Revenue Authority five years without following funds from the district and at the end of it all let my district suffer. 

Mr Speaker, Lira District has attained the status of a regional referral hospital. This hospital supports more than eight districts but there is no blood bank in the district and my people are dying. My appeal to the Ministry of Health is that Lira is tired of going to Gulu. Gulu is also a referral hospital. Can we have a regional blood bank such that these eight districts are catered for?  

On the education sector, I heard His Excellency talk about the hardship allowance. I wonder which area or district is not suffering; what is a hardship and what is not? This, I think, is discrimination of the highest class. The teachers need to be treated equally and my teachers from Lira are complaining. If it is a matter of hardship allowance, then all the teachers have got to benefit from that and not only a few districts. We feel it is uppermost discrimination. 

Lastly, Lira District suffered the LRA insurgency. This therefore brought about a lot of street children in Lira. As a district, we struggled to remove these kids from the streets with the efforts of the Police, the UPDF and some NGOs like Save the Children but these efforts are yet to be appreciated. These children are not going to school; these are our children who are practising homosexuality; these are children who do not have any proper care. It is my appeal to the minister responsible that if possible, Lira District is really crying for a remand home. These are children who commit offences, which are grave, but we cannot take them anywhere. If only we can be given that remand home, it would be so much better. Thank you. 

5.15
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. I have some remarks to make. Page 29 talks about disaster preparedness and response. As you all know, my district had a disaster; the landslide you heard about and witnessed. I am appealing to the Minister of Environment or the Minister of Disaster Preparedness, to give us seedlings; we need to undertake afforestation in the area. So, the minister concerned, come to our rescue. We need trees to be planted in the area, especially in Nametsi where the landslide occurred.

On the same issue of disaster management, I am appealing to Government to put in place an equalisation grant to cater for areas affected by disasters. This will help these areas get better services like health. In fact, my place is even more disadvantaged because of its terrain. We are living in the mountains. There are no health units in the mountains. It is hard to get a patient from up the mountain all the way down. In fact, we have to just use a stretcher with four strong men to carry the patient. Chances of surviving are very few, especially when it comes to maternal problems. 

The other challenge about the services is water. There is a sub-county called Nabweya. When I went through the ministerial policy statement on water, the Bududa-Nabweya gravity flow system has been earmarked. I thank the Minister of Water for this but what I know is that these projects at times need a lot of money and they take long. I am appealing to the minister to come up with short-term measures to help my people harvest rain water. For instance, the minister can avail my people with tanks as we wait for this system.

About health; I appeal to the minister to have some health units constructed in the mountains, those hard-to-reach areas. Last Monday, there was a strike in my area because of the bad state of the Mbale-Manafwa-Bududa Road. This is an international road. It connects Uganda to Kenya and we are here talking about the East African Community. We need to work on our infrastructure to develop trade because it also has trade relations in it. Once this road is developed, it will help boost Bugisu region. We can trade in coffee and other products with Kenya. I raised this issue before the President and the Minister of Works and they said they would work on it. I am appealing to you, please, help us to promote the East African Community and develop our region. 

When the President came to Bududa during the campaigns, my people requested for a county. We have 16 sub-counties. So, to simplify the administration, they requested for Bulukyeke County so that we could have two counties. Like other areas in Uganda, we also do not have power. We need the power; we also embraced rural electrification. 

Page 21 of the State of the Nation Address talks about our treasure, oil, but the question on table is: how do we share this treasure equally? I am appealing to Government to recruit five students from each district and let these students be trained in oil management so that when that time comes, the whole country can partake of the jobs in the oil industry. [HON. MEMBER: “Isn’t it too late? They have already trained.”] Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Wabigalo Primary School from Makindye East represented by hon. John Ssimbwa. (Applause) I think they are the ones on this side. They have come to observe the proceedings of Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming them. 

5.20
MRS CHRISTINE ACAYO (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to others that have thanked His Excellency for the State of the Nation Address. It was a comprehensive report because it covered all sectors of the economy. 

In the State of the Nation Address, it was stated that next year, free A’ Level education would begin. I appreciate free secondary education. Free education has enhanced accessibility to education and democratisation of education. However, I have the following concerns which I think are undermining the gains made from free education.

According to the 1992 Government White Paper on Education, the unit cost of education per child in a day secondary school was supposed to be Shs 132,000 per annum. That was 1992. That was supposed to be Shs 44,000 per term. But at the inception of Universal Secondary Education in 2007, the unit cost of the capitation grant per child was Shs 41,000. A ream of paper used to cost Shs 7,000. Today in 2011, the unit cost of a capitation grant in USE schools in still Shs 41,000 but a ream of paper costs Shs 15,000 -(Interjection)- It is even Shs 17,000.

The financing of education has a direct impact on the quality and that is my concern. It is the work of Parliament to see that we do not have only quantity in the education but also quality. If I may ask: how many of us have our children in USE schools? Why? I think this is a serious issue. We are moving onto free A’ Level education yet the financing at O’ Level is inadequate!
 
Through you, Mr Speaker, I am requesting the Minister of Education to brief this House on the plan they have as far as the capitation grant is concerned so that we can enhance the gains made from Universal Secondary Education. Actually, UPE is receiving only Shs 7,000 per year. Can Shs 2,500 per term run a school? On the ground, this is very unrealistic. We want something which is viable, practical and workable.   

I have also noted with concern that the lack of science teachers is undermining the gains in secondary education. After the State of the Nation Address, I had a familiarisation tour in my district of Nebbi. What I found on the ground is that all the USE schools in Nebbi do not have enough science teachers. You find one or two science teachers on the payroll. The rest are not. These schools are not supposed to pay money and sciences are compulsory; it is a policy, sciences are compulsory but the teachers are not there in the schools. 

I know of interventions where the Education Service Commission went upcountry to interview teachers, but I am surprised that up to now we don’t have teachers in schools. But when you move on the streets, you meet graduates of Bachelor of Science with Education; you meet people who have diplomas in science education. They are not recruited and yet we don’t have science teachers on the ground. I think this will greatly undermine the gains of Universal Secondary Education. How can these children get a first grade when at the end they must do science practicals and yet they don’t have the teachers? (Member timed out_) 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We do regard this debate as a very important debate. We don’t consider the State of the Nation Address as a ritual for Members to start gossiping about. Honourable colleagues are raising very pertinent issues, which Government should be able to note and respond to but we are just talking to ourselves. The Leader of Government Business is not here -(Interjection)- hon. Byabagambi, when we raise serious issues, there is no time for jokes here. We are talking about health; people are losing their lives; we expect the Minister of Health to be in the Chamber. If he is not there; the Leader of Government Business should be here. The Chief Whip should be here. (Applause) 

All these Members have been raising concerns but who is taking note of that? I think it is high time Government took Members of Parliament seriously. We are now just talking to ourselves. We are gossiping. If, for example we talk about trade, I can see that the Minister of Trade is here. (Applause) And I think she is very serious and she jots down issues being raised; otherwise, the entire Cabinet has gone to sleep.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, with all due respect to my colleague, hon. Katuntu, is he in order to praise only one Member of Cabinet and yet some of us seated here are also Members of Cabinet? (Interjection) A minister of state is a member of Cabinet; I attend Cabinet proceedings. Is he in order to insinuate that the rest of the Cabinet members are a sleep; that only one is awake and taking notes? Well, I’m really in charge here and taking notes. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the hon. Member does not have any proof; unless he can substantiate that he has seen honourable ministers sleeping somewhere -(Laughter)- because the information I have is that there are some meetings going on in the Speaker’s office and some of the Cabinet ministers are there. I have received a note to that effect. 

I have also just got another notice from hon. Migereko, who was holding the position of Whip, by assignment here stating that they have left Mr Byabagambi to be in charge of the Government side to take notes for all of them because they have meetings. I am in receipt of those. So, hon. Member, unless you can substantiate those grounds, I will be constrained to ask you to withdraw, particularly the word, “sleeping”.

MR KATUNTU: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. Of course, when I used the word “sleep” I didn’t mean it literally that they had actually closed their eyes and they were busy snoozing. I meant that they are absent from the Chamber and are not taking note of Members’ concerns. That is the point I was making.

Having said that the motion by hon. Najjemba is a very important one and I thought Government should give it due respect. To have one minister to take notes – (Interruption)

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Thank you colleague for giving way. Mr Speaker, this is not the first time this issue is raised on this Floor. It is becoming a habit; right from the other Parliament and it has now come to this Parliament. We really need to take Parliament seriously. If there is an issue like this, ministers should be here. We have almost 70 ministers. Count and see how many are here? We should really be serious. Thank you very much.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want us to be fair to one another. You have said that there is a meeting in the Speaker’s office where the ministers have been called. I think we can do an audit. We can go there and find out how many ministers are there and we confirm what the true story is. 

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: The meeting that is in the Speaker’s office is for chairpersons and vice-chairpersons of committees of this Parliament.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you can see for yourself. If such a note has been written, then they are lying. And if they are lying, I think we should take action on our colleagues so that they respect Parliament from now onwards. (Applause) (Interjections) You have a motion? Let me conclude and then you bring the motion.

Mr Speaker, if we have on average 80 ministers; that means a third of them is about 26 ministers. If I count those present here, they are six ministers. (Interjection) Of course you know why she fears to sit here; she doesn’t want to take responsibility and that is why she is seated at the back. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the honourable ministers sit on the front bench please so that we have a fair assessment of what is going on? Hon. Ministers, please sit on the front bench.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you can see for yourself that we have only eight ministers out of 80, that is, 10 percent. If we have only 10 percent and some of them, like the one here who is just a shadow – he is not officially a Member of Parliament but he is here by virtue of being a minister, it can demonstrate to you the problems we have -(Interruption)  

MR SSIMBWA: I thank the Leader of the Opposition for giving way. Mr Speaker, at the beginning of this sitting, the whole front bench was full but as we now discuss issues concerning our country, members of the Front Bench are not there. I am now wondering whether they consider issues of Sudan more important than issues of our nationals. That is the information I wanted to give. (Applause)

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. When we were beginning Parliament, the President made a request to increase the number of ministers, which Parliament approved. Mr Speaker, we want full accountability for this because the President stated that the increase in the number of ministers was to do with service delivery. Now, if we look at what is happening in Parliament today, ministers absenting themselves, coming in when they wish and even failing at times to answer questions that are put to them, is that proper accountability? That is the information I wanted to give.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to thank my colleague, hon. Abdu Katuntu for raising it –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The leader of Government Business is on the Floor –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Now from this you can see for yourself that the matter is very dangerous and I tend to agree with Members that we rather suspend the House until we have the ministers who can listen to us – 

THE  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have a request from more than 11 Members who have said they need to speak today because from tomorrow they will not be in and they have already requested the Speaker to be absent from tomorrow onwards. I do not know what to do with them because they have made their requests in writing and they are here and tomorrow they will not be here and the subsequent days they will not be here. They might miss out completely on their presentations to the State of the Nation Address –(Interjections)- hon. Members, can I finish? I now have the honourable ministers here including the Government Chief Whip. Would you want to give an explanation for this?

5.36
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me start with the remarks made by my friend hon. Katuntu when I was answering a short call -(Laughter)- which is very natural and I came and proved it with my bag being here. 

We have a good percentage of the Cabinet on the front bench right now, and we also have a reasonable percentage of the back benchers. During this period when people are settling into offices, it is not only affecting the Front Bench and the Back Benchers on this side because I can also see that even on that side, out of about 58 Members of the Opposition we have five. On the front bench of the Opposition we have five Members. So, it seems to be a rather seasonal problem that we are solving.

However, I want to assure you, hon. Members and the Leader of the Opposition that every matter that has been mentioned here by Members on both sides concerning service delivery and any matters of the country in response to the State of the Nation Address, for each sector, has been recorded. As soon as possible, when we consult the Speaker, each relevant minister will come and give the explanation as has been recorded. Apart from being here, everything is being picked on the Hansard and it is going to be answered and then at an appropriate time the Leader of Government Business will wrap up.

I think we have enough people on the front bench and there is no need to adjourn the House. As I can see the problem is common to all of us. In fact we have more Independents present than even the Opposition -(Interjections)- and I beg that these 11 people be given an opportunity and I assure the Leader of the Opposition and hon. Members that everything raised will be answered by Government. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, can I then have hon. Balyeku Moses.

5.38
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I proceed, let me say that maybe when we see the bag of the Chief Whip present we know that the Chief Whip is around in the House because when he came back, the first thing he showed us was his bag that he was present.

I want to thank the President for delivering the State of the Nation Address on time because it was delivered on time. However, I am more concerned about the issue of NAADS. The President says in his statement that NAADS is in 114 districts, which is very good, and we commend the NAADS programme. 

However, in Jinja, they sent funds for NAADS - for example on 27th June they sent funds for NAADS for the whole district and on 30th June the automated system took back the money to the ministry of finance. So, these people in the ministry of finance - in fact Members, take note of this in your districts. These people in finance send the money two days to the end of the financial year and before districts start spending the money it is automatically sent back to the ministry of finance. Then the following week they put in the newspapers districts that did not spend money for NAADS yet in actual sense, in Jinja, in the month of June, money was sent on 27 June and in two days it was automatically sent back to the ministry of finance. How do you expect the whole district to get that money and spend it in two days with the new guidelines on how to spend money?

So, it is wrong for the ministry of finance to send money with the intentions of taking it back because that is a clear intention and deliberate policy on the part of the Ministry of Finance –(Mr Katuntu rose_)- granted, please.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable colleague for yielding the Floor. Yes, what you are saying is correct. However, my own experience as Chairperson of the Local Government Accounts Committee in the last Parliament was that we managed to actually move to each and every local government but the problem of the local government authorities spending the money is also real. They have stayed with resources for even six months without spending. It is real in all local governments. So, the problem is actually not only with Finance but it is also with our local governments and the reason is that most of them lack capacity. They lack capacity - not even absorption capacity but human resource capacity to spend this money and consequently our people lose out on delivery of services. 

MR BALYEKU: Mr Speaker, now Jinja has a very vibrant Member of Parliament -(Laughter)- and in Jinja such incidences will not happen anymore. I am now referring to the issue of last month when the money came two days before the financial year ended and I still insist that this should not happen -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Just a short one. I want to help you so that - they will give you more time. Money can only be returned to the centre if it is not committed. Now if that money came on 27 June and your district had not committed it, it had to go back because you cannot start procurement two days to the end of the financial year. So, you should not blame only Government you should also blame your district for lack of capacity. (Applause) 

MR KATUNTU: Further information on that.

MR BALYEKU: No, hon. Members, this time let me complete. This is a new Government coming into office. The LC V Chairperson and his executive cannot commit money when they are not yet in office. We have to bear in mind that these people had just assumed office. They cannot start committing funds when they have just entered office. The point I am putting across is that let the ministry of finance send the money on time. We are not saying that on our side as Government we are not planning on time; you cannot commit money when you are not in office. For example, hon. Katuntu, you cannot commit funds when you are not yet elected. These people were elected less than two months ago and so they could not commit that money.

Secondly, still on the issue of NAADS, NAADS is a very good project and policy but in the urban centres, NAADS is not applicable. For example, in the municipality I represent, NAADS cannot work in Jinja town because most of these people are not used to agricultural products. This is an urban area. We need to bring something that will help people in the urban areas -(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY: Give the hon. Member one more minute to wind up.

MR BALYEKU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In Jinja, especially in the municipality, as Parliament we need to find a proper way of helping urban areas because NAADS cannot work in urban areas. You cannot have cows, piglets and goats in the middle of town. It is even against the Urban Act to have animals in the city centres. So, as Government we also need to bring in another programme equivalent to NAADS but for the urban areas. Thank you.

5.44
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank His Excellency, the President for the State of the Nation Address. However, I have a few concerns from the people of Kongasis. 

On page 33 under transport, that is roads, you will find that in the previous State of the Nation Address, His Excellency the President has always mentioned particular priority roads that had to be constructed. In this case, a road that has never missed is Swan-Bukwo-Kapchorwa Road or the reverse. But this time he has not mentioned any road but instead mentions 150 kilometres of tarmac roads to be constructed this year. I hope the 77 kilometre road is part of the 152 kilometres. If it is, that would be very good for the people of Kongasis. Those of you who have ever gone to Bukwo can bear me witness. I am sure it is because of fear not because they do not want to be in Bukwo but because they fear the road.

Secondly, we have the issue of justice, law and order – that is in page 42. It is true there is an improvement in the country in terms of dispensing justice but Bukwo is a different case. We have one magistrate who is there once in a month and at most for two days in a month. When you ask where he goes, they say: “He is also in Kapchorwa and Tororo.” So I am wondering whether a district which is six years old does not qualify to have a resident Magistrate. Remember, justice delayed is justice denied. It is high time we had a magistrate specifically for Bukwo – 

MRS TETE CHELANGAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to inform this august House that we are the only Members who travel through a foreign country to get to another part of our own country. So there is a problem because we move from Kampala through Kenya and back to our constituencies - we have passports to travel to our constituencies. 

MR SABILA: Thank you, my colleague. The other issue concerns agriculture, which is on page 11. You recall that whenever we talk about agriculture, we talk about value addition. That is the way to go but we have a problem of electricity; it ends in Kween District and on the other side it is on the border – moreover that is Ugandan electricity. There is a stretch of about 20 or 30 kilometres that needs to be closed. How can we achieve value addition without power? If the minister responsible is here, they should do something about power.

There is the issue of seeds and fertilizer in a bid to go commercial in agriculture. We have land there and being an agriculturally rich area, we need a seed multiplication centre so that we can get good seed and our farmers can be out growers for seed, therefore adding value to crops.

The other one, Mr Speaker, is under education. We have a problem with A’ Level because the whole district does not have government-aided A’ Level schools. Can we have some of the O’ Level schools upgraded like Amanang Senior Secondary School which started in 1982. This will enable us to foster science education. We may have a laboratory for science so that we can ably compete with other parts of this country.

5.58
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was very impressed by the President’s proposal on agricultural mechanisation and commercialisation. Sheema is basically an agricultural area but when you look at the proposals, especially in terms of agricultural credit facility through the commercial banks, you realise that women are the biggest drivers of agriculture in terms of contributing to economic development. But how do they access these credit facilities when they do not have collateral? 

In addition to that they have resorted to getting agricultural credit from microfinance institutions which charge two percent per month, meaning that they are charged 24 percent per annum, which is very high for a woman who is contributing to agricultural sector. 

Regarding water, our women are supposed to be thinking – their brains are supposed to be thinking for the countries but they spend a lot of time walking very long distances fetching water. In Sheema District, for instance, out of the 32 existing boreholes, only 11 are functional. This means that the girl-child is dropping out of school; others are sexually harassed on their way to fetch water because we do not have access to clean water.

On the issue of health, today I received a message that we have one doctor for 25 patients and one nurse for 1,630 patients. You can imagine in the President’s speech, he talks about developing infrastructure without increasing the human resource. How are we going to contain malaria, for example, when we do not have enough doctors and nurses in the country? 

I saw in the news today that expired drugs were going to be burnt yet one of our concerns in this Parliament – everyone has been talking about – is access to medicine in our health unit. I really wonder if these medicines are there waiting to be burnt yet our people lack drugs. What is the essence of developing the infrastructure when we do not have medicine and personnel?

MR ISAIAS SSASAGA: Thank you for giving way. The information I want to give to my sister is that on health, as much as the President talked about improving health infrastructure - he talked about decongesting Mulago Hospital by building hospitals in the divisions of Kampala – regional hospitals are also in very bad states. The congestion is too much, especially of diabetic patients; they move from rural areas to come for services in the regional referral hospitals. And in today’s newspapers there was information that diabetes kills about 8,200 Ugandans annually with 5,000 of them being women and children; moreover 682 die per month –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssasaga, you are on my list as coming to make a contribution; do you want to contribute in the process of giving information? Why don’t you wait for your time and make a contribution because you are now going beyond giving information. (Laughter) You wait; you will make a substantive contribution.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I was doing my research, it was observed that 53 percent of the girls who start school keep on dropping out and one of the issues that make these girls dropout of school is that of sanitary towels. In other countries, they provide sanitary towels. When we came to Parliament during our orientation in the nurses’ place, we were shown a place of convenience in case something happens to us and yet we are mature people who are also Members of Parliament. But think of a girl who is six years old - these days it starts at six years - goes to school and it happens to her when there is no facility for that - they usually drop out of school because of that.  I wish the Minister of Education could put it into consideration because dropping out of school for girls is a contributory effect of lack of sanitary towels. 

Finally, crop diversification is still a very important factor in our country because agriculture is the backbone of this country. We grow matooke but the minister of agriculture has seemingly failed to contain the banana wilt. In the event that banana wilt has failed to be contained, what are our people going to grow?  I was so touched that the price of bread has increased because we cannot even sensitise our people to grow wheat. And to make matters worse, we export our wheat to Kenya from where it is processed and sold to us expensively, which is the reason why the price of bread has gone up. Why is it that we cannot process that wheat within our country? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I have hon. Ssasaga, Budadiri East, conclude, because you had already started? (Laughter)

5.56
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko):   Thank you, Mr Speaker. My contribution was on health. The concern was that the President clearly indicated in his State of the Nation Address how Mulago National Referral Hospital is congested and moved ahead with plans to decongest the hospital by putting up satellite branches in Naguru, Nakawa, Kawempe and Makindye. But my concern is not that only Mulago Hospital which is congested but all the regional referral hospitals. 

If you moved to Mbale, it is serving the whole of Pallisa, Budaka, part of Tororo and the entire Bugisu. The hospital is so much congested especially now with the increasing  cases of diabetic diseases that these old men and women plus children are moving right from the rural areas , which is combined with the escalating journey fares to get services from these hospitals. Some of them even come a day earlier so as to book because doctors work on a first come first serve basis.  

So, the concern is the Ministry of Health should decongest referral hospitals by extending the services offered to district health centre IVs and IIIs and also appoint doctors there. 

It was reported in the papers today that 8,400 Ugandans are dying annually, which is attributed to the poor diet and lack of sufficient exercises. Mr Speaker, if this is the real cause of diabetes, then I am scared that it is not only the people in villages but even some Members of Parliament could be victims because this is a disease that could attack anybody and, therefore, Government has to come in immediately and act. So, the minister concerned should help us so that these patients get treatment form convenient centres other than travelling that far to the regional hospitals. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like us to be fair to our colleagues, if you have already spoken, please allow the other Members the opportunity to speak. I have just discovered that an hon. Member has spoken before and now he has again done it, which is not fair. 

5.59
MR HARUNA KYEYUNE (Independent, Kyotera County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the President for his State of the Nation Address. In his address, he was concerned about improving education; PLE performance and he suggested ways like reducing the pupil to teacher ratio of 1 to 56. But I would rather suggest that if we don’t improve on the teachers’ salaries, PLE performance will not improve because for sure a primary teacher working for less that $100 a month and without lunch allowance, cannot make them deliver.  We must advocate for the salary increment for teachers if they are to improve the performance of our children at PLE. 

Even if we build schools and send their textbooks without paying the teachers a relatively higher pay, the pupils’ performance will not improve. If we cannot do that, let the teachers start teaching in shifts where one group teaches from 8.30 a.m. to 12.00 a.m. and then another continues from there. But if we do not look into that, we are failing our country [MR KYAMADIDI: “Point of information.”] Mr Speaker, I am well informed about what I am talking about. (Laughter)

Concerning the depreciation of the Uganda shilling, the people I represent, Kyotera people, and all the people of Uganda would like to know why we are using two sets of legal notes. I think it is not acceptable; it creates a credibility crisis. We ask ourselves why our shilling has depreciated so much but we cannot look at – I beg that the minister of finance makes a statement on when one set of notes use will expire. 

About the Ministry of Health, in the whole of Rakai District, we don’t have even a single ambulance - not even a motorcycle in that form. We only have two hospitals and one health centre IV in the whole of Rakai District but nothing like an ambulance there.  Now that there is tax exemption on the importation of ambulances, I beg that some money is allocated for the importation of ambulances to be distributed in every district. 

Mr Speaker, we have another serious problem in Uganda and that is “presidentialism”. I wonder why the President goes to mediate very minor conflicts. He has energetic ministers -(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is hon. Asamo Hellen still here? She has difficulty standing so – Oh! That is sad.

6.05
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I add my voice to that of many who have thanked the President and the Leader of the Opposition for the State of the Nation Address.

I represent a constituency, which has three sub counties and it gives me pleasure to speak when the Minister of Transport is here. In one of the sub counties in my constituency, Buwunga I have a problem of moving from one parish to go to a village in the same parish. I have to go through another constituency in another sub county represented by hon. Edward Ssekandi that is Kyanamukaka to go to Mumpu village; it is in Kamywa parish. There is no road connecting one village to another. That is a serious problem and it makes it very difficult for me to do political monitoring.

Another issue is to do with NAADS. The President, when giving the State of the Nation Address under production and food security indicated that Shs 15 billion is earmarked to be given to institutions as Commercialisation Partnership Challenge Fund.

Under agricultural finance, the President reported that support to modernise agriculture is backed by an agriculture credit facility, which in the year 2010-2011 stood at Shs 90 billion. This gives me a problem of seeing what my people are going through in that regard when you reduce from Shs 90 billion to Shs 15 billion. It is an indication that there is good performance; so this needs to be explained because when I look at my constituency, I still see a major problem with NAADS.

Village committees have been established. The President indicated that only 100 homesteads in a parish are targeted and out of the 100 homesteads, only six farmers are to benefit from this programme. I pose a question that if these fora have been established and procurement committees at village level target only six farmers, is there value for money and who is supposed to meet their costs?

The problem of water is yet another in my constituency because the bore holes are all down. On page 33 of the President’s State of the Nation Address, he indicated that he has appointed an Executive Director for Kampala who has excavated new equipment.

I wanted to say this when hon. Byabagambi and the former Minister of Works are here. Maybe to remind Members, I have been the deputy mayor of Kampala city. I wanted to know whether this new equipment, as it was given to Kampala City Council, was intended to fail the administration then -(Member timed out_)

6.11
MS ANNET OKWENYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): I have an interest in the National economy as a whole. We have a problem as Uganda as far as the economy is concerned. The government seems to be trying to do everything at a go. They are trying to undertake industrialisation, agriculture and so forth, and at the end when there is something missing out people will think that government is not doing anything at all. 

I have a suggestion for the Government that we could try to prioritise certain sectors and maybe we say this year we concentrate on the industries or for the next six months we concentrate on agriculture and maybe education and see some change in it and then move to another sector so that we can realise some results. Otherwise, if we say we are handling industries, schools, education, health, road construction, everything at a go, we are moving nowhere. I love my Government and that is why I am trying to give that advice.

People have complained about districts but today I am not complaining. I am just going to watch and see what will be done. Is the Minister of Works around? Let me speak when he is listening because last time he wasn’t around. With all due respect, I represent a district that is at the border of Karamoja and Lango sub-region. We are actually the gateway to Karamoja region and some people say we are the Karamoja of Lango sub-region because we are the ones who are the least developed in the region. 

Because of that background, I would like to tell the minister that we have the worst road network in the district and country. We don’t have any murram road so if it is very expensive for the government to give us a tarmac road, mine is a humble request that at least you get us a first class murram road. We would appreciate that to ease our transport. Thank you very much.

6.14
MS JANEPHER NANTUME (NRM, Woman representative, Buvuma): Thank you so much, hon. Speaker. I want to take this opportunity as the Woman representative of Buvuma Islands to thank the President and Members of the Eighth Parliament for having given Buvuma a district status. I want to thank the President because he recognised the Islands. 

We complained about lack of hydropower in Buvuma but the President has asked the Minister of Energy to do research about Buvuma Island such that we get electricity for our development.

Besides that, Buvuma is composed of 52 islands and it is still back ward in all sectors. When I was in primary one of our teachers used to tell us that, “We shall not wait for Karamoja to develop”. This is not the case these days. I want to tell this august House that the Karamoja of Buganda region is Buvuma. We have one secondary school that stops at ordinary level and it got an examination centre last year. When the President talks of Bonna Basome going to A’ Level, we shall miss out because we do not have it. I ask the minister of education to focus on Buvuma because it is a government policy that each sub-county must have a secondary school but Buvuma as a district has one secondary school. 

Buvuma is the only place where you find only three teachers in a primary school of primary one to primary seven. How can they teach all the subjects from primary one to primary seven? 

Before I came to Parliament, I was the Chairperson of the Education and Health Committee of Mukono District. This was before Buvuma was curved off; we used to ask for more teachers but we were told that we have enough teachers not considering other places like Buvuma. I want to ask the minister of education to put more emphasis on primary education. You find that there is one primary school in a parish on an island. People complain that children are moving long distances to school but ours cannot swim as the case is in Buvuma because we are composed of islands. For purposes of regional development, let us look at Buvuma and give it a special consideration such that each island has a school for us to benefit. 

I want to look at the fisheries sector briefly. This is a sector which was almost becoming number one source of revenue in the country. We now have a disaster, the 20th person died two weeks ago. He was an LC111 chairman of a sub county. These people die as they try to run from Police because of illegal fishing. My question is; how come the illegal nets are licensed? (Member timed out_)

6.20
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): The first issue I want to talk about is the hardship allowance to teachers in hard-to-reach areas. I do not know why this programme began last year but Kasese District was not considered and up to now our teachers are still complaining, that is why education is very poor in our district. I am appealing to the Minister of Education that Kasese should also be considered for hardship allowances. 

The second issue is about the fisheries sub-sector. The people in my constituency still have a problem of fishing immature fish in Lake George and Edward. It is a very big issue that needs the minister to intervene. Up to now my people have been complaining about people who come at night and catch immature fish. 

As we are trying to promote agriculture in our constituencies, we have a problem of animals which come from Queen Elizabeth National Park and destroy peoples’ gardens. I am appealing to the minister to make sure that this issue is addressed. The Uganda Wildlife Authority has stubbornly failed to stop animals walking to peoples’ gardens. This is because there is no law that calls for compensation of individuals after loss of property destroyed by wild animals. It is a serious issue that needs consideration and urgent intervention otherwise the people in my constituency are crying.

On the health sector, each constituency is entitled to have a health centre IV; a health centre III for a sub-county and a health centre II for a parish. In my constituency, I do not have a health centre IV and an ambulance. 

I am appealing to the Minister of Health –(Interjections)- he is not even around – 

Another issue is -(Member timed Out_)

6.25
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): I would like to thank the President for this elaborate presentation. However, the President could not put everything in this document. In performing his duty as the head of state, he is assisted by other people like ministers, Parliament, the judiciary and the technical people and that is why you will find that there are issues that we normally have to raise for attention of respective persons in helping the President to deliver services to the people.

I wish to address myself most especially to the management of contracts that are normally awarded by the central government. The management of these contracts is always very poor when it gets to up country areas like in my constituency and others in the North of the country.

I want to cite two areas of concern; Government has done a good initiative to improve on the health centres that were built in the 1960’s and have become so dilapidated and one of them is in Apac where a contract was awarded in 2009 to rehabilitate three wards.  

The contractor started with the paediatric ward but the rehabilitation of this ward has taken three years with this one being the third year and yet the work has not been completed and the ward has never been handed over and people are not even using it which has caused confusion and problems in the hospital. 

I would now like to ask the minister concerned to ensure that, first of all, the work is done expeditiously and handed over so that people can use it. I would like to know when the two remaining wards will be rehabilitated and if the programme is still on.

Secondly, a contract for rehabilitating roads in my constituency was awarded in November last year. The work only started in June this year and it is appalling the way it is being done, which calls for immediate and serious supervision and monitoring.

In my constituency, the roads –(Interjection)– pardon? The roads –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: I think you can –(Interjections)- no, I wish to request the hon. Member holding the Floor that he should mention the roads so that I can note them down.

HON. MEMBERS: You know all of them!  

MR AYOO: The road comes from Loro via Aduku in Oyam District to Nambyeso in Kwania County. The central government roads in my district are worse than the local government ones implying that the monitoring and supervision is not being done effectively and I do call for better work.

One of the issues that have been forwarded by the President is on the theft of drugs in hospitals and health units. A lot of things are being done by the Police and IGG to arrest and prosecute people who steal these drugs. 

I wish to make a proposal to this House that in order to end the theft of drugs, this Parliament must empower the citizen of Uganda to take charge of controlling the theft of drugs by passing a law so that all the drugs bought by the Government must be branded and once they are branded, the citizens are authorised to pick the drugs from the drug shops or clinics since Government would have paid for them. It is only the citizens that can help us fight that because the drugs have been branded but since –(Dr Bitekyerezo rose_)- 

THE SPEAKER: Are you taking the information from the Member from Mbarara Municipality?

DR BITEKYEREZO: I thank you so much. I wish to assure you that a very large number of drugs bought by the Government of Uganda are branded but this has not stopped people from stealing these drugs. 

When you pretend – I said it yesterday and want to repeat that when you pretend to employ somebody, he will pretend to work for you. People are hungry and they are stealing. If chalk was very expensive, teachers would also steal chalk. 

So the problem is that people are hungry and yet they have drugs. The doctors, nurses and other medical staff are not paid well and this explains why drugs like Panadol go missing -(Applause)- the problem is that the living wage is small; so they will continuously steal the drugs. I thank you. 

MR AYOO: I thank you for the information. However, much as we are struggling and moving to a level when we can pay a living wage to our people, should we now leave them to take the drugs illegally as a way of compensating? I think we cannot condone this. 

6.31
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABI (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): I would like to commend His Excellency, the President for his State of the Nation Address to Parliament because of the many achievements that have been registered under the NRM Government under the leadership of His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. 

However, I have the following to note. The President congratulated many leaders who were elected; however, we still have a problem of grassroots leadership. The Movement carried out its primaries but many LC 1 chairpersons were not elected in many of the villages across Uganda; meaning there is no leadership at the ground root because those who were elected in the primaries are not working and yet they are the ones who have the mandate of the people. Today if you want a meeting, the old chairman may fail to mobilise the people because they do not listen to him or her. 

We, therefore, need to budget and since the problem is money; Parliament should appropriate money for the election of LC1 councils if we are to move and monitor Government development programmes on the ground for effective service delivery.

We cannot develop agriculture without mechanising it if we have to be commercial. I therefore propose that we strengthen the produce co-operative societies at sub-county level and through these co-operative societies; we support them with well mounted tractors, haulers and ploughs so that the management of the co-operative societies undertakes the management of these tractors.

We should as Government, support these co-operative societies at sub-county level with the building of granaries for storage of their produce because if we do not do that, we shall continue singing the song of storage. I remember we put up some silos in Jinja and Kyazanga but they were not operationalised and we do not know what they are doing and yet we put a lot of money into constructing those silos. So, to help the situation, we should emphasise equipping cooperative societies and building these storage facilities at sub county levels to be managed by these very cooperative societies.

Also we should help them with the equipment that do value addition. Some of these could be grain milling plants, milk coolers and so forth.

Mr Speaker, under NAADS on page 13, the President said he has secured Shs 15 billion for the Commercialisation and Partnership Challenge Fund in financial institutions. But I don’t know how many farmers accessed this money. I also do not know how this money assists these farmers. I am saying this because on page 14, the President said that there was going to be an agricultural credit facility which would be funded at Shs 90 billion for farmers to do borrowing at an interest rate of 12 percent per annum and being repaid between one and eight years. 

However, I would like to say that I have never seen anybody borrow that money at such an interest rate. So, let it be operationalised. Government should be serious on this issue because there are many progressive farmers who can utilise this facility.

On water for production, I propose that instead of constructing huge water reservoirs which are over billed - in my constituency there is a dam that was rehabilitated at a cost of Shs 2.5 billion. If that money had been given to the district, they would have constructed 100 medium-size dams because these bigger dams cannot be accessed by all the farmers. Under modernization nobody will allow a fellow farmer to move through their farm that they are going –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. On my list I had hon. Ssimbwa John –

MR KABAJO: Mr Speaker, I am reporting that hon. John Ssimbwa has left –(Laughter)– but I am also rising on a point of procedure. I have noted that many honourable members have persisted and sat up to the end of the sitting, but have not had the chance to speak and they might not speak even tomorrow. My proposal, and I am not sure whether I am being right or not, is that before we end today, let us have the clerks note down the names of those honourable members who have persisted up to now, but have not spoken so that they are the first to speak tomorrow. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Member. These are the names of those members who didn’t speak today. Some of them might have left, but here is the list that will be arranged by the clerk for tomorrow and that is what they have been doing before. Yes, thank you for that reminder, but that is what has always been done.

Hon. Members, I would like to thank you very much for sitting here up to this time. Tomorrow we should have a longer hold so that we can give opportunity to as many members as possible to help us cover this subject in time; to help us close this debate when everybody is satisfied with the discussion. With that the House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.39 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 14 July 2011 at 2 p.m.)

