Thursday, 17 July 2014

Parliament met at 3.04 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to say that there are a number of items on the Order Paper and I hope that we can work expeditiously so that we accomplish the bulk of it. We need to finish the Bills so that we can go to the State of the Nation Address before we adjourn the Plenary for the committees to do their work.

Secondly, I will be adjusting the Order Paper to allow hon. Nabbanja to make a personal statement a little bit later. Thank you very much. She will be coming; she is writing the statement. Hon. Ogwal has something urgent to say.

3.06
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, and I beg your indulgence. 

I would like to draw the attention of Members to the fact that Parliament is an institution that carries out an oversight role to ensure that the Government or the Executive is kept in check. It would be unfair if Parliament pretends to be unaware of the fact that the grounding of Uganda air local service providers is causing the government, the country and the people of Uganda a lot of suffering. It is important therefore that Parliament’s attention should be brought to that issue.

Rt Hon. Speaker, as Parliament, we are aware that Uganda is a signatory to the Convention on International Civil Aviation, commonly known as the Chicago Convention. Uganda became a member of the International Civil Aviation Organisation in 1967. The Convention provides international standards and practices to be adhered to. We are further aware that the Civil Aviation Act, Cap 354, compels the Civil Aviation Authority to carry out functions in accordance with the provision of the Chicago Convention. However, the public is concerned about the shutdown of the local airline service providers and following that shutdown of the airline operations, Ugandans have suffered and continue to suffer multidimensional losses. 

First, there is the increased cost of air tickets. The cost of air tickets has suddenly gone up and in some cases doubled, making it difficult for Ugandans to travel across the border to do their normal business as they have always done. In fact, to be specific, an air ticket on KQ from Entebbe to Nairobi has suddenly shot up from US$ 380 to US$ 560 and it is still going up.

Secondly, there is the local employment; the suspended companies have been employing as many as 250 workers and all these have lost their jobs. If they continue to lose their jobs, Ugandans and their families are going to suffer because these are bread winners in their homes and they are supposed to maintain their families.

Thirdly, and more importantly, Ugandans have spent a lot of money mobilising investors to come Uganda; the moment these airlines were shut down, it dented the image of Uganda abroad and it is going to be very difficult for investors to head to Uganda for investment. We now have a double cross against us. One is the propaganda that Uganda is insecure, and this has already caused many tourists to cancel their trips to Uganda, and now this shutdown of the airline has actually reinforced the earlier campaign against Uganda.

As far as Uganda is concerned, therefore, I am surprised that the Government has not come to Parliament to update us on what is happening. The more we continue to keep these airlines non-operational, the more we are going to suffer these losses, which I have already highlighted. Above all, the image of Uganda is so damaged that even if these airlines start operating, it will take us time to build trust in those airlines. 

As a way forward, I beg that we do everything possible to revive our national airline. (Applause) Ugandans were very proud to have Uganda Airlines. Uganda Airlines was vandalised and we saw people divide the spoils of our own airline. Now we are suffering the shame and we have to beg other airlines to carry our very important dignitaries as if we never had an airline. Uganda Airlines was the leading airline at that time. Rt Hon. Speaker, as we suffer this shame- (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Chief Whip, for giving way. The information I want to give is that while I was in Mwanza, the flight from Mwanza to Dar es Salaam cost TzShs 50,000, which is about UgShs 100,000, and the distance is over one hour and yet a flight from Kampala to Nairobi takes 45 minutes and is about US$ 600. You can relate those two. That is the information I wanted to give. That is how Uganda looks like now.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you. Rt Hon. Speaker, there is one issue, which I did not want to raise, but maybe it is important that we know. You are aware that Uganda is very active in stabilising the East and Central region; we have a mission to carry out in Somalia and South Sudan. Right now, because of these airlines being shut down, we have to engage other foreign airlines to carry some of our very important persons in ensuring that peace and security is maintained in the region. Now we have to depend on foreign airlines. 

This is a very dangerous engagement and it is important that as Ugandans, we begin to look at the security of our country and the strategic position that Uganda occupies in East and Central Africa. We have to build on the confidence of Uganda Airlines and the trust that the people of the continent of Africa have given us in stabilising the region. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope that we shall have a statement from the Government. Incidentally, I am one of those who patronise Air Uganda because it has the Crested Crane. When I am travelling within the region, that is the plane I use because it has a Crested Crane and I am proud to use it.

3.13
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO IN CHARGE OF POLITICAL MOBILISATION (Mr Richard Todwong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We thank the Member who has raised this issue. I promise the House that the minister in charge of transport will come out with an official statement on Tuesday next week. I thank you.

3.14
MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. The issue raised is a very pertinent one. However, Air Uganda is a private company and according to the International Civil Aviation Organisation rules, once an airline does not meet international standards, it cannot be allowed to fly regardless of what status it is. 

I am a founder of Uganda Airlines. In 1977 when the East African Community collapsed, Gen. Idi Amin had bought two Boeing 707s, four Fokker Friendships and two King Airs. By the time Idi Amin left, we had a fleet of 12 aircraft. Each time an aircraft goes to a hangar – that is a garage where they check the aircraft - the fitness of that aircraft must be declared. It is not a matter of just coming and saying that the airline should be allowed to fly; it must meet international standards. (Applause) So, even if it is a Government corporation like Uganda Airlines – Those of you who remember the crash we had in Rome - that aircraft was supposed to go for a hangar check so that they can ascertain the fitness of that aircraft. So, it is not a matter of saying that it is a corporation for Uganda so let it fly whether it is fit or not.

Madam Speaker, what we can only request the Government to do is to come and tell us when we shall revive our airline as the national airline. (Applause) I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank up. Honourable members, when I fly Air Uganda it is not because it is the national airline; it is the nostalgia of having something Ugandan. That is why I fly it.

3.16
THE MINISTER FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Hillary Onek): I thank you. I would like to thank hon. Nsubuga for the correct explanation that he has given. 

I was a founding member of the Board of Directors of Civil Aviation in 1992. There are regulations and fitness measures required of airlines, and if some of these are not met, definitely, as you have stated, the airline can be stopped. They would be advised to correct those weaknesses before going back to fly. I believe that if Air Uganda is honest, they should not start using our MPs to kind of propagate for them – (Interjections) - other than the technical solution to their weaknesses. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Order.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Rt Hon. Speaker, the statement that I made here is general. I know that all the airlines, probably including Air Uganda that the minister is talking about, have been grounded. I am concerned about the civil aviation services to the people of Uganda and I have told you how Ugandans are suffering because of the shutdown of those air operations. 

Is the hon. Minister in order to imply or insinuate that I, in my capacity as Cecilia Atim Ogwal Barbara, and moreover whipping the Opposition, would stoop so low to be used by foreigners? Is the minister in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he is out of order. Air Uganda operates in Uganda, employs Ugandans, and Ugandans use it to travel. So, let us ask the minister to tell us what is happening. If we are going to bury it, let us know so that we must now budget higher to support Kenya Airways. I think that is what we want to hear. Thank you very much –(Interjection)– Yes, they do. The flights that have been cancelled generally are the Ugandan ones anyway. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.19
THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Questions were raised concerning the fate of our citizens who were condemned to death and executed in China. We have the duty to explain the alleged non-implementation of the transfer of convicted offenders to this House.

Madam Speaker, the Transfer of Convicted Offenders Act No. 2 of 2012 was operationalised by Statutory Instrument No. 8 of 2013.  We have been engaging the Ministry of Foreign Affairs –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please hold on. I want to introduce these children; they are from Ibanda County South from Greater Primary School. They are represented in the House by hon. Byabagambi and hon. Kiboijana. You are welcome. They are here. Proceed, hon. Minister.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: We have been engaging the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Internal Affairs to try and have some of those prisoners who applied to serve their sentences in Uganda to be transferred, especially those convicted in Hong Kong and Mauritius.

The Transfer of Convicted Offenders Act provides for transfer of prisoners between Uganda and other Commonwealth Countries. However, the Minister is empowered to extend its application to other jurisdictions. Such other jurisdictions, however, must have a similar law to handle such transfers. We found out that Hong Kong has such legislation in place and therefore transfer is possible for those who apply; the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was so advised. It should be noted, however, that with China mainland, we do not have that kind of legislation.

Madam Speaker, we have initiated talks with the People’s Republic of China to have our prisoners who are convicted in China exchanged with us, but the agreements are not yet done. However, it should be noted that the Act applies to those prisoners serving their sentences of imprisonment and does not cater for those condemned to death or life. I beg to report, Madam Speaker
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you may want to look at the situation of some students from India which was reported here yesterday. They have been convicted to two years imprisonment and yet they have finished their degrees. I am told that some of them have got the best results but they cannot leave the country and so, you may want to take an interest in India.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Rt Hon Speaker. When the Minister talks of Uganda having an agreement with Hong Kong, which is part of China, can you tell us exactly when that agreement was signed on the exchange of prisoners?

Secondly, when you tell us that the Government is negotiating with the Republic of China, when did they start the negotiations for exchange of prisoners? By the way, the minister used to be a Foreign Service officer and he served in China and I had the opportunity of serving in China too. During those years, there was no Ugandan that was hanged. We negotiated and Ugandans were repatriated. 

I have always stood on the Floor of this Parliament and raised issues on what is happening in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in missions abroad; we do not have people who can negotiate. The missions have been run down. Government would have taken this issue up and made sure there are negotiations going on with the People’s Republic of China and see that some of these offenders are repatriated to Uganda. This is quite important. 

Honourable minister, when you come and just state that there are negotiations or agreements with Hong Kong – when was this agreement signed between Uganda and Hong Kong? When did the negotiations between Uganda and China start?

3.25
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister sounded like he was throwing his arms in the air as if nothing can be done. I believe that if your Government, of which the Chinese Government is a beneficiary particularly in investments and bilateral relationships, had done something more, you would have negotiated for those who were condemned. However, it looks like you have given up. 

A direct question, which I would like to put to him, is whether those who have been tried and condemned really got a fair hearing, especially in languages they could understand. We are informed that it is very likely that they even did not have legal representation or understand what was spelt out to them in Chinese. Could we get the details on how the court process took place and what intervention this Government made in order for these people to get a fair hearing?

3.26
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to pose a question to the minister. It is in the Hansard that Government at one time was requested to table all agreements they have made as far as transfer of convicted offenders is concerned. Can the minister avail us with those agreements so that we can know how far they have gone and which countries they have engaged?

Secondly, the minister has told us that there is no law that would help our Government to negotiate with mainland China. This is an avenue that we can slot in; diplomatic means can be used to negotiate with China. I want to assume that this Government has good relations with China and that is why their companies are operating here; would the minister exploit this opportunity? The absence of law offers an opportunity for diplomatic negotiations. So, can we use this opportunity of the absence of a law in China to use our diplomatic means to negotiate for the return of these people?

3.27
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the statement he made. It was very painful to see that Ugandans were executed for whatever reason. This Government or this Parliament should at an appropriate time pronounce itself over that. I want to find out whether these people were entitled to legal representation since they went up to the last court in China? What kind of legal representation were they entitled to? 

Secondly, every year, China executes 10,000 people. If you watch on National Geographic, the manner of execution is such that they put a bag over your neck, you kneel down and then they shoot you in the head from behind. My question is: can we have the actual bodies of these Ugandans brought back? This thing of sending ashes after cremating the bodies is un-African and un-Ugandan. So is there any initiative – (Interruption)

MS BAKO: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I want to give this House is that there is big trade in China – actually, China leads the world - in human organs. One of the reasons they quickly execute you by firing your head is because they need to preserve your internal organs so that the organs can be sold. So we should seriously look into that. If we cannot get the bodies and they only send us ashes, how sure are we that there is no wrong influence for one to be executed so that one’s organs can be traded? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you should not make such wild allegations unless you can really substantiate them. Let us ask the Government to find out but do not continue making allegations. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, in the absence of any legislation, can we negotiate that in future if any Ugandan is executed – Of course, I am naturally against the death penalty because someone who dies learns nothing, unless you are deterring those who remain alive. Can we have an agreement urgently between the Government of Uganda and China so that if they execute anyone their bodies are brought back?

3.30
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for that statement although in my opinion he has briefed the country very late. I have six of my constituents in Chinese prisons. I therefore want to know if the minister knows the exact number of Ugandans in Chinese prisons. 

I would also like to know if those Ugandans facing death benefited from the provisions of Article 28(3) (e) of our Constitution, which makes it mandatory for people facing death sentence to have representation at the expense of the state. I want to know if this right is also extended to Ugandans charged outside Uganda like in this particular case. 

3.32
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Recently, we were part of a delegation which you sent to China - we were 20 Members of Parliament. We asked the Ambassador that question and he said that he had done some work on those who are in prison so that they are not executed. However, he was told that they refused his plea because our laws do not rhyme with theirs. Our punishments on drug abuse are relaxed so they cannot work with us. My question to the honourable minister is: did you make any efforts? It seemed like they would listen, according to the Ambassador. However, has Government made any efforts up to now? 

The other side of the coin is: what would happen if a Chinese here made the same mistake or even a graver mistake? Let him tell us what would happen. We know the other ones are big brothers and I know what would happen, but honourable minister, tell us what would happen in this situation.

3.33
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi Conuty, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, I would like to ask a few questions. 

First, honourable members, you know that there are over 2000 Ugandans in the USA jails. This is according to the New Vision newspaper of January, 13th 2014. You are also aware that there are Ugandans in prisons in South Sudan. At least I have physically visited some of them and I saw them. 

We are concerned about the judgement that saw the execution of our brothers in China, and may their souls rest in eternal peace. However, are we waiting to be alarmed again by another execution of Ugandans say, in the USA jails? I am saying this because the death penalty is still embedded in the practice and Constitution of the USA. How about if you read in the newspapers and from other sources that the said 2000 Ugandans reported to be in the USA jails and those in other countries have been executed, what are you going to do? Can you give us a list of all Ugandans in jails abroad? Thank you.

3.35
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, we must take cognisance that China is a sovereign country. When you go to China and their laws say that a person who gets convicted for trafficking has to be executed, we have nothing we can do about China as far as implementing their laws is concerned. The best one can do is not to take those drugs – (Interjections) – period! Do not take drugs; that is immunisation number one.

MS OSEGE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. There are two issues upon which I seek clarification from the honourable minister. One is that it is not the first time that Ugandan laws are said to be weak. No wonder, Uganda is now a hub for drug traffickers. It is an easy transit route for all drug traffickers. So, I am wondering what the ministry is doing in regard to strengthening these laws. I am saying this because this is not coming up for the first time.

Two, the minister has just said that they are negotiating but at the same time he is saying that there is nothing they can do about it. Are you out of all the diplomatic options? Can’t we even ask for those people to be repatriated and be banned from going back to China? It is not very helpful for us as a Government to give up on our citizens like that – (Interruptions)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you so much for giving way. Let me provide some information to the House. Mr Minister, some countries have negotiated for their citizens – (Interjections) – I do not have to mention them; let me leave that to you. There are many countries that have negotiated and had their people released under the same law. Why can’t Uganda too negotiate? Many countries have negotiated for their citizens arrested with drugs in China and those people have been released; how about Ugandans?

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, I thought I had stood up to explain; I did not know I would be engaged in a debate. I said that the first immunisation against execution is the observance of the Chinese laws. Please, observe the laws and do not blame the Uganda Government.

When one is condemned by a Chinese court, the issue as to whether you have been represented legally or not legally is not based on the Ugandan Government; we have got to explore whether our legal representation is adequate in China. Also, you need to understand that that mandate is not in my docket; it falls under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. I only liaise with that ministry about the status of our Ugandans who are in the Chinese prisons and we are represented by our embassies –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, I beg for your protection from this former diplomat who is undiplomatic this afternoon. (Laughter) He was actually my successor in China.

We have agreements with Hong Kong because this country used to be a Commonwealth country before it reverted to China. Those covenants have been inherited by the People’s Republic of China and Hong Kong enjoys that special immunity. That is why we have agreements with Mauritius, India and so forth – the former communist countries.

We are now trying to negotiate with China – reciprocity - so that their prisoners can serve their sentences from their home country and our prisoners in China can also serve their sentences here. However, until we achieve that stage of having a reciprocal agreement, there is very little that we can do.  We must respect the sovereignty of China as of now. As to whether bodies are cremated or not, that is within the powers of the Sovereign Republic of China –(Interjections)– We have no agreement for repatriation of bodies.

Finally, like you said, our role concerning drug abuse is not weak but inadequate. However, I want to inform you that we shall be coming up with a law to strengthen the protection of our people against drug abuse. As I said, that is within the sovereign right of Uganda; outside the sovereignty of Uganda, we have no control –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, I seek for your protection.

There was a question on what has happened to Chinese who transgress our laws here. I want to state that the Chinese nationals who transgress our laws here will be handled according to the laws of Uganda. If there is a death penalty for drug trafficking, we shall execute them. If it is about locking them up, we will lock them up. In other words, they will face the laws of Uganda, though that is not in the ambit of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs but that of courts of law. I cannot instruct the courts to stop sentencing them to hanging or not. They will be handled according to what the Ugandan laws dictate.

I have heard the arguments that we could have pleaded. I want to state that whether you are a Ugandan or Chinese or anybody else, if you are convicted of crimes that carry death sentences in China, they will hang you; they even hang their own people. So, if they can hang their own people for drug related crimes, how about foreigners from Mukono? They hang their own! 

Honourable members, it would make a difference if there was discrimination; if there were any discriminatory practices, then we would have had an entry point, but they even hang their own. All we can do is to maybe plead for clemency but that also depends on the will of the sovereign state. Now do not hang me for –(Interjections)– We have tried our level best. So, don’t hang me for the decisions of a foreign sovereignty.

Finally, Madam Speaker our –(Ms Nalubega rose)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we have two other statements, please conclude. 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for protecting me. 

As for the Ugandans convicted in the US, this is the first time information is coming to us. We are going to request our embassy to draw up a list of all Ugandans who may be incarcerated in China and then see how we can interface with the Chinese Government through diplomatic channels and see whether we could do a similar arrangement of exchange of prisoners. I thank you Madam Speaker.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and colleagues, yesterday I promised that I would come back to this House to tell you the story about capitation grants in a form of a statement. (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I put on my best suit and necktie to come and transact business on behalf of the people of Aruu and not to hear stories from people who are gifted in storytelling. Is it in order for the minister to address this House and the chair in such a casual manner, telling stories as if he is representing the Teletubbies in this House? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think he is going to narrate the sequence of events and it may be a story.

MR KASAIJA: Thank for that ruling, Madam Speaker. Now I will read the statement. 

During the debate in Parliament on Tuesday, 16th July, honourable Members of Parliament raised concern about the failure of Government to disperse capitation grants under UPE for the second term of academic year 2014. In addition, concern was raised on the per capita funding for a UPE pupil, which was reported to have declined from Shs 7,560 to Shs 5,516 per year. I would like to, therefore, present an explanation, citing the reforms undertaken by Government to improve the timeliness of the disbursements to schools, including the need to confirm actual enrolment numbers in schools.

Prior to the Financial Year 2012/13, disbursement of the school capitation grants was made through the local government general accounts on a quarterly basis. This modality had been deemed appropriate at the time, to ensure the CAOs at the local governments retained adequate control over the use of the funds. However, it was established that this modality caused unnecessary and unprecedented delay of payments from the general accounts to the end user, that is, the school. In some instances, the delays would exceed two calendar months.

To address the above constraints, starting Financial Year 2012/13, Government piloted the Straight-through Processing (STP) mode of disbursement. Under this, funds would be directly transferred to the school accounts from Bank of Uganda. In FY 2013/14, the STP modality was fully implemented for the school capitation grants starting in July 2013.

In the initial year, 2013/14, the capitation grants to institutions were released in four tranches on a quarterly basis. This payment mode reduced the actual lead times from over 60 days to less than 15 days. However, there were concerns that the funds released on a quarterly tranche system would be received at the schools later than required due to the misalignment of the school calendar and the budget implementation cycle. 

It was therefore deemed necessary to realign the quarterly tranches with the school calendar, to take into consideration the three termly requirements of the schools. Accordingly, the four quarterly tranches were adjusted to three annual tranches as indicated in the table below. I do not need to go through it; I am sure Members have this on their iPads.

While the above reforms were being implemented, our attention was drawn by the education sector stakeholders under Uganda National Teachers Union to the fact that the termly provisions were received by schools midterm and this was negatively affecting the school expenditure patterns. The July release, for instance, would be received by the schools in the course of the second term.

The above concern formed the basis of the directive by His Excellency the President to ensure that the funds to schools were received by the schools 15 days before the opening of the school term. Under this arrangement, which took effect in August 2013, the releases for FY 2013/2014 were effected as shown in the table below –(Interjections)– It is table No.2 and I am assuming that you have all got it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is on your iPads; use your iPads.

MR KASAIJA: As shown in table No.2 above, the preterm releases were made starting in August 2013 and in January 2014 for the capitation requirements of third term 2013 and first term 2014 respectively. In so doing, the annual provisions of Shs 189.34 billion for the capitation grants were exhausted by end of March 2014. It should be noted that during the budget execution of FY 2013/2014, there was need to release funds 15 days before the term begins and this required pre-financing of capitation grants to schools. This request came forth in August 2013 when the first tranche of capitation grants (column d of our table) had been released.

Given the need to ensure that the second term of 2014 was not disrupted by the non-availability of funds, there was need to consider providing such sums as would be necessary to cover the costs of the second term through supplementary appropriation. Whereas the termly capitation required the provision of a sum of Shs 62.12 billion based on the annual provision, consideration was to be made for the month of May and June 2014, which fell within the FY 2013/14 while the month of July 2014 would be covered by the appropriation of the FY 2014/2014. The budget requirement for the two months of second term of 2014 was included in the supplementary request as indicated in table No. 3 below. 

The supplementary requirement for the above funds, that is, Shs 42,080,224,696, was submitted for consideration and approval by this honourable House under Supplementary Schedule No. 2 for Financial Year 2013/2014. However, this request was not approved by this august House. The implication has been that schools have had to operate in the second term to date without funds, given that the annual provision of Financial Year 2013/2014 had been exhausted.

Madam Speaker and Members, our attention has also been drawn to the possible discrepancy in reported enrolment numbers from the exercises conducted by the Ministry of Education and Sports to the effect that-
(a) 	There were reported establishments/schools, which were not in existence. 
(b) 	The reported enrolment numbers, that is, the pupils, were exaggerated, suggesting that there were non-existent or as we commonly call them, “ghost” pupils within the official statistics. 
(c) 	Arising from (a) and (b) above, Government continues to suffer possible nugatory expenses and misallocation of resources as I said the other day.

In response to the above stakeholder concerns, my ministry requested all local government accounting officers to submit authenticated and detailed enrolment data on students/pupils for all grant aided institutions for validation. This exercise, which started in March 2014, was undertaken in order to address significant challenges in the education and sports sector regarding adequacy, completeness and accuracy of sector level statistics, which inform the indicative planning figures.

The preliminary results from data received from 116 local governments and Kampala City Council Authority by the 1st of July this month showed that enrolled UPE pupils were 5,734,937, which was less than the 6,031,777 pupils reported in the Ministry of Education statistics. This represents a variation of 296,840 unaccounted for pupils in the 115 local governments.

Regarding the number of UPE schools, the local governments and KCCA reported a total of 10,563 UPE schools against the figure of the Ministry of Education reported as 10,595 schools. This implies that there could be 32 unaccounted for schools in the Ministry of Education and Sports statistics.

Members are all called upon to consider that the per capita or per pupil allocation is dependent on the reported enrolment. Therefore, the above discrepancy in the data has the effect of lowering the nominal per capita allocation in case the enrolment is exaggerated, or increasing the nominal per capita allocation if the enrolment is lower than reported. This is largely statistical and cannot be taken to be representative of Government action to deliberately reduce the per capita allocations.

The above discrepancy has been a source of concern and also suggests possible validation of earlier stakeholder allegations, which warranted my ministry and the Ministry of Education and Sports to undertake a series of inter-ministerial consultations on this matter. Accordingly, in addition to official correspondence between the two ministries, the results of the above exercise were discussed in an inter-ministerial dialogue convened on the 15th of this month. During the meeting, agreement was reached that the quarter one tranche of capitation releases would be based on the data submitted by the local governments by Friday 18 July 2014, which is tomorrow.

I would like, therefore, to assure this House that the funds for capitation grants will be released immediately the Ministry of Education and Sports submits the allocation by school and by local government to aid the funded transfer process. The shortfall for the months of May and June 2014, of Shs 42 billion, which had been included in the Supplementary Schedule No. 2, is to be incorporated in the corrigenda for approval by this Parliament as part of the budget approval process for Financial Year 2014/2015.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker and colleagues, I wish to affirm that Government has taken all possible measures to ensure that school capitation funds are received by the intended beneficiaries in time to ensure that service delivery is not unduly constrained. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us just have comments for ten minutes. Hon. Fungaroo, you had an opportunity on the other statements. We need to share these opportunities. 

3.12
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Minister of Finance, but his statement contains a very high degree of dishonesty. For the minister to stand here and say that because Parliament did not approve supplementary schedules capitation grants were not sent, is a total lie.

Madam Speaker, I am a member of the budget committee. All the supplementary schedules, 1 and 2, that were brought before us were considered. We questioned the minister and he said yes, he was coming to make a request, but all these monies have been released to the spending agencies. What we need is just to legalise the process. 

It is therefore a total lie for the minister to come here on the Floor and say that it is because Parliament did not approve. By the time the minister came here, all the money had been approved and released to the spending agencies. So, is the minister in order to come on this Floor and lie that Parliament did not approve. Is the minister in order-

THE SPEAKER: Were you submitting or raising a point of order?

MR EKANYA: No, I was submitting.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, when we come here, we come to transact serious business for this nation. If what I read in the statement is not a story, I do not know what it is, but I do not want to go there. Hon. Ekanya particularly should know the process. If a year comes to an end – (Interjections) - I am getting to the point of order. If there is money that is required but has not been budgeted for, there is no way Government can leave that money when it has not been appropriated. 

In this particular case, we came here and requested for this supplementary because this money was being – Actually, now this money has been shifted from last financial year to this financial year. So, is the honourable member in order to accuse me of a lie when he knows the facts about this matter very well?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I want to know whether the minister is saying that when we approved the budget last year we did not appropriate the capitation grants. Is it what you are saying?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, what I am saying is that appropriation for grants was done for the whole year but because of changes of payments, there was an overflow – (Interjections) - Yes, the figures –(Interjections)– can I be protected? 

THE SPEAKER: Order, members! Honourable minister, if we appropriated, what happened to the money that we appropriated? 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I wish to refer to my statement. There was change. Before, we were releasing money in four tranches and then a problem came up because the tranches were not matching with the terms. We then changed the terms and decided that money will now be released in accordance with the school terms. School terms do no coincide with our financial years, and you know that very well. So, in order to release money for the first –(Interruption) 

MR BIREKERAAWO: Thank you so much. I am sorry to raise this point of order against my namesake. Yesterday, when the minister was asked this very question, hon. Matia Kasaija said that the money was there but they did not want to send money into a ditch and that they were still investigating. So, is the minister now in order to come and change his statement? 

Yesterday he said that they were investigating and they did not want to send the money into a ditch and now he is changing. Is he in order?  He is telling lies because yesterday you said you are investigating so that you can send money when the situation is normal. Are you in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what this House wants to know is what happened to the money we budgeted for and appropriated? That is what we want to know.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker and colleagues, I have not changed my story; I have not changed my statement, my namesake. The problem is being caused by two things; can I be marked correctly, please. The first one is the changing of the manner or the frequency in which the money is released to schools. Originally, it was four times and now it is three times. That is the first.

Two, in my statement, I have clearly shown that there are schools that do not exist but came in the statistics. In my statement, I have shown that there are a number of students – statistics - that came and when we verified, what we got from the local government and what we got from the Ministry of Education, they did not match. That is what I said yesterday, and I said that we did not want to send money and send it to the wrong party. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. The Speaker raised a very good issue. However, before I can raise the point of order, I want to say that it is the first time that I have seen the Minister for Finance trying to con Ugandans.  

In table No. 2, he says that the first release was in July 2013 and this meant that between March of 2013 and June, they had released; so, the only money that was needed was half, to cover the period up to the end of second term. Now, what they did in July is that they released Shs 16 billion and in August, again Shs 16 billion and then in January Shs 16 billion. What does that imply? It implies that the money which was meant for the other half of the term in 2013 between March and June, the Ministry of Finance “ate” the money - (Laughter)- Yes, because if it had been released in these quarterly tranches, that money could have covered that period and he would only release a portion to cover the remaining part of the term. This means that for this quarter that we are talking about – from April to June - we would have no problem; as simple as that.

So, Madam Speaker, is the Minister for Finance in order to come and tell us that when the system changed and the money which was meant for the other period could not be seen, increased to this tranche - Is he in order to come and lie to Parliament that the change of the system is the reason as to why he is bringing a supplementary for money already budgeted for up to the end of June 2014? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Actually, let me ask the former chairperson of the budget committee to come in before we continue. 

MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you. When we look at paragraph 15 of the minister’s statement, it talks about the statistics and pupils being 5.7 million as compared to the statistics of six million. When we budgeted, we budgeted for six million and so we had enough money. Now, I really fail to understand where all these shortages are coming from. The other thing is that money is released quarterly and the last quarter was released on time. So, what is the problem? 

MS ANITE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the honourable minister started making his presentation, he told the House that he was going to narrate a story. Truly, it was a story with a nice rhyme in it. I first want to use his own words - that the capitation grant should be received immediately. So, I want to understand how immediately is immediate as you said in your presentation? 

Madam Speaker, I want to tell you the truth that as we speak, teachers are not teaching because they do not have money to buy chalk. So, how immediate is your immediate? Can you give us timelines? Can you tell us that the money will be released on this date and you do release it as opposed to the story? I am even disappointed that as I am presenting, he is doing something else.

4.12
MRS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also do not agree with the explanation that the Minister is giving and I have two reasons for that. He told us that money was not sent to schools because the schools were exaggerated. In every district of Uganda, we have district education officers and inspectors of school who submit their reports on a monthly basis to the ministry. How come the ministry is telling us that it knows that the numbers of schools were exaggerated? That is very wrong, according to me. Why do they tell us that money for the districts was delayed because the number of pupils was exaggerated –(Interruption) 

MR BESISIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank my honourable colleague for giving way. It is evident we appropriated money for UPE and the capitation grants, and table No. 2 shows this. Table No.2 shows that the budget approved for UPE was Shs 49,683,789,000 and all of it was released - 100 per cent – with all the other capitation grants. So, where is the Shs 42 billion shortfall coming from? This shows a 100 per cent release. Whether it was released in three or ten instalments, it is still what was budgeted for in that year and all the money was released. So, where did the money go?

MS NANTUME: Madam Speaker, I want to give some information here. In my constituency in Buvuma, teachers are no longer teaching because the requirements are not there. They cannot buy chalk or any of the things they have to purchase. What do we do? We have become liars to our constituents; we tell them money was released, but they do not see the money. Madam Speaker, we seek you help and we need a genuine explanation from the minister. 

4.15
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity. This situation is very interesting; that is why the senior minister is sitting and the deputy is suffering with the problems –(Laughter)

Secondly, I want to make it clear to you, Madam Speaker and colleagues, that whenever this money does not reach the schools at the right time, it becomes useless. Let me repeat this statement: whenever school capitation grants are not sent in time, that money does not serve the purpose. That is a head teacher gets that money, they budget for chalk – a P.7 teacher is given two pieces of chalk and he teaches until it is finished – and once the money comes, the headmaster takes the money and goes scot-free because there is no accountability. 

These people are very good liars; all schools in Uganda in this period received Shs 100,000. If they talk about fraudulent head teachers, they are lying because they have sent Shs 100,000 to each and every school. What mechanism did you use to send this money? 

Out of the whole statement, there is only one genuine statement you have told us, and that is bullet No.20, where you say, “in case you get the money”. Madam Speaker, this is not new. I came to this House in 2011 and we have had these problems for a long time. Hon. Lyomoki was our chairperson and also Madam Sylvia Namabidde; they are here and they can tell you. We have had these problems of delayed capitation grants since we came and it is still continuing. 

What I want to put across is that there is no school in Uganda without registers. What is the purpose of a register - to note the number of children who have come to school and when you tally them, you can know the figures so that the headmaster can report. That is also put on the notice board. Today, many UPE school accounts are being closed. Why? It is because they are running current accounts and there is no other source of money they can use to put money on these accounts. Once an account is dormant for three months, the bank rightly closes it. 

You talked about ghost schools. The investigations on ghost schools were done by the current Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Education. They took over Shs 5 billion together with the Director of St Lawrence to search for ghost teachers. Where is that report? 

Finally, I saw in Busoga that head teachers are charging Shs 200 per child for chalk. So honourable minister, go and find other people to tell that the strongest man in Singapore is called Badang, but do not say that to this House. Find others you can mislead, not this Parliament. 

4.19
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. There are two things we should appreciate. One is that we are in a democracy and being in a democracy means you should listen to the people’s voice. Unfortunately, the democracy in Uganda looks like what we call technocracy; this is where the technocrats make decisions for government and then government goes full swing to change policies and sometimes even suggest laws. That is where we get it wrong. 

If I was a lady taking care of my children, I would prefer to have four meals in a day - breakfast, lunch, lupper and dinner. So, if I miss lupper, the meals at lunch would take me up to dinner. This is where this country went wrong; they changed disbursement from the quarter system to the term system. I made noise when that change was made because I have 120 primary schools in my constituency and 79 of them are actually UPE schools. When I go to these schools, the first thing the headmasters tell me is that this change in disbursement period is affecting them negatively. If there is any slight delay in the term disbursement, even by one month, it affects their planning. So, whoever misled the Ministry of Finance to change from the quarterly to the term disbursement did us a very big disfavour. 

It does not stop only with UPE; it goes even to USE schools. It is even worse where government is in partnership with private schools –(Member timed out_)

4.21
MR JOHNY SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the Shadow Minister for Education, I want to say the statement of the honourable minister is quite lacking. 

First, the headcount exercise which is conducted in institutions is carried out by the DISOs who are under direct supervision of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, particularly the RDC. They go moving from one school to another, conducting headcounts. Also, they are immediately supervised by the District Education Officers. The question therefore is: where do the ghost statistics come from? Schools do not submit their returns directly to the Ministry of Education; they submit to the DEOs, who verify them with the DISO and the RDC before they can submit them to the ministry. So who is behind creating ghosts in the Ministry of Education?

Secondly, where did the 32 ghost schools come from? The returns are from the districts, which are in a school by school format. So, where did the 32 ghost school come about? 

Lastly, in the previous financial year, much as there was release of 100 per cent of grants, institutions were paid only 87 per cent in the three quarterly releases of the previous financial year. Where did the 13 per cent go to the extent that up to now the schools are still demanding for the three quarterly releases of the last financial year which you have never paid up to now? When they go to the Ministry of Education, they say the problem is with the Ministry of Finance. When they come to Finance – (Member timed out_)

4.23
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a very important matter that has been raised by the august House. I beg to defer this matter until Tuesday when we return with our colleagues from the Ministry of Education to give complete clarification on all these points as we have written them down. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

MR MULIMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas I concur with the Minister of Finance that this matter needs to be given a second touch, we should also be looking at the time. Like they have all agreed, this is a very critical matter. First of all, it is very shaming that we are in this kind of situation, having budgeted fully with all the money being availed but also having these shortfalls. It is extremely shaming especially when it is happening with the people that belong to this side - the NRM.

However, I want to pray that whereas we agree that it goes for a second touch, let us given it a timeline so that we will have a specific time when they should come back. Let the minister herself give that time when she will come back to report on and conclude this matter. I thank you.

MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has read a report that is fairly detailed. So, I suggest that this report be sent to the Committee on Finance to deal with it and report back in a day.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Looking at the way forward and given the importance of this matter but also looking at the discrepancies in the figures presented by the ministry, I would like to propose that we set up a select committee to investigate this matter thoroughly.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think when the hon. Minister Matia Kasaija started by telling us some kind of story, it created some situation where it seemed that we would not conclude the story. So, I would like to propose that since we have Friday, Saturday, Sunday and Monday, we come back here with a full story that will answer every question. Thank you.

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to give a way forward as a teacher because I know how painful it is for a teacher to be with that situation. Madam Speaker, we have had hon. Matia Kasaija around four times without the senior minister, hon. Maria Kiwanuka. Now that she is here, let us give her the benefit of doubt by not allowing the setting up of a select committee but the ministry should handle the matter and report back on Tuesday.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There was a value-for-money audit carried out on UPE. One of the revelations is that most of us seated in this House don’t take our children to the UPE schools we care talking about. This means that we are actually creating a certain class of people in this country. Whereas we undermine the likes of people out there, what this means is that Government is not taking this matter seriously and I am of the considered opinion - honourable colleagues, I want to implore you that we give the hon. Minister of Finance chance. I am saying this because this is about the lives of people out there. We are creating human waste when our children are actually going to school.

Madam Speaker, I am of the considered opinion that we give the Minister of Finance until Tuesday next week – we are not politicking in this House. None of us, including the Minister of Education and that of Finance, take their children to these UPE schools. They take their children to private schools and leave the children of the public out there to suffer. I think we will be exemplifying the problem when we allow the Minister of Finance to play on our nerves by coming here with a fake statement and goes away with it.

When we dealt with the issue of salaries, the committee produced a report and we pronounced ourselves here. The statements of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister Henry Kajura were that people are thieves and that everybody is a thief. So, if we don’t properly handle this matter, I see us falling into the track of the Executive of going into a select committee and waste some four months while the children are not going to school. 

MS BETTY NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, a motion was moved by hon. Magyezi and seconded by many people including myself. To emphasize what hon. Paul Mwiru has said, people think that we are not doing enough to defend children under UPE because our children don’t go to those schools. So, I stand to support the motion by hon. Raphael Magyezi that a select committee be set up and be facilitated to do its work quickly because this matter - Madam Speaker, yesterday we were told different things and today the minister is saying other things. This shows there is a problem at the Ministry of Finance. I strongly support the motion as proposed by the hon. Raphael Magyezi.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is not a laughing matter; it is a very serious matter and we need to handle it very fast because it is only about two or three weeks to the end of the term and no learning has been taking place in our schools in this country. And I know that this is a very serious Parliament. The proposal by hon. Magyezi is the solution to this problem. I want to strongly support the motion. We can give this committee just one week for them to produce a report because I have already seen discrepancies in the presentations.

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, I am not supporting –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you are making so much noise, I do not know who is informing or who is doing what.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I do not want us to take things for granted. The money we are looking for which is missing between March 2013 and June is about Shs 60 billion. The numbers of schools involved are very few, they are 10,563. If you gave serious analysis that every day you are doing 3,000 schools and totalling the money they got from March 2013 until today, this work cannot take more than three days.

The Minister of Finance came with a report saying there are 10,563 schools and if she was serious, she would have said, “Busamaga Primary School got this; Kirongo Primary School got this” but they just brought a block of figures so that they can confuse the Members of Parliament. That is why I am giving my sister information that what she is saying that we put a select committee - and I am ready to chair it for five days only –(Laughter)– we shall produce a report here to tell you where the money is and I know why they fear me. So, the information I was giving is that we need- 

MS AKELLO: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for that information. Madam Speaker, that is the major reason I thought the proposal by hon. Magyezi would work out so that my very good friend hon. Kasaija would kindly withdraw the story he has produced here and then form a select committee and give them just one week. This is because according to the table that hon. Kasaija has presented here, the Ministry of Finance has already eaten Shs 32 billion. They must have already released this money and they are asking for more money from Parliament. They have Shs 32 billion unaccounted for. I have just seen it now. When we get the select committee, we will get the truth, Madam Speaker. 

4.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (FISHERIES) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank my colleagues who have contributed towards finding the solution to this problem. I stand to inform this august House that Government is very serious about the payments. And secondly if I may ask, who is Government? When hon. Mwiru who I supported when he supported the minister –(Interruption)

MS ABIA: This matter was raised two days ago. It was proven beyond doubt that Government never gave an explanation and that is why the Minister of Finance, ho. Matia Kasaija, decided to seek leave of Parliament for two days in order to come with a statement. Today, he has told this House an endless story. The attempt by the senior Minister, hon. Maria Kiwanuka, has not yielded any fruit. Our children are not learning; there is nothing like chalk in schools. Is the Minister of State for Fisheries in order to suggest that this is a serious Government when as a country we cannot get answers to questions that they should have answered months ago? Is she in order to continue feeding our children with immature fish as a donation, a total suggestion that it is a failed Government? (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: I am unable to rule on that point of order, please conclude.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I sit in Cabinet. I have children in schools that people have been mentioning. I have a child in Kisubi and what I wanted to share with you is that one day I was in Kisubi attending a parents meeting and the issue of non-payment of teachers for three months was raised and they said that since hon. Nankabirwa is one of them, she should help us talk to her colleagues so that our teachers are paid. 

My child is being taught by the teachers who had spent four months without getting salary. So, when you stand here and paint a picture as if some of us who are in Cabinet do not take our children to those schools is to miss a point.

I want to end by requesting that we support the minister who has requested to go back and present a harmonised report on Tuesday next week, taking into consideration what hon. Members have raised because a select committee will delay us. It will begin afresh and yet this matter is very important. Let us give the ministry a chance to present again on Tuesday and then from there we shall find a way forward.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the statement of the minister shows that all the funds we budgeted for were fully released, therefore, we are not satisfied with his explanation. In addition, he has gone on to discuss problems in KCCA, problems in the local governments, the numbers of students - I don’t think that a week is enough to answer all these questions. So, I want to propose that the minister comes back on Tuesday and if we are still not satisfied, then we will set up the committee because we want the money and we want the children to get their chalk. So, come back on Tuesday with real answers this time.

MRS KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the ministry we undertake to come back on Tuesday with our colleagues of Education with a clarification. We also ensure that the release is done by then. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON ISSUES IN THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND

4.43
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to clarify on the ongoing recruitment process for top management at NSSF, specifically the post of Managing Director, Deputy MD and Corporation Secretary. 

As the minister responsible for the fund, my mandate in this recruitment process derives from the NSSF Act Section 39(1), which states: “There shall be a managing director of the fund who shall be appointed by the minister for such period and on such terms and conditions as the minister may deem fit.”

Madam Speaker, Section 40 reads, “There shall be a deputy managing director appointed by the minister on such terms and conditions of service as the minister deems fit.” Section 41 clause (1) states, “The fund shall have a secretary who shall be appointed by the minister and the Board on such terms and conditions as the minister may determine.”

Madam Speaker, the minister responsible for the fund is therefore obliged to put in place the process and mechanism of recruitment with the consultation of stakeholders including the Board of Directors as per the Act. It therefore follows that recommendations and suggestions of the Board’s consultants in this particular case, PriceWater House Coopers are also advisory.

The NSSF Act authorises the minister to manage and control the process of recruitment and appointment of top management staff as detailed in the NSSF Act. My obligation as the minister responsible for the fund is to ensure a framework based on principles of good corporate governance and in recognition of NSSF’s roles as a financial power house and major repository of retirement savings in Uganda.

Accordingly, Madam Speaker, this process has been taking place competitively and in a transparent manner to ensure that the NSSF recruitment exercise benefits from the widest pool of financial talent, managerial capacity and proven experience within a fast moving and globally inter connected financial world.

Madam Speaker, I am consulting widely with relevant stakeholders up to the highest level and carrying out rigorous due diligence and the requisite integrity checks as required for top positions in financial institutions of this category. 

As you are aware, the recruitment process is in advanced stages and nearing completion. I will soon finalise a recruitment exercise in accordance with the NSSF Act. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to clarify on this matter. I beg to submit.

4.47
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I do not know whether I am mistaken but I remember this issue was raised by hon. Odonga Otto about the NSSF and also the recruitment modality as to how somebody acquired that top position. The position was not advertised and if it was advertised, people who qualified were not taken but some other people were taken. 

The House had resolved that a select committee should have been put in place. Madam Speaker, I remember you ruled that the minister should give us a report but in this report that she has given, she has not stated clearly what transpired. I do not know whether she could be given another opportune time to explain what happened, verbally. Who was recruited? Where and when was the interview? How did somebody qualify for this?

4.49
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to speak. The last time we discussed this matter, you guided that we were going to set up a select committee. That committee has not been set up but again, the minister has come to talk. I think the minister should take this statement to the select committee. The last time we discussed this matter, the Speaker was to set up a select committee and that decision was taken so we should be handling this matter in that way.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the allegations made by the Members, they touched on five or six different institutions and as I was working out the terms of reference, I found difficulty in where to stop. That is why I asked the minister to come and assist us so that we can determine the duration, the format and the scope of this inquiry; whether the 20 days they wanted are going to be sufficient. If she had given an answer that it will take a week, that would be fine but how long do we need? That is what I wanted to understand. Do we need a month or two months?

4.51
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. According to what the minister has said, it is not provided for the Board to appoint or to participate in the appointment of the MD or the chief executives at NSSF. I want the minister to tell us if she is really in charge and when did she know that there was no requirement for adverts and interviews. Hon. Minister, when did you know that - because the moment you put a public note that you are calling for people to apply, then people apply and interviews are conducted. They forwarded names to your office and they expected your action but if you are going to say we are now consulting - in this country we should avoid the issue of nepotism and this is killing the Ministry of Finance. I can say this without mincing my words.

There is a suspicion that you have avoided the transparently recruited or identified people and you are going to go for your own choice. How shall we know that you are consulting widely? Will you come here and inform us? So, we want you to tell us, when did you know that the Board has no power to recruit? Thank you.

4.52
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the minister for the statement given. I was here when Parliament resolved that we should hear from the minister and there were four issues raised. In the statement, I see only one. The issues raised included delays in appointing the three top most officers to sit at the NSSF, which she has talked about and said she is still consulting. The other issue was that Parliament pronounces itself about the NSSF acquiring shares at Umeme but the NSSF went ahead to procure shares in Umeme.

There was also an issue that three years ago, land was procured at Shs 750 million and after three years, it was sold at Shs 600 million. Parliament wanted the minister to explain why this land depreciated to this extent.

The last one was that there was illegal recruitment of the IGG’s daughter in NSSF. The minister should explain how they could illegally recruit a daughter of somebody who fights illegal recruitment. 

So, this statement that we have received today is talking about the recruitment and yet I expected the minister to come here to explain the critical issues as were raised by Parliament. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.54
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This matter was clearly concluded in the last sitting and the conclusion was that a select committee be formed. We expected that the honourable minister could go and raise these issues in that select committee. However, the minister has gone ahead to make a submission but in a shallow way. She is avoiding a lot of issues that we raised, like the issue of conniving with the chairperson of the board, Mr Kyayonka to do certain things and we raised it very clearly on the Floor of the House. So, I do not think that for the minister to come here and raise issues here which cannot be substantiated will be enough and this statement, to me, is diversionary. If we formed a committee, all these people will go to that committee and then we shall come back with a report which will be conclusive. 

So, Madam Speaker, the procedural question I am asking is, what will be the relevance of the minister coming to make this statement that is very shallow, as far as I know? What is its significance in terms of the select committee that is being formed?

THE SPEAKER: It was meant to inform us how much time we need for that select committee. You had asked for 20 days and so, I wanted the statement to give us an idea on how much time we need. Do we need a month or two months? Anyway, hon. Members, I will establish the committee and initially give it one month.
 
STATEMENT ON THE FLOODS THAT DEVASTATED KASESE DISTRICT

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tayebwa, if you could use five minutes.

4.56
MR ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am giving a statement on floods in Kasese District under Rule 45 of the Rules of Procedure. However, I would like to ask you, Madam Speaker - because during our tour, we took some pictures and we have them on slides - so that Parliament can understand what actually happened in Kasese during the floods. The technocrats are now putting up those slides. I will be very brief in 10 minutes.

In the week ending 7 July 2014, as Shadow Minister for Rehabilitation, Relief and Disaster Management, I led a delegation to Kasese District. The visit was intended to assess the level of damage caused by the recent floods, emergency response and recovery efforts undertaken by various stakeholders. We had that meeting in the Kasese Administration Hall.

On the 8th day of May, 2014 at around 10 a.m. Kasese District was hit by floods that led to the bursting of the banks of rivers Nyamwamba, Rwimi, Mubuku, Nyamugasani and Lhubiriha. This turned into a double tragedy in subsequent years following earlier floods that hit the district on the 1st day of May 2013. The delegation witnessed the aftermath effects of the floods and was saddened by the heart breaking narrations by district leaders and local residents. That is what actually happened to River Nyamwamba after the flooding.

Impact of the floods

The floods led to the loss of 13 lives; - eight lives were lost in the 2013 floods and five in the 2014 floods. Of the five, there was a 77-year-old Lucia Bwongerize, who passed on during the evacuation stampede at Kilembe Mines Hospital. She was due for discharge on the fateful flood morning of 8 May 2014. May her soul rest in eternal peace.
 
Madam Speaker, about 665 households were displaced in the sub-counties of Bulembia Division, Nyamwamba Division, Karusandara and Nyarumba. These currently reside with host families. Several properties were destroyed. For instance, the Kilembe Mines offices were partly washed away and volumetric records destroyed. Kanyaruboga Trading Centre was completely erased. Now surviving residents sell their merchandise on verandas of the remaining Kilembe Mines structures. 

A section of a recently constructed Shs 2.9 billion Kyanjukyi – Katiri tarmac road was washed away and replaced by boulder deposits making accessibility difficult. In fact, when you are going there, you have to stop at Kilembe Hospital as the vehicles cannot pass. You have to just walk and yet all that was a tarmac road that was recently done at Shs 2.9 billion but you can now see how it has been burdened by boulders.

Some Bulembia Primary School buildings were washed away and the remaining buildings, particularly the administration block, are occupational hazards, for their foundations were hanging in balance. As a result, the school population has reduced from over 700 pupils before the 2013 floods to 512 pupils after the 2014 floods. This is attributed to damaged roads hindering some pupils accessing the school, fear of reoccurrence of floods as well as relocation of Kilembe Mines staff whose children were schooling in the area. At the time of the visit, the school was in operation using the dilapidated structures and tents. You now see that the students are now in the tents that were provided by donors.

The floods have made residents vulnerable to hunger, poverty, tremor and desperation. The delegation was heartened by the timely support of Non-Governmental Organisations, private sector and donors who supplemented the slow and inefficient response of Government. For instance, in the week after the floods, the Office of the Prime Minister was only able to provide 400 empty plastic jerrycans and basins as compared to excavators and hundreds of litres of fuel, tarpaulin, blankets and medical kits mobilised by the private companies such as Hima Cement, Kibeti Hima as well as international partners like the Uganda Red Cross and UNICEF. 

On 14 May 2014, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, accompanied by some area Members of Parliament visited part of the affected areas and made some directives. I, too, recently led a delegation to some affected areas and established that they were yet to be implemented. 

Lastly, the recommendations; the Shs 2.9 billion should be availed to fund the post-disaster work plan and budget which was developed in the financial year 2013/14 and has not yet been considered by Cabinet. However, this afternoon I was sharing a meal with my colleague, the Minister of Disaster and he said that yesterday, after the Cabinet realised that the report was coming today – (Interjections) - you know it was supposed to be on Thursday; they appropriated that money and they will still come here and he will explain because I shared that with him. So, those saying “No,” I am speaking from my point of research. 

Madam Speaker, I would have loved to have the presidential directive to purchase D8 and D10 bulldozers to de-silt river Nyamwamba, installation of early warning systems and construction of a third wall as incorporated and funds be appropriated in the 2014/15 budget. When we were there we found out that what happens on those four rivers is that there is climatic change. The snow melts on top of Mt Rwenzori and the vegetation that used to protect that water is no longer there. So, when the snow melts, the rivers flood and over flow their banks. So at any time floods can occur. It is unfortunate to say that I believe at one time, even Kasese Town will be swept away.
 
So we are suggesting that some warning gadgets be installed on top of the mountain and the rivers so that people can know when it is going to flood and flee from the danger. 

With that, we would like Government to deal with natural and manmade disasters; the Natural Disaster Preparedness Fund and a Natural Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission should be established as provided for in the National Policy for Disaster Preparedness and Management and as per Article 249 of the Constitution respectively. 

However, I request you, Madam Speaker, to spare sometime and go there and see for yourself; that is how you can fully appreciate what is happening in Kasese. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think there is the Shadow Minister for Disaster – 

5.08
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): I was, but I am no longer; I am now the Shadow Minister for Gender. Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have now seen the disaster of Kasese and I am very sure that in August we are still going to receive a lot of rain. And tomorrow, we will hear of more disaster may be in the Eastern part of Uganda. I am disappointed that we have the human resource – for instance, in defence. Right now, they say the soldiers are going to take over the position of NAADS officers and when they do, our people will lose their jobs which they need. Why don’t we equip those soldiers to respond to disaster? Sometimes it is very frustrating because we cannot even predict the rain; I do not know what happened to the metrological department. And I do not know how far the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness is apart from giving those jerrycans and foodstuffs and blankets; how prepared are you to help our people? We need to prepare ourselves and use those soldiers who are not going for war since we are very peaceful and use them to help respond to disaster which we cannot predict. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.10
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): I want to thank the Shadow Minister for I do not know what – hon. Odo Tayebwa – (Interjections) – the one who presented was hon. Tayebwa. Madam Speaker, I want to inform this House that if we do not wake up early, the climate change effects are getting worse than this. This one is about Kasese, the other day it was Bududa, the other day it was somewhere in Ntungamo and another day it will be elsewhere. The bad thing is that we do not easily see or feel it; we can only see the effects. The Minister of Disaster might not be able to actually cover all the disaster because it hits this way and that way. What we need to do is to look at the mitigation measures and take care of climate change. This is affecting the whole globe and it is caused by the heavily industrialised countries which we cannot avoid. 

So, I request that we all come up - this is not for the government only and it is not only for the MPs; it is for everyone in Uganda to come up and do something on the effects of climate change before it takes us all. Thank you.

5.12
MS GRACE BYARUGABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to express my appreciation to the committee for the report and the recommendations therein. I am of the view that possibly, we need to study the settlement patterns in relation to the flow of the river. This incident has occurred several times and our people die every time this river overflows. 

I recommend that Government puts in money to transfer people from the valley and resettle them elsewhere so that they do not get these problems, which they are experiencing now.  

Two, instead of the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness coming with jerrycans when people have already died, I think that it would have been better for the ministry to invest in the planting of trees upstream but not to bring jerrycans when our people are dying; so that we can control the flow of the river. And, Madam Speaker, I will need an explanation from the ministry on the relevance of the jerrycans to the people dying after they have been displaced by the floods. I thought people would need shelter and other things –(Interruption)

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, hon. Grace Byarugaba, for giving way. When controlling a disaster, there are many measures and interventions that are put in place. Yes, we appreciate your point of planting trees but that is a long-term process but there are certain immediate interventions which must be handled in disaster preparedness like giving to the displaced people tarpaulins, jerrycans and where possible, food. So, I think we should appreciate that and encourage the minister to be on standby to process the long-term as well as the short-term interventions. Thank you. 

MS GRACE BYARUGABA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the immediate intervention but I would like to know, for example, since that time, has that ministry procured tree seedlings to prepare for the next eventuality? This is because we would expect the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness to work hand-in-hand with the relevant ministries. Otherwise, just coming up with jerrycans every other year is not helping this country. I thank you.

5.15
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to appreciate the committee for the report. Let me start from where the hon. Grace Byarugaba started. There is need for us to have an inter-ministerial coordination team instead of ministries working in isolation. The issue that she raised of planting trees is not within the mandate of the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness but because they work in isolation, we keep pushing all the demands to one ministry. I think we need to have a synergy on how we should manage or counter re-occurrences of disasters in our country.

Madam Speaker, the committee is proposing to procure excavators and bulldozers for de-silting River Nyamwamba –(Interjections)– yes, I am told it was a presidential directive but instead of just looking at the issues of River Nyamwamba, there is need to procure facilitation to the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness with such equipment. I recall that during the Bududa incident, there is a private person whose grader was hired and he has been forwarding bills to the Ministry of Defence and that of Works that his grader got stuck somewhere and so, he was filing a claim against Government. But if the Ministry of Disaster had been well-facilitated with such equipment, we would not be gambling with that bill. The contractor still claims that his grader that got stuck in Bududa. So, for us to equip the ministries and departments would be the wise way to go.

Finally, Madam Speaker, also when the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, you had given us a term of reference on the follow up on the national identity cards project. One of the key challenges that particular sub region is facing is the issue of flooding. Some areas were cut off and that meant the exercise would not move on smoothly; it was all because of the effects of the floods. We need to address that issue squarely to ensure our country is safe.

5.18
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the Shadow Minister for Disaster Preparedness for this initiative. Yes, climate change is a global issue but as a country, we need to be prepared because as they have said, it is not only in the area of floods. For example, I don’t know how the Minister of Disaster Preparedness is going to manage some of these issues because as we speak, there is draught everywhere especially in places where it never used to occur. So, I don’t know you are going to manage these situations in terms of supply of food stuff and water to the draught-stricken areas including Sheema, which never used to experience such problems. 

Like Members have said, as a country, there is need for the different sectors to work together. They talked about the mountain slopes being bare. So, what is the Ministry of Water and Environment doing in terms of planting trees to protect vegetation in those mountainous areas though there should also be an initiative to ensure we plant more trees to protect our environment.

Madam Speaker, in the pictures, I saw the hospital that was washed away. I imagine that as we talk there is no accommodation in that place. So, what is happening is as far as this hospital is concerned? Is it still the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness that should handle that or it is now in the docket of the Ministry of Health? Where are the patients now sleeping? Yes, the area was affected by the floods, how about the health of the people who were affected by this disaster?

5.20
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join my colleagues to thank the Shadow Minister for Rehabilitation, Relief and Disaster Management and his team and all the Members of Parliament who have visited Kasese District to assess the impact of this disaster.

Madam Speaker, you will realise that what happened on 8th May was the second disaster following the one that had taken place on 1 May 2013. So, this is the second time such a disaster is happening in this particular area – (Interjections) – yes, on 1 May 2013 when workers were celebrating the International Labour Day, they got surprised to realise that they now could not cross back home because of the floods. River Nyamwamba had flooded and cut the district into two parts. 

So, people who had come to Hima to celebrate the International Labour Day could not get back home. On that same fateful day, I and hon. Mbahimba were also trapped on this side of the river because there was no way a vehicle could cross and there was no way workers who had been at Hima Cement for the International Labour Day celebrations could cross to access the town. However, by God’s Grace, we later on overcame it.
But that was after people had lost lives especially those who had been admitted in the hospital and those in the houses that were swept away.

On 8 May 2014 is when the other unfortunate incident happened but which also claimed lives. Madam Speaker, many initiatives have taken place. For the first floods, I would like to recognise and thank hon. Musa Ecweru who camped in Kasese for almost a week trying his best but also had no resources. There was hon. Maj. Gen. Dr Oketa who participated in de-silting Kilembe Hospital. Like other Members have said, 42 units in which staff members used to stay were washed away. As we talk, they have nowhere to go for accommodation. Some of them had been using the structures of Kilembe Mines for accommodation – they had a housing estate which members of staff of the hospital have been using but the new investor is chasing away all tenants who do not belong to Hima Cement space. 

So, all the hospital staff who had been using the facilities of the Kilembe Mines apart from the units of the hospital   are being told to vacate those units. That tells us that there is a bigger problem in regard to the hospital staff accommodation; they might not be in position to give better care to the patients.

I do concur with the colleagues who are saying that we should plant more trees on the mountain top but also as we look at mechanisms of averting these floods, can we see government come in very fast.

5.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, I want to start by thanking my colleagues the shadow minister for highlighting the challenge that the people of Kasese are facing. My reply to this report is going to be restricted to specifically the interventions that we have so far undertaken. 

I beg that at an appropriate time like you had requested allow the ministry to come and give a comprehensive of all the areas that are afflicted by disasters particularly now that the ministry has come up with a hazard map for the entire country, and in that map we have captured all the areas which are likely to be affected by different types of emergencies.
But coming back specifically to this report the May 2013 emergency flood that happened in Kasese repeated itself again in 2014 and flooding the municipality of Kasese, causing destruction of houses, crops and facilities such as roads, power lines and forcing many people to temporally camp in one of the primary schools that Government was quick to set up.

The intervention that we did Madam Speaker was to immediately set up multi-sectoral intervention team, which was coordinated by the Office of the Prime Minister working with the Ministry of Education, working with the ministers of works, water, working with partners like UNICEF, partners like Care, Plan International, UNDP and our own Government auxiliary, the Uganda Red Cross.

I want to emphasise this, when my colleague the shadow was describing the Uganda Red Cross, he wanted to create an impression that the URC is an international donor. To the contrary the URC is established by an Act of Parliament of this august House. It is an auxiliary to this Government and anything that it does it does to supplement what Government of Uganda does.
I want to let this House know –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You know very well that anywhere Government has an interest in investment, an MP cannot be a board member and you are aware hon. Tashobya is chairman of Board of URC and the minister is telling that URC is an auxiliary. If you do not auxiliary look for a dictionary on your Ipad, it means that that is part of Government.

Is he in order to say URC belongs to Government?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think he said that it was established by an Act of Parliament passed by House in 1959.

MR ECWERU: What then happened on that particular issue, sometimes when the minister of disaster preparedness goes to mobilise for resources given the mandate even within and outside our budget, organisations chose to help Uganda Government through their auxiliary the URC.

A multi-sectoral team was setup; we did make interventions in a phased manner. We moved in emergency relief and I want my colleagues, who are denigrating interventions like giving jerrycans, tarpaulins, food, to know that in all emergency situations globally, emergency response is phased. There are people who find themselves in such a situation of distress that they need those that are extremely basic to enable them survive. Then we will look for those things that will be medium term, then we will look for permanent solution. 

I am very sure that very soon I will be rescuing her with some tarpaulins with or without her permission because it makes sure that there are people who find themselves in situations of distress and are given support. 

What then did we do? apart from undertaking emergency relief intervention, the ministry set up a committee that went to do a study of the entire Rwenzori Region and I am happy that the entire region has a report that I will be happy to lay on Table here, and this report captures the challenges that afflict the people of Rwenzori Region given the problem of climate and suggest solutions that must be undertaken by Government and its partners in restoring the lives of the people of Kasese and I beg to lay this one and Members should be given copies.

MR SASSAGA: Thank you hon. Minister and Madam Speaker. The minister has talked about the committees you have put in place to help in those disaster-stricken areas. I want to know maybe the procedure you are using because in areas where we have been where disaster has stricken, what is happening is that there are some members in the OPM and also connected to your office who are masquerading to be part of the committee who move in advance having known that disaster items are coming and districts have written. They move and say that the MPs failed, the area LCV has failed, and it is us who are working very hard to bring these items and it looks like those members who are masquerading are in connivance with your office. They are moving in advance in those areas where they have interest.

Some of them have served in your office. Not only in constituencies of members of the opposition but also in some constituencies where they want to unseat the seating MPs and LCVs in those areas.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister please conclude.

MR ECWERU: Madam Speaker, that information is useful; I will look at it but what happens is that when we receive appeals from MPs and the CAOs, we scrutinise those appeals and with the limited resources available to us, we attempt as much as possible to send those resources through the CAOs, if there are any masqueraders, this would be news to me. 

What did Government do as recent as yesterday. Government received our report, the report of the technical committee that made an assessment of the entire Rwenzori Region and that report was costed particularly the interventions that must be undertaken and this is not because we had gotten any information from my colleague but because the department of metrology in the ministry of water has warned the country again that if we do not move very fast we are likely to face the situation of El Nino in September, and we did not want as Government to be caught off guard when we have got warning from our technical organisation and the department of metrology.

Yesterday, we sat in Cabinet after the Prime Minister had chaired the committees that did this assessment. We presented a report to Cabinet yesterday and I want to report to this House that Cabinet approved a costed work plan for the recovery of Kasese worth Shs 25 billion and most of this money will go to the Ministry of Works particularly to undertake major de-silting of River Nyamwamba, River Mubuku and other areas.

I must also add, Madam Speaker, that I have been directed by Cabinet to move and cause a quick meeting of what we call our “national disaster platform” that will be sitting next week. The national disaster platform comprises of Government and UN persons like the UNDP who have a mandate, by virtue of us being members of the UN, to supplement our interventions as Government in as far as disaster relief reaction is concerned.

So, we will move to supplement this intervention because it is going to be multi-sectoral apart from de-silting and fixing the bridges. And I also wanted to make this clear. Looking at this map of Kilembe Hospital and all that infrastructure - when the Canadians were constructing, they diverted the river in order to create space where the hospital was constructed. How they sustained the hospital over those years was through periodic maintenance. They continued doing the embankment and de-silting of the river. Unfortunately when the copper mining collapsed, every programme including programmes that were very critical like de-silting, collapsed. 

So for the last 40 years - and I want to emphasise 40 years because some people may think this problem started now - silt has been accumulating in that place. I had the privilege of working in that district as a resident district commissioner and I know what I am talking about. This time round, the river had to go back to its original position because where it had been diverted artificially is now silted. So, the challenge is to remove that silt and remove the boulder, among major things. Only then will we have the river flowing normally.

Madam Speaker, I want to say Government certainly may not be able to say we can prevent or stop these emergencies but Government is also launching what we call a National Emergency Coordinating Centre (NECOC). We have developed a network for this country. We do not stand on anthills to blow our whistles but, Madam Speaker, we try very much to stand with the people in distress.

I want to say that once the National Emergency Coordinating Centre has been operationalized, it is going to be second to similar set ups in some countries that may not even be in this region. The Government of Uganda has again been very supportive. They have given us land in Namanve but in the meantime, we are establishing NECOC in our old building on Yusuf Lule Road. The NECOC will be able to mobilise and in the event of unpreventable disasters arising, we can coordinate response in a manner that is more organised.

Madam Speaker, the situation is certainly bad but it is not hopeless. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, item five. Do you have some information? The Minister for General Duties has some information.

5.37
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister, hon. Ecweru, for his contribution. I would also like to add that in addition to NECOC, the Ministry of ICT is building capacity for early warning using ICT. As such, we should be in a better position when all these efforts are put into operation. The House should be assured that we are really doing our best.

THE SPEAKER: Item five. Yes, I had said hon. Nabbanja - I do not know how long your statement is. I had indicated that I would allow you to make a personal explanation. Are you ready? Okay.

5.38
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise under Rule 46 of our Rules of Procedure to make a personal explanation. On 15th July, that was Tuesday, as I was driving to Kampala on Kakumiro-Mubende Road from my parliamentary work, I met a freight of trucks carrying large amounts of produce that had blocked the road to Mubende, a kilometre from Kakumiro town in Kibaale District. 

The truck drivers and owners, most of them traders, stopped me to inquire whether they should pay sales tax on produce yet it was stopped as per a letter dated 26 May 2014 addressed to all chief administrative officers and town clerks from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Local Government. 

This letter was advising all local governments not to levy sales tax on produce, bicycle licences and fish licences in Uganda as per Regulation 18 of the Fifth Schedule of the Local Government Act that mandates the minister to revoke the above licences to improve business environment and competitiveness in the country and East African Region. 

Attached, Madam Speaker, is a copy signed by Mr Mutabwire on behalf of the Permanent Secretary.

Madam Speaker, as an informed Member of Parliament who cares a lot for the people that I represent, I already had this letter in my hand and I had already talked about this letter on one of the radio stations in the district. Having seen the predicament that was between traders and the tenderers and the scuffle that could easily escalate - the people present included Mr Asiimwe Yusuf who is an aide to the chairman LCV. You know the LCV in our district is also a tenderer. Also present was the driver to Dr Kasirivu Atwooki, my fellow MP from Bugangaizi West who is also a tenderer. He is commonly known as Mzee.

Having seen the growing number of the crowd all protesting what they called an illegal tax, as you all saw on TV, I intervened by explaining details in the letter and why the tenderers must respect what was in the letter. I told them that as leaders from Kibaale District, we shall meet and forge a way forward but we cannot allow this predicament.

When the traders heard that from me, they removed the road block and vehicles started moving. This angered the tenderers. The driver to hon. Kasirivu Atwooki then grabbed me around the chest to allow his colleague Asiimwe Yusuf, who is a very fat young man, to punch me heavily many times as you viewed on TV. 

I sustained serious injuries in my face to the extent that my eye cannot see properly. My doctor’s report indicates that I suffered internal bleeding in the face and chest. I was admitted at Kakumiro Health Centre IV and then referred for further diagnosis and treatment. This has cost me a lot as a woman because I am now undergoing serious intensive treatment as you all can see.

Madam Speaker, the assailants were arrested and taken to Kakumiro Police but before I recorded my statement, the DPC Kibaale District, who is also a tenderer, Mr Ojokuna Eratu, together with the OC/CID, released the assailants and the DPC personally drove them to their homes as they were bragging. 

Madam Speaker, the DPC has now gone back on stage and they have put the road block again. He is manning it himself now. He has been in the district for the last 10 years and he is a landlord. He is a tenderer and has become so native that if he does not support you politically, you will be denied justice irrespective of who you are. 

Madam Speaker, the man is gender insensitive and very discriminative. I was very helpless. I got embarrassed in front of my voters especially when I saw him drive a culprit – those assailants I talked about.

I tried to call Dr Kasirivu so that he can know what his driver had done to me but he could not pick my phone. 

Madam Speaker, I feel betrayed and this shows you what my people of Kibaale go through day and night when it comes to accessing justice. In a different incidence, there was a case I reported at the Police after a radio presenter who works with Mamba FM, which belongs to Dr Kasirivu – he infected my niece with HIV/AIDS. To me, this is aggravated defilement. He was arrested and later released on orders of the DPC despite overwhelming evidence. The case file No. is Kakumiro CRB/48/2014. That was January. They told me that the file was taken to DPP Kampala since January to-date.  

Madam Speaker, most Police officers heading Police posts in my district have overstayed for a long time and are now a nonsense to our people. For example the Nalweyo Police Post OC has stayed at the same station for the last 13 years and that of Kakumiro, Mr Okello, has been at station for the last seven years. As long as you have some personal relationship with the DPC and you are a police officer, you will stay.

I am aware of Article 191 of our Constitution that empowers local governments to levy and appropriate taxes. My intention, therefore, is not to sabotage revenue collection in my home district because we badly need services. However, my people are questioning the following:

The backward and primitive methods of collecting this revenue by enforcing road blocks - that ancient way of collecting this tax, which even claimed the life of one police officer at one of the collection points. During that time, I was prompted to write a letter to the Minister for Internal Affairs who then acted and removed police officers from these collection points. I reported this matter to the President but no action has been taken. These road blocks were introduced in 2011 and the prices of our farm produce since then went down because this discouraged traders from other countries like Rwanda, Kenya, and South Sudan who used to buy this produce in bulk and at high prices. A kilogramme of maize now in my home district is just Shs 300. We have very poor roads.

Farmers complain of being exploited by the district authorities because they are the tenderers themselves. For example, the district chairman, the revenue officer, the DPC and the acting forest officer among others, are the ones manning these check points. They just put a token figure and they take this money scot free.  

If I gave you an example – after they saw this letter from the permanent secretary, they continued to go ahead with issuing out tenders. There were seven tenders one of the check points that I know. One offered Shs 80 million, another Shs 64 million, another Shs 48 million and another offered Shs 43 million but they gave the tender to the one who offered Shs 43 million because he is the acting District Forest Officer for the last 13 years – acting! He is a P7 drop out!

Madam Speaker, I have attached all this for evidence and my humble prayer, therefore, is that Parliament helps us to divide this district and that is why I always cried here. I expect this Parliament to come up with a motion to stop forthwith sales tax on produce as advised by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Local Government. 

The DPC, John Eratu should be disciplined and removed from our district. This should include those police officers that have over stayed for more than three years since they have become useless to our people. If they can treat me this way, what about these local villagers who do not have a voice? 

The Minister for Internal Affairs should see that justice is given to me and those others who have always been treated the same way I have been treated.

Madam Speaker, I feel betrayed. I feel that I have not been assisted. I did not even make a statement conclusively because it was useless. The culprits are on the radios across the country. You can imagine this was stage managed –(Interjection) – yes, stage managed because they knew that I was driving and could not allow that nonsense on the road. So, they even had cameras to capture me being belittled and beaten on the road. I was wondering how these TV people could be there. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Nabbanja. This is a personal explanation but the prayers go beyond Parliament and so, I want to direct the Minister for Local Government to come and speak to us on Prayer No. 1 on the issue of the tax and then the Minister for Internal Affairs to handle Prayer No. 2 and No. 3 and give us a report that should really be soon. If it becomes necessary, we may have to ask the rules committee to look at the other allegations relating to one of our colleagues.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The procedural issue that I am raising – you know that they have talked about a colleague who is hon. Kasirivu whom I know is a very simple and good gentleman. He is God fearing and has two churches in his home. Would it not be good for him procedurally that he also comes and gives a personal statement.

Two, for me, I come from Eastern Uganda. I can tell you that for the first time I have discovered that it is painful to beat people. It is painful to beat what –

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, are you debating a statement of personal explanation?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No. I am feeling bad. When I saw hon. Nabbanja crying, I also started crying. (Laughter). Madam Speaker, we have evidence that there are people in this world who have been doing bad things and hon. Nabbanja has demonstrated that. In Mbale, I recall there was a time people were beaten and even in Busia there was a time people were beaten. The person who was beating was hon. Nabbanja when she was still a leader there. So for her to cry she must remember that – (Interruption)

MR NZEIMANA: Madam Speaker, I was here watching clearly hon. Nandala smiling while shading his crocodile tears; meaning he was feeling very happy because I was looking at him directly in the eyes. It annoys everybody in this august House for a colleague to arrange and cause such beatings that could end up in murder – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you are on slippery ground. Let us ask the police to investigate and find out who organised this. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, there are moments when you feel sad and this is one of them; for a Member of Parliament to have been treated in the manner our Member here was. Whatever the case, there is nobody who had a right to do the kind of thing that was done to the honourable member. It is therefore regrettable that such a thing happened and maximum efforts will be made to investigate and the culprits will be brought to book. 

Certainly, Members of Parliament must be assured that you are citizens and you should be able to walk in your constituencies without any interference. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I have given my directions to the Minister of Local Government and the Minister of Internal Affairs to handle that issue. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

5.56
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I lay these papers on Table, I would like to make a comment that we are receiving a lot of work that the Auditor-General has done, especially on sub counties. At an appropriation time, Madam Speaker, there is need for you to guide this House on how we shall move to ensure that these audited accounts of sub counties are effectively worked on. We have public accounts committees at district level and – (Mr Sabiiti rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: Let us have information from the Chairperson, Committee on Local Government Accounts.

MR SABIITI: Section 80 of the Local Government Act is very clear; once a sub county PAC do its work, they submit it to the CAO and the CAO sends it to the Minister of Local Government and the minister is mandated under section 8 to lay it on Table. But I see things are being done wrongly and I do not understand. 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, you should ask the Auditor-General to stop sending them to the Speakers Office because I got them and I cannot hide them. Proceed, please. 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Maybe he did not understand the position I was giving. These sub county accounts are supposed to be audited. The Auditor-General brings them here to Parliament. The Public Accounts Committee of Parliament, as we all know, has district accounts to look at. 

We have the local government public accounts committees, which I think should have the mandate in coordination with the Local Government Accounts Committee to look at this. So, at an appropriate time, I think there will be need to guide the House on how to proceed. 

Madam Speaker, in accordance with the relevant provisions in our Rules of Procedure, I beg to lay on Table financial statements for the year ended 30th June, 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following sub counties:
Nebbi District: 
    i) Nebbi sub-county – Nebbi district
    ii) Kucwiny sub-county – Nebbi district 
    iii) Ndhew sub-county – Nebbi district 
    iv) Kalapata sub-county – Kaabong district
    v) Kathile sub-county – Kaabong district
    vi) Sidok sub-county – Kaabong district 
    vii) Pachara sub-county – Adjumani district 
    viii) Bulo sub-county – Butambala district 
    ix) Ss-bukunja sub-county – Buikwe district
    x) Padibe east sub county – Lamwo district 
    xi) Kabulasoke sub county – Gomba district
    xii) Nama sub-county – Mukono district
    xiii) Padibe west sub-county – Lamwo district 
    xiv) Gimara sub-county – Moyo district 
    xv) Moyo sub-county – Moyo district
    xvi) Metu sub-county – Moyo district 
    xvii) Dufile sub-county – Moyo district 
    xviii) Aliba sub-county – Moyo district 
    xix) Maanyi sub-county – Mityana district 
    xx) Kikandwa sub-county – Mityana district 
    xxi) Bulera sub-county – Mityana district 
    xxii) Kakindu sub-county – Mityana distirict
    xxiii) Butayunja sub-county – Mityana district 
    xxiv) Kabira sub-county – Rakai district 
    xxv) Lolelia sub-county – Kaabong district 
    xxvi) Loyoro sub-county – Kaabong district 
    xxvii) Olio sub-county – Serere district 
    xxviii) Kateta sub-county – Serere district 
    xxix) Pingire sub-county – Serere district 
    xxx) Kyere sub-county – Serere  district 
    xxxi) Atiira sub-county – Serere district 
    xxxii) Kadungulu sub-county – Serere district 
    xxxiii) Nyaravur sub-county – Nebbi district 
    xxxiv) Kasitu sub-county – Bundibugyo district 
    xxxv) Kisubba sub-county – Bundibugyo district 
    xxxvi) Nyamarwa sub-county – Kibaale district 
    xxxvii) Bubango sub-county – Kibaale district 
    xxxviii) Bubukwanga subvcounty – Bundibugyo district 
    xxxix) Lokung sub-county – Lamwo district 
    xl) Ngando sub-county – Butambala district 
    xli) Palabek kal sub-county – Lamwo district 
    xlii) Nairambi sub-county – Buvuma district
    xliii) Paloga sub-county – Lamwo district 
    xliv) Kikamulo sub-county – Nakaseke district 
    xlv) Kapeeka sub-county – Nakaseke district 
    xlvi) Busamuzi sub-county – Buvuma district 
    xlvii) Budde sub-county – Butambala district 
    xlviii) Buyaga sub-county – Buvuma district 
    xlix) Hapuuyo sub-county – Kyegegwa district 
    l) Kakabara sub-county – Kyegegwa district 
    li) Ruyonza sub-county – Kyegegwa district 
    lii) Mpara sub-county – Kyegegwa district 
    liii) Ndugutu sub-county – Bundibugyo district 
    liv) Harungale sub-county – Bundibugyo district 
    lv) Bubandi sub-county – Bundibugyo district 
    lvi) Buyanja sub-county – Rukungiri district 
    lvii) Busaru subvcounty – Bundibugyo district
    lviii) Busanza sub-county – Kisoro district 
    lix) Kyengize sub-county – Kibaale district 
    lx) Ntungamo sub-county – Ntungamo district 
    lxi) Ntara sub county – Kamwenge district 
    lxii) Kanyantorogo sub-county – Kanungu district 
    lxiii) Bumbaire sub-county – Bushenyi district
    lxiv) Kyeizooba sub-county – Bushenyi district
    lxv) Mpasaana sub-county – Kibaale district 
    lxvi) Nyamarunda sub-county – Kibaale district
    lxvii) Buhunga sub-county – Rukungiri district 
    lxviii) Bwambara sub-county – Rukungiri district 
    lxix) Nyakagyembe sub-county – Rukungiri district 
    lxx) Bugangari sub-county – Rukungiri district 
    lxxi) Nyakishenyi sub-county – Rukungiri district 
    lxxii) Kebisoni sub-county – Rukungiri district 


I beg to lay, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Commissioner. They are sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for perusal and report back. But we shall again study the provisions of the Constitution and the Audit Act, 2008 as well as the Local Government Act and advise you if we need to do a change.

BRIEF TO PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL TO BORROW  $ 170 MILLION FROM  VNESHECONOM BANK TO FINANCE THE PURCHASE OF CLASSIFIED EQUIPMENT FOR FURTHER STRENGTHENING OF DEFENCE AND SECURITY INFRASTRUCTURE

6.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay before Parliament, a proposal to borrow $170million from the VNESHECONOM   Bank of Russia to finance the purchase of classified equipment for further strengthening of defence and security infrastructure. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the request is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP BILL, 2012

6.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, you will recall that yesterday we adjourned the House for us to access the Hansard and harmonise the position of Government amidst the amendments that were made to the Bill.

I now want to report that we received the Hansard today and we are still consulting in order to come up with a position by Tuesday next week. 

I beg to submit.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I rise on guidance. The Hansard is public information and the Parliamentary Commission has upgraded the system. I know that every day, after a sitting, information is available to the public. 

We are supposed to adjourn so that we can start handling the budget. Now, you are pushing us to next week, yet, we need to have this Bill concluded. If we do not handle enough Bills, tomorrow, the public will criticise us for only handling, for example, five Bills in a whole session.

So, is it proper for Government to keep in ping-pong in handling Bills yet, tomorrow, it will be Parliament to be blamed for not expediting the process?

MR NADALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As Parliament, we made a new Clause 18 and the contentious issue there is that the minister does not want Parliament to get involved. Yesterday, I had to go look for the Hansard and I got it. I read it together with the Bill in regard to the amendments moved by the minister. I can assure you, I never slept. But what is the minister’s interest in not wanting Parliament to get involved in the drafting and signing of the PPP agreements? I realised that the minister wants to retain these powers so that he and his staff can do their things there and after 25 or 45 years, even if anything goes wrong, they will not be there and so not bothered.

Madam Speaker, I want to plead with colleagues that this law we are making will either keep or destroy Uganda. The minister’s proposals on Clause 18, in my opinion, are not justifiable. 

In the circumstances, I would like to suggest that we continue by maintaining our Clause 18 as we passed it and pass on this Bill to the President for assent. This is because we made a very good law that will protect the people of Uganda. The minister does not want to see Parliament get involved in this and that is what he is fighting for.

The commitments in the PPP agreements stay for a long period. It could be 40 or 50 years. Let me give you, an example, and I like the hon. Kajara very much – he gave the example of constructing a highway in Jinja but you can construct a highway to stay for 25 years. That means the private person in the PPP will collect their money for 25 years. But by then if the road is still good, they can collect up to 45 years or they might collect all their money in just 10 years and use the remaining 15 years to collect bonus but at the expense of the people of Uganda.

So, Madam Speaker, for me I do not think we should give the minister time up to Tuesday. Either we handle the matter now or we say the matter is finished.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, it is Government that initiated this Bill and it is in our interest that this Bill is completed as soon as practicable. It was introduced two years ago so it is us really who would be most interested and I can tell you that we need to conclude this Bill.
But in order for us to do that, we need to exhaust every aspect of consultation so that we come with a very good solution. We don’t want to hurry Parliament; we don’t want the people of Uganda to get a raw deal. The cause therefore for us to seek just one further adjournment such that when we come here on Tuesday we are able to complete this matter once and for all.

MS KWAGALA: I think regarding this matter, the minister was reinforced by a committee. I do not know why the minister wants to divert from the committee findings. If he was not there as you were saying, he would have consulted the members who were around representing finance because you set up a committee. Hon. Bahati came here and said that they had reached a certain point with the minister. Now when another minister comes from the same ministry and borrows more time – (Interruption)
 
MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you remember yesterday - I want to thank you madam Speaker for making a decision that we get answers. Yesterday the minister wanted it passed. If Members never rose up to say “we do not agree with you what are passing” I can tell you that we would have passed what the minister wanted. Since he has his proposals of yesterday, we should go with them, look at them whether we agree or disagree.

MS KWAGALA: In that line I thank hon. Nandala for the information. We feel that since we are all here the minister should forecast his fears when we are at committee stage he will be allowed to amend other than delaying every other day.  We have an assignment on Tuesday and you are piling more work on Tuesday and it is for the same ministry.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is the interest of the House and we know what Public Private Partnership means to this country. It is also in our interest to make a law that will stand the test of time for the benefit of our people even if we are not there.

I would like to request the minister why we proposed that amendment. we found that the Bill they had provided was not - but I want to request him also if it is the wish of this House to look at the clause in the Bill section 6(2) and also what the proposal for section 18 is to seek harmony. I see that they are all consistent. If time is given to him he should come up with what we have asked and what we are proposing.
In section 6 we passed and he agreed that Parliament is the one to borrow and must get interested and it is the same in Clause 18, the chief accounting officer - so he should look at it and come with a concrete position so that we deal with this Bill forever. I can imagine the time now. This is July we passed the vote on account and we have not ended with the budget. We have a public finance accountability Act which is going to affect the circular of the budgeting process. I think it is in the interest of this House and the minister that his work is easy to deal with this work and finish it and we end it.

MS ROSE AKOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clause that was recommitted is only one clause and that is 18. Yesterday, the reason for adjournment on this clause was that we did not have the record of the amended Clause 18 as amended by the committee of the whole House, because now the minister had proposals for amendment of that clause but we did not have the new amended clause. So that was the only reason. 

Now that we have that amended clause, I see no reason why we should go by the position the minister has given that up to Tuesday because that was the only reason and yesterday we were ready to proceed and conclude on this Bill but the only reason was that we lacked the new amended clause.

My proposal is now that we have that new amended clause, I see no reason why we should postpone finishing and concluding business on this Bill again up to Tuesday. We have taken long on this Bill and we need to conclude.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I was in this House and what I remember is that you had put a question and Clause 18 stood to be part of the Bill. The minister asked to recommit Clause 18 and we thought that he had good reasons for moving in that direction but what is transpiring is that like that he going to look for justification why he moved to recommit clause 18. I am only wondering whether Parliament has enough to wait for the minister to look for the reasons.

This would be setting a new precedent that once a clause is voted to the next part of the Bill, it is recommitted and wait for someone to go and look for another way of justifying why the clause should be recommitted. I am of the considered opinion that since we voted on Clause 18 to be part of the Bill, let the Bill pass, when the minister goes back to the ministry, we can even give them a year once they find a reason why we can amend then they will bring an amendment. As Parliament our term is still on, we shall consider his amendment.

MR SSEBUNYA: We will excuse the minister because he was not around. But I can see the Attorney-General is around, hon. Bahati is around and you have the mapping to the Hansard. So we can help each other, go to the committee stage and we handle the matter.  I think the Attorney-General can do much to help us process this. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that we set up a committee and we worked long and hard to make sure that we build a consensus and the minister knows though he was not in the meeting but his colleague was and the Attorney-General and we were progressing very well. But what we are faced with looks to be a bit technical I do not know if the mover – because the Bill belongs to the Executive, the mover of the Bill is saying that is not ready to move today. I do not know whether as Parliament we have the powers to force him to move today. 

In my opinion, if we have that authority, then I think we should move forward, we do not have to delay but if we do not have it then, we should leave him to go and make more consultations. 

Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the Business Committee, we had set a programme of how much work we shall do at which stage. By now, we should have been handling the State of the Nation Address. We had wanted all these Bills out of the way. Also, when the minister asked for time to review Clause 18, we gave him our Members and hon. Kasaija, hon. Bahati, hon. Ruhindi, hon. Sebunya, hon. Oboth, hon. Anthony Okello, hon. Mwiru, hon. Ssasaga were all there. 

Yesterday, when they came, they were together and they said they had agreed. What was pending was the request of Members who were saying, “Can we see the state of the Bill and what we passed?” That was all. They were ready yesterday.

Hon. Members, let us go to Committee Stage.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP BILL, 2012

Clause 18

MS AKOL: Madam Chairperson, as we had agreed yesterday, we needed the new Clause 18 as amended in order for us to flow together. We had requested that as you mention the relevant sub section in Clause 18, it be read so that those who would like to move amendments can do so. At that point in time and having listened, in case they do not have a copy of that new clause, they can then bring up amendments. So, I am proposing that as you recommit Clause 18, let the new sub section be read. 

Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERON: Hon. Members, I will ask the clerk to read Clause 18(1). Is it on your iPads?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, it is on the iPads and I recall you procured enough iPads for Members of Parliament. Since we have them, we should move on.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 18(1) do stand part of the Bill.

MR KAJARA: Madam Chairperson, we did move to recommit this very clause because we thought that the amendments that had been proposed by Parliament were not - first of all, we thought that Parliament has supervisory powers and that if they were involved in approving partnership agreements, then they would lose the oversight function. That is why we thought that this function of procurement and signing PPPs should be left to the Executive arm of Government. 

We had said that instead of this amendment, we had already passed another amendment because the concern of Parliament was, how, for example, the Executive could borrow to financing a PPP without the approval of Parliament? We have examined this law again and if we go to Clause 5, which was passed by this House, in terms of a contracting authority and in particular Clause 5(3), it says categorically that for avoidance of doubt, a government or a contracting authority shall not borrow, guarantee or raise a loan for a Public Private Partnership except as authorised by Article 159 of this Constitution.

Madam Chairperson, that was the fear of this Parliament; Government having to borrow, guarantee or raise a loan without going through the rigorous process of approvals that are required by Parliament. The point of contention was that if we gave the Executive powers to determine these agreements, they could pass through the back door and borrow, guarantee or raise a loan.

Now, when we look at Clause 5(3), it caters for that safeguard; that Government cannot borrow, even if it is a PPP, unless it is authorised by Parliament under Article 159 of the Constitution. It is on that basis, Madam Chairperson, that I do oppose the amendment of Clause 18 because what was feared is already covered in Clause 5 (3). 

I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You see, hon. Minister, the problem is that Clause 18 of the Bill was amended by this House. We had this argument yesterday and we agreed that the present Bill is the Bill as we passed it before the request for recommittal.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I think the best way to proceed is the way we had started off yesterday; by going to the sub clause of Clause 18. We could start with Clause 18 sub clause (1) and the amendment that the Executive is moving is that Clause 18 sub clause (1), as it was in the Bill before the amendment, be retained.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is no longer there. Attorney-General, please.

MR RUHINDI: Okay, let me move it this way. That Clause 18 sub clause (1), as passed, be amended to read as follows: “The minister shall, with the approval of Cabinet by statutory instrument, prescribe the value of an agreement for which the approval of Cabinet is required before the agreement is signed by an accounting officer.” That is the amendment proposed by the Executive.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, our argument was simple. All Public Private Partnerships agreements are of a very high value and in most cases, it creates contingent liabilities for Government. Parliament should examine them for consistency with a national budget and policy priorities.  That was our argument because most of the agreements in Government that are done without the intervention of Parliament, we have made mistakes and the best example is Umeme. The end result is that it comes back to encroach on the Treasury where taxpayers’ money is kept. 

We are saying it is okay - do all the donkey work you want to do and then come back and say that, ”We entered a partnership with point A but we want money to do a partnership with point B.” The amount that you want and we are going to pick from the Treasury, let us know the purpose and the objective and that is why I was very careful to tell the minister to look at Section 6 (2), which we have committed and passed. 

I can read it verbatim. We said, “An accounting officer shall not enter into agreement that in anyway binds the contracting authority to the financial commitment or which results in a contingent liability without approval of Parliament.” This is consistent with Section 18 so that we say any contingent liability and I can give an example. The contingent liability I am talking about is the arbitration of the tax that went into London. Do you remember that case? The Government came here and said they wanted money for the contingent liabilities. We had to pay and Parliament had to approve. Checks and balances give the leeway for efficiency in management of systems. 

I do not see any problem where Government does its work and Parliament does its oversight function, for all of us to come to know – you know with finances, it is just a matter of figures and scrutiny so that you curb all the controls and frauds within a system. So, if Government does its work and Parliament does theirs, I find it better. 

So, if we are in agreement that we pass Section 6 (2) so that it is in tandem with Section 18 which says, a chief accounting officer should come without encroaching on the Treasury – that we have a scrutiny of it. I know that Parliament has at all times that loans that have come here with the objectives and purposes mentioned, Parliament has been approving and I do not find it a problem.  

The way forward; if a minister is finding it very difficult, there is a window and we can cross Section 18 in the Bill which I can also read verbatim – in the original Bill of Government. Instead of replacing it, Section 18 (2) we can say, “Where an agreement is of value for which the approval of Cabinet is required before it is signed by the accounting officer, the accounting officer shall not sign an agreement without the approval of Cabinet.” This is the provision in the original Bill.  That is a window for you and Cabinet to scrutinise and I am not finding it a problem. Unless another argument comes in but financially, Parliament must scrutinise the amount of money is leaving the Treasury as we appropriate. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, a contingent liability means a liability that has not crystalized. You cannot put the exact as it could be that amount that you are thinking about – it is like a provisional. Now, if we are talking of a provision for the future, we must be careful. 

Clause 1, which we passed says, “An accounting officer shall not sign a Public Private Partnership agreement without the approval of Parliament.” 

Maybe, for purposes of demonstration, I again want to use hon. Aston Kajara. Government wants a highway road but to get the road, they will need to tax people of Uganda. Now, because they have overtaxed, they want them to pay taxes indirectly and for them to pay indirectly, they will go to one person, maybe in China, to come and build a road and when the road is built, whenever a car passes, you will charge a road toll so that you recover your money. 

What this means is that it has deferred taxation of the people of Uganda for the future. The Constitution is very clear on the only person who imposes tax – it is Parliament. 

MR EKANYA: Information. There is a PPP agreement that I read about a road and in the agreement, it was stated that until this private party has recovered all his costs, no other road shall be built. It is very dangerous.

Another I can give you –(Interjections)– no, an access road, for example, going to Jinja, you put a road toll – and the agreement because the minister says that let us look at the financials – but if you do not look at the agreement, there can be a word that until the private party has recovered all the money, you do not create any other road because it will disadvantage and that is very dangerous. You cannot have a “panya” in the villages just an agreement that a private company signed with the Tanzanian Government when they were privatising water. They said “all waters, including rain water” until the recent Government liquidated the agreement because the other company said that “you said all water is the responsibility of my company. So, your people cannot even harvest water because I am the one supplying all water, including rain water.” 

Therefore, colleagues, this PPP – if you look at the UK, the underground train system is still a liability to the British Government. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We need to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is why we want to move. What I wanted to put up is that the people of Uganda will pay for the road that will be built. Now, instead of bringing money directly to the Treasury, they will pay somebody who is managing the road. You must be able to protect the people of Uganda who are the owners of the road now because they are paying taxes and the only person who can protect them is Parliament.

I have the Hansard and this thing was debated from page 7 to page 21 – Clause 18, when the minister rose after having passed all the clauses. This means that 15 pages are talking about one thing. How do we protect the people of Uganda? But the most interesting one that I read and I can see here and I think that it was from the chair. “Agreements are done for 25 years and when people come to learn about them, they say, ‘How were they done?’ Then you say, ‘You gave the minister the power’.” 

Madam Chair, there are many quoted here and the minister is aware. Given that past experience, we cannot allow a minister, single handedly, to approve the agreements of the PPP. Given the fact that you can go to Cabinet and discover that all Cabinet members are asleep and you assume that they are the only ones who should approve – (Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Chair, this insinuation of all members of Cabinet asleep – (Laughter) - is he in order to think that all members of Cabinet can at one single time go asleep as if that kind of argument cannot be used on Parliament as well - that parliamentarians could all be asleep including the Speaker. Is he in order to make that assumption? (Laughter) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I do not think the honourable member has access to the Cabinet. So, he is out of order. (Laughter) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I want to I have a picture here during the budget and the State of the Nation Address. The people who were not sleeping were basically MPs but the remaining frontbench was all asleep. 

So, given that fact –(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please, conclude.

MR BAHATI: Thank you my senior. Hon. Nandala and colleagues, I want us to put this in to contest because hon. Nandala is right because we have debated this for a long time. We also know that we considered Section (6). I want us to again reflect of 6(2) and see whether what we were looking for was cured by 6(2), it states: “An accounting officer shall not enter into an agreement that in anyway binds the contracting authority to a future financial commitment or which results in a contingent liability except where the future financial commitment or contingent liability is authorised by Parliament”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then there is no problem; it is stated, so what is the problem? That means there is no problem with 18, it is just for emphasis. 

MR BAHATI: What I thought was the spirit of Clause 18 was that there has been a lacuna in the process of Government engaging private initiative. And because of that, Cabinet wants to fully understand this. So, they are giving Cabinet the authority, because at the moment, ministry A can engage with somebody where Cabinet is not privy. So, I thought it was a cure for the process. But in terms of approval, Parliament has the ultimate power. I thought this was just to help Cabinet; the Attorney-General can help me or the Minister of Finance. That is the information I wanted to give you and I think it is very friendly.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you know I am in the same profession with hon. Bahati- we are very few of us here. (Laughter) What he is raising is a bit fundamental. I am happy because clause 18 is providing a better cure for clause 6(2) because there are times when they come here and ask us to approve the budget. One of the experiences I often get is that once you pass a third of the votes, they say, “You already agreed”. 

One clear example was for Uganda market in Juba, which has never been built up to now. When we came here to oppose it because there were no plans, they said, “You passed a third”. And since then, nobody has ever raised any question. My brother hon. Ekanya almost boxed me when I objected to it. But he has never come to say, “You were right at that time.”

So, Madam Chairperson, the Cabinet is free to look through the agreements of their colleagues from other ministries. But for us, as Parliament, we should have the mandate to finally say, “yes” or “no”. We must be the ones in charge of approvals because we have experience and we cannot accept individuals to sell the people of Uganda.  I rest my case.
 
MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. First, it is not correct that our concern as stated by the minister was about borrowing; that is not an issue. Act 159 clearly deals with borrowing. There is no borrowing, which can be done in this country without Parliament approval. So 6(2) is not about that. This 6(2) in our context deals with 155, that if we are to spend any money, it must be through the budgeting process and Parliament should pronounce itself on that. 

So, what we are saying is that in as far as appropriation and borrowing are concerned, they are catered for by the Constitution and they are not an issue. The issue now is that the PPP involves colossal sums of money. We are committing generations of people. Given what we have gone through as a country, we have made oil agreements where we say that our laws shall not apply when dealing with such disputes. That is why Parliament is passing money here to go to London for arbitration. Where was the Attorney-General when that was being put in the clause; how can you say that your law of the owner of the oil shall not apply but the law of UK shall apply? I think we should wake up. 

Secondly, I gave an example the other time and I am going to do it for the last time. That even before the PPP law, we passed money in this House for Quality Chemicals; what is our shareholding? None of them can tell us. 

As if that is not enough, we went to BIDCO; we asked in PAC, “but what is the shareholding of Uganda in BIDCO?” They cannot tell us. So, what we are saying is that if we let these gentlemen in the Executive do their work, they can even mortgage the entire country. (Laughter)

That is why we are saying that as Parliament, we should look at the agreements they are signing. The way the oil agreements passed them and that of Quality Chemicals and BIDCO also passed them. These ones will also pass by them. 

The argument before was that if Parliament looks at these agreements, we shall be executing an executive function –(Interjections)– not about appropriation, Madam Chair. Then we said, where is the check point – in that meeting with hon. Ruhindi, we said, and this is without prejudice to what was adopted by the whole House, let us say that when a PPP is executed and we find that it is fraudulent in whatever way, then Parliament has the power to review that agreement. That is what they do not agree with. 

So, we either say that Parliament looks at the agreements before the execution. If they do not want that, and we let them execute it as an executive function then if there is fraud, then we should have the power to review that agreement. That is the only way we can cure the problem. 

So, let nobody confuse us that Clause 6 talks about this – no. Clause 6 only reinforces Article 155 on appropriation and Article 159 on borrowing. So, based on past experience, we must cure this. If today, hon. Ruhindi and my friend hon. Kajara sat somewhere; God forbid, if they sat somewhere and they agree to sign a PPP for a project that involved billions of money, how can country cure that? 

Under the law, if there is a contract and you are not a party, you may not challenge that contract. They will tell you that there is a contract between Uganda and those people; so you cannot interfere. So, we want whoever comes to deal in Uganda in a PPP to know that if you participate in fraud, Parliament of Uganda can review that agreement. 

To me, that is the only compromised position. If they do not want us to approve the agreement at initial, then we should have the powers to review the agreements in case fraud is discovered. That is the only compromise we go with. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I do not want to go with the argument of the minister that if Parliament gets involved, we will be doing an Executive function. When we pass the budget here, don’t we come back and review how the money has been spent? When we pass the loans, don’t we come back here to monitor whether programmes have been implemented?

So, I want to encourage the honourable members and the minister to accept Clause 18 as we passed it. If we get problems, you can come back to this House. This House is here. Parliament is not ending.

I now put the question that Clause 18 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is no amendment. So, it is just Clause 18 to stand part of the Bill. Yes, minister, motion for the House resume.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)
(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Public Private Partnership Bill, 2012” and passed it with amendments.

THE SPEAKER: No, we were only reviewing Clause 18.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered Clause 18 of the Bill as was recommitted and passed it.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP BILL, 2014

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the Bill be read for the third time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP ACT, 2014”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed. Hon. Members, I thank you. It has been a very long journey. I thank you for the work done. I think we shall have to take a decision on how to move because we are getting late on the State of the Nation Address. But we shall advise you on Tuesday. House adjourned to Tuesday. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.57 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 22 July 2014 at 2.00 p.m.) 

