

Thursday, 12 July 2018

Parliament met at 3.24 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I apologise for the late start. We have many issues taking place today but we will try to work quickly and finish what is on the Order Paper. 

Honourable members, join me in welcoming our guests in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery. We have a delegation of six Members of the Makueni County Assembly of Kenya. They are led by hon. Richard Munywoki, the Deputy Leader of Majority in the County Assembly. He is accompanied by:

    1. Hon. Magdalene Mulwa
    2. Hon. Dennis Masavu
    3. Hon. Alfred Nyamai
    4. Hon. Jades Kalunda
    5. Mr Robert Mwalu, the Deputy Clerk of the Assembly.
 
You are most welcome. 

Honourable members, I just have a few other issues to communicate. First, I take this opportunity to inform you that the Parliament of Uganda will host the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians (CWP) East Africa Sub-region Sensitisation workshop from 21st to 26th July 2018 at the Golden Tulip Hotel here in Kampala. 

As you are aware, the CWP is part of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) and it was founded by the women delegates in 1989 to enable women discuss ways to increase female representation in Parliament, and work towards mainstreaming gender consideration in CPA activities and programmes.

The theme of the workshop is “Mainstreaming gender in Parliamentary business”. The following topics will be discussed:

    1. Gender and Equity Budgeting in Parliament
    2. Women caucuses and gender perspectives in Parliament
    3. Strengthening the use of ICT and the Media by the Women Parliamentarians and
    4. Empowerment of the Rural and Young Women.

These topics highlight the challenges and opportunities availed to women Parliamentarians and will empower the participants to realise the desired leadership and governance potential.

The participants will arrive on 23 July 2018. I will preside over the official opening on 24 July 2018. It will close on 25 July 2018. The deliberations will be summarised into resolutions, which shall be adopted in the subsequent CWP meetings.

Therefore, I call upon your support. Members, if you have time, please, go and join our colleagues coming from Mauritius, Seychelles, Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda and Uganda. 

Now, honourable members, yesterday, we had an issue here concerning the Excise Duty (Amendment) Act, 2018 and this is my ruling. 

You will recall that during the proceedings of the House on the 11 July 2018, Members raised concerns over the application of the Excise Duty (Amendment) Act, 2018. The main issue of concern was the tax on mobile money transactions and the tax on Over-The-Top (OTT) services now widely known as the social media tax. 

The Honourable Leader of Government Business and the Prime Minister informed this House that Government is in the process of reviewing the Excise Duty (Amendment) Act, 2018 following the public outcry against the effects of the taxes introduced by that Act.  After his presentation, Members then sought my guidance on what can be done in the interim as the Government continues with the process of reviewing the tax.

Honourable members, as you recall, the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2018 was read the first time on 3 April 2018. The object of the Bill was to amend the Excise Duty Act, 2014 by among others amending the excise duty on telecommunication services. The Bill was referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for action. When they reported here, the committee observed among others that an obligation is imposed on telecommunications service operators providing data for accessing Over-The-Top services to account for and pay excise duty on access of Over-The-Top services. 

In their report, the committee observed that the use of mobile money is an efficiency gain and should be taxed. The committee also observed that the proposed tax on mobile money will generate revenue and broaden the tax base. After an extensive debate, the Bill was passed on 30 May 2018. 

Honourable members, it has become apparent that Government is facing challenges in implementing this tax as introduced by the Excise Duty (Amendment) Act, 2018 and there is general resistance against payment of the tax. Therefore, we need to rethink and review the law.

Yesterday, the Leader of Government Business and the Prime Minister stated before the House that Government is in the process of reviewing the Excise Duty (Amendment) Act, 2018 following the public outcry against the effects of the taxes.

Honourable members, we need to reiterate that the Bill was passed into law and it was assented to. So, it is a law and it cannot just be handled lightly.

We do understand the need for Government to raise taxes in order to provide the much needed services to the people of this country. We are also aware that we run a budget on revenue-expenditure basis. However, we have to strike a balance between the need for the revenue and also the general good of the country and therefore, the urgent need to harmonise the existing law as it was passed with the present demands within the country.

I would like to remind the House that under Article 152 of the Constitution, no tax shall be imposed except under the authority of an Act of Parliament. The Bill was brought and the Act was passed. It is Parliament that passed the law and it is only Parliament that can make amendments or any changes in the law.

Therefore, the available and fastest option is for Government to propose and bring an amendment to the Excise Duty (Amendment) Act, 2018. 

I also would like to inform the Government that Rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure provides as follows:
“118. Urgent Bills

“(1)	Where the House determines upon the recommendation of the appropriate committee of the House appointed for the purpose, that a particular Bill is of an urgent nature, that Bill may be introduced without publication.

(2)	Copies of a Bill referred to in sub rule (1) shall be distributed to Members, and the Bill may be taken through all its stages in a day, notwithstanding anything in these rules.”

I would like to, therefore, urge the Government to move expeditiously and present here the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill No. 2, 2018. I am prepared to adjourn today’s sitting to tomorrow for Parliament to consider this Bill, if you are ready.

Alternatively, a private member may also introduce an amendment Bill for this purpose. You will not be caught by Article 93 because this will be reducing, not increasing the expenditure. Article 93 provides as follows:

“Parliament shall not, unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of Government-
(a) proceed upon a Bill, including an amendment Bill, that makes provision for any of the following- 
(i)the imposition of taxation or the alteration of taxation otherwise than by the reduction.”

Of course, we know that private Members Bills have challenges especially the issues of certificates of financial implications. So, at the end of the day, the Prime Minister and the members of the Cabinet – the immediate option is to amend the law. I, therefore, urge the Prime Minister to listen to the concerns of the people of Uganda and bring proposals to the House expeditiously for consideration and enactment. I would not want to threaten the Executive if they fail to bring this Bill. It is in your interest to move quickly and bring that amendment here. What I am saying, honourable members, is that we do not have capacity to interfere in any other way with that law. Thank you very much.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, I raised an issue to do with deduction of the money, which was a deposit charge. A deposit charge was not covered by any law. In the confusion of implementing the new law, telephone companies erroneously deducted one per cent on every deposit, which we made on our phones. URA later clarified that they were not supposed to make that deduction but they had collected money from the public. 

Yesterday, when I raised this matter for your guidance on whether the telephone companies are going to be directed by URA and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to reverse that money – I had construed that to mean that that would also form part of your ruling today. However, I have not heard it in your ruling. Therefore, I seek guidance on how we should proceed.

THE SPEAKER: All matters related to the implementation of this law will be discussed in the context of the Bill when it is brought here. Wait for the Bill. We cannot take action in a vacuum.

3.37
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Like the Prime Minister said yesterday, Government is considering this Bill and we cannot dodge Cabinet because it is the procedure. I would like to plead that you allow Cabinet to sit on Monday so that we present on Tuesday as we requested. We cannot present tomorrow. We will be ready next week.

However, we have taken this matter as very urgent that concerns the nation. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has already worked out his presentation to Cabinet on Monday.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, the issue I am raising has nothing to do with the Bill. The Bill as it was did not provide for a tax on deposit. It was up to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, URA and telephone companies that they made deductions. Therefore, even the intended amendments we are talking about do not cover the said deduction on the deposits.

THE SPEAKER: Bring a formal written motion, which we can debate. As hon. Kakooza is organising himself, join me in welcoming students and teachers of Al-haramain Secondary School in Luuka District. You are welcome. They are represented by hon. John Bagoole and hon. Esther Mbayo. They have come to watch the proceedings. 

We also have the teachers and students of Golden Top School, Nansana Wakiso. You are welcome. They are represented by hon. Robert Sebunya and hon. Rosemary Seninde. (Applause) You are welcome children.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, thank you. The information I wanted to pass to my colleague is; once the law is passed as a tax law - Article 152(3) of the Constitution says, “Parliament shall make laws to establish tax tribunals for the purpose of settling tax disputes.” 

Parliament passed the laws of tax disputes. Anybody who is aggrieved against that law must forward his case to be refunded or otherwise. However, Parliament cannot again say that it will deal with the tax disputes here. These are deposits, which are deposited –(Interruption)

MS AMONG: The information that hon. Kakooza is giving is not correct. What hon. Mwiru is saying is that there was an erroneous deduction of money. It was not included in the Bill. You cannot take what is not included to the tax tribunal.

THE SPEAKER: Is Parliament the one which asked them to deduct the money?  Why do you want Parliament to solve it?

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, we need to distinguish these two matters. It is not legislative matter and it has nothing to do with the law. It is purely a decision that can be taken by the Executive to refund money that was erroneously collected outside the law.

We are shouldering a burden that is not ours. With all the problems of the law as far as the public are concerned; we have never made a law authorising Government or somebody acting for the Government to charge a tax on the deposits.

What I had expected from the Government side is for the Prime Minister to say yes, since URA has clarified that this is not their tax, refund the money-

THE SPEAKER: When did they clarify?

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, they have clarified about three days ago that they were not supposed to collect this tax. They did clarify that this is not their tax. Therefore, it is question of refunding the money to the people of Uganda from whom they collected this money.

That would avoid liability on the part of Government should some litigious Ugandans decide to take up a matter; one, you will refund this money with damages and costs and yet, we have not authorized them to collect this money.

THE SPEAKER: Let the people who are aggrieved go to court and present their matter there. 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Government has perfectly admitted that it is facing challenges with this law. We can also ably report that Ugandans are facing challenges being extorted of their money under this same law. I raised a matter yesterday that Parliament has the mandate not to suspend the law but to suspend the implementation. They are including provisions in the Constitution whose implementation has been suspended because of the challenges. One of them is the regional tier. It is Constitutional but was suspended. 

Now Ugandans are being extorted of their money dubiously and Government is admitting itself that it is facing challenges of implementing this Act but at the same time Ugandans are continuing to pay dubiously under this law.

Madam Speaker, through you, this is a procedural issue, can’t we as Parliament instruct Government to suspend implementation of this Act until when it is reviewed? We are not suspending the law; we are suspending implementation of the Act.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have asked the Government to bring the Bill very quickly. We have no power to manage a Bill outside amending it. Bring it, we amend and move on. Those who are aggrieved will go to court. Finally, hon. Akamba.

MR AKAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a procedural matter. Section 4(2)(a) of the Excise Duty Act, 2014, as amended, states: “… unless otherwise provided in this Act, excise duty in case of an excisable service …” in this case mobile money, “… is to be paid by a person providing the service.” 

Yesterday, I received Shs 50,000 through mobile money and the accompanying message said that I have paid tax of Shs 500. The obligation of paying excise duty under this law is on the telecom company. If we wait for Government to bring the amendment when the implementers of the law are continuing to tax users and not the operators, this will contravene the Act.

I therefore request the Attorney-General to clarify on that because you have just ruled that as Parliament, we cannot stop the operation of the Act. Even then, they are misinterpreting the Act in its implementation. Are we proceeding well, as Parliament, by not intervening in any way when Ugandans are being taxed without a law? The existing law obligates the companies and not the users. This is very clear and does not need any other interpretation. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, where is your motion on that issue? Hon. Adeke had an issue of national concern.

3.48
MS ANNA ADEKE (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The matter that I would like to raise concerns the issue of tuition increment in Makerere University –(Interruption)

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, I rise under rule 81 of our Rules of Procedure, which makes prescription for the dress code of a Member of Parliament. Is hon. Kyagulanyi in order to dress the way he is with a red cap when that kind of particular dressing is not prescribed? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what he is wearing is not part of our dress code. Can you exit the Chamber? 

MS ADEKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter that I would like to raise concerns the issue of tuition in Makerere University, which has been increased by 15 per cent. 

The students who are going to join in the academic year 2018/2019 are wondering whether the tuition increment is going to affect them because at the time they were applying for entrance, the old fees structure was attached. Now, media reports state that the university has increased tuition fees.

I would like Makerere University to come clear on this issue because failure to do that will brew a very big strike at the university. Government should also clarify as to whether the increment will apply to students retrospectively. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Education and Sports is directed to come and explain to the country the issue of increase in tuition fees at Makerere University. 

MR ODUR: Madam Speaker, I rise under rule 42 of our Rules of Procedure that requires ministers to be in the House to attend and answer questions, which is the import of Article 116(b)(i).

We have read in the media that the honourable Minister of State for Investment has resigned. Amidst this allegation, it is stated that the minister resigned because of alleged fraud. Since this House approved the list of ministers, including the minister in question, isn’t it procedurally right for Government to clarify this matter since the minister named is in charge of a very important function in this country? 

This week, we have been reading about turmoil in the Uganda Investment Authority. I thought that Government should be able to clarify whether those allegations in the media are true or not. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I appreciate your concerns but that minister was not required to answer any question today. Maybe she was referred to the President but not to answer any question. The rule you are referring to regards coming here to answer questions. 

3.54
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance, which borders on the rights of MTN mobile subscribers’ privacy and the credibility of Uganda as a preferred investment destination and a country governed by rule of law.

Madam Speaker, on 2nd July, MTN Telecommunication Company reported that their workers were kidnapped. They reported a case of trespass and unauthorised access to their data centre. As we all know, a data centre is an information and technology infrastructure that must have integrity, be reliable and accessed by people who are authorised to do so. 

We have also been informed by several media houses that the people who invaded and intruded the MTN data centres were security operatives from Internal Security Organisation (ISO) and they are under the Ministry of Security. 

As far as we know, access to data centres is governed by protocols including court orders, which were not exhausted in this particular case. Today, Ugandans continue to wonder what the motive for this unauthorised access was. Many Ugandan subscribers are concerned that their data has been tampered with in this process of intrusion. Now, we would like to know from the Minister of Security why the officials from ISO got unauthorised access to MTN data centre – (Member was timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, just state the issue and say your prayers. Do you want to say the Government should state whether it is true that there were intruders and if so, can they tell us who they were?

MR OGUZU: Yes, that is one of the prayers. We need assurance that in future we will not have security operatives just get unauthorised access to infrastructure, which belongs to the private sector. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: We shall ask the minister to answer.

3.57 
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This very week, on 10th and 11th July, we had elections for Local Council 1 and indeed we appreciate the efforts by Electoral Commission. 

My concern is that in many areas, we have got new leadership. However, immediately after elections, people were demanding for stamps. It is my humble request, through this Parliament, that the Ministry of Local Government should come out clearly with guidelines on how handover should be done at both local council 1 and women councils. As we speak, people do not know what to do. Stamps are being grabbed from those who lost. 

Secondly, we need to know whether we should have more than a stamp in a village, who should keep it or should it be got from the Ministry of Local Government? I am sure the ministers are present and they can give us a go forward. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: The minister will answer shortly.

3.58 
MR GIDEON ONYANGO (Independent, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Ugandans were issued with national identity cards by National Identification Registration Authority (NIRA). Unfortunately, we are aware that mobile telecommunication operators were ordered by Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) to register SIM cards. Many people are trying to have their SIM cards registered using the national identity cards. 

Madam Speaker, it has come to my notice and knowledge that the national identity cards are being rejected by telecommunication companies and one is required to go to NIRA to get a certified copy, which is quite disturbing. In the villages, people are wondering what to do. 

I would request that the minister comes and explains to us because it is quite disturbing for someone to move from Tororo or Busia to NIRA offices. I am personally a victim; I went to NIRA to have a certified copy of my identity card. The line is too long - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Onyango, why are you required to certify your identity card?

MR ONYANGO: You cannot have a SIM card without a national identity card. The national identity card I have is not valid according to MTN and Airtel. Therefore, it is a matter that needs an intervention of this House.

THE SPEAKER: I will give the instructions to the minister.

4.01 
MS ROSE KABAGYENYI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the water situation in Kisoro. This is the second time I am raising this issue and it is now alarming.

First of all, allow me to congratulate the country upon the successful LC1 elections and my party for performing very well in the recent elections –(Applause)

Madam Speaker, the water situation in Kisoro is alarming. People are being fed on water like medicine. They are rationing water, for example, in a sub-county, where people are getting water once in a week. We also have people in the hilly terrain who cannot get water at all. 

My prayer is that we request the Ministry of Water and Environment to find some lasting solution to the rising water crisis in Kisoro. Our children are suffering; they are not going to school and so are the other vulnerable people, especially the women and the elderly. 

Where National Water and Sewerage Corporation water is accessible, it cannot also match the capacity of the population. We would like this situation solved so that our people live in peace and harmony. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we ask the Minister of Water and Environment to address the water situation in Kisoro urgently because it has been raised here before.

The Minister for Education and Sports will come and address us on the issue of the increased tuition fees of Makerere University. 

The Minister of Local Government is here; she can talk about issue of guidelines to the LC1 elections. The Minister of Security will address the issue of intrusion into the MTN data centre. 

Honourable Minister of Local Government, when are you inducting your 60,000 leaders?

4.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank you and all my colleagues for participating in LC elections and electing your leaders. I would like to equally thank you for supporting us as a ministry to have the leaders in place.
 
Madam Speaker, regarding the issue raised by my colleague, hon. Muyanja Ssenyonga, our plan as a ministry is; First, to issue a press release guiding these LCs.

Secondly, we are also going to ensure that we send guidelines to local governments. They are not supposed to grab the stamps. The official handover of these stamps must be presided over by the sub-county chiefs. We are going to guide them to ensure that the handover is done officially and also – (Interjections) - yes, in the short term.

Madam Speaker, I thought that I was very clear. I said that –

    i. We are going to issue a press release to guide. We could issue it even tomorrow, so that all the LCs do not just grab the stamps. There must be an official handover in the entire country, presided over by the sub-county chief. 
    ii. We are also going to send guidelines which will include the LC court regulation that the LCs must follow. We are going to send it throughout the country, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Minister for security, are you in position to give us update on the data centre issue?

4.06
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Gen. Elly Tumwine): Madam Speaker, concerning the matter of MTN, I received a report from them. As the Minister for Security, they wrote to me a letter and I have been investigating that matter. I have made a follow up. We are jointly handling it with them to ensure that harmony and continued good relationship prevails, and wherever there was a mistake, we shall correct it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what about the assurance about the safety of the data of the citizens? 

GEN. TUMWINE: MTN has assured us that nothing was affected – totally nothing.

MR SSEGGONA: When the honourable member raised this point, one of the prayers was assurance from the Government that such things that look ugly in the eyes of the community, need not happen again.

We have a procedure under the law which guides on when you want to access premises. It is conventional amongst all civilised nations, with civilised leaders like ours. What one needs to do is, you go through the due process. You do not just invade, especially in a country like ours, where we have seen people with masks entering premises of civil society organisations, NGOs and even our personal homes. It is about decency. I have not had the minister address that point. Are we proceeding right to allow the minister to sit without answering that cardinal question? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, instead of having the minister answer casually, he should come with a statement about that incident then we can get the answers. The minister should speak first – (Laughter)

GEN TUMWINE: Madam Speaker, I have said and I repeat it. We are investigating the matter, and if we find that there was a mistake, we will correct it.

4.10
MR MUBARAK MUNYAGWA (FDC, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Madam Speaker, thank you so much. As the minister plans to come in with a statement, I would like him to also include the scenario in which the chief of ISO, Colonel Kaka, went to the press and made unprofessional allegations that FDC, led by “His Excellency,” rtd Col Dr Besigye, was involved in committing atrocities around the country. 

Madam Speaker, he paraded suspects and alleged that FDC is involved in the “panga squad” which was at the forefront of killing of Ugandans. There are no official investigations that have been opened on the rtd col Dr Besigye and Ms Ingrid Turinawe. He just gave a casual talk which does not befit a person who is in charge of the security of this country. Honourable minister, we hope you give us information.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you are exceeding your privileges. We were talking about the data centre. You need to raise that issue separately and you need to do it substantively.

4.12
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda North County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. We will need clarification from the Prime Minister on the letter which we received from the President, regarding the fleet of four wheel-drive cars, pick-ups and sharp shooters.

Madam Speaker, I have never asked for such security, but I saw my name aligned among those going to acquire the pick-ups and sharp shooters; I do not know who they are meant to shoot. That is an issue that will be resolved later, but the clarification I would need is, are they buying for each and every MP?

Secondly, we know that we have our colleagues who might need security. It is up to me to determine whether I need extra security or not. I do appreciate the President for being concerned. I, therefore, propose that in case we have MPs who need extra security of sharp shooters, those MPs should register themselves with the Clerk to Parliament. You get their list before the procurement is done.

You go ahead and submit it to the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development, and they only purchase cars and sharp shooters for those MPs. Some of us that do not need them - I also request that, that money saved for buying a car for my Constituency  be given to me to go and renovate – okay, send it to my district to go and re-innovate Bitereko Health Centre III that has no beds, medicine and medical officers. I beg to submit Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the 27th June, on your request, we had a meeting with the President concerning security. You are the ones that raised those issues. It was an all-party caucus – Order, honourable members, I will arrange with the Commission to study the letter. All we did yesterday was to give you the letter. It was just for delivery to you. I will, therefore, study the letter with the Commission and we shall get back to you, on how to move on that issue. Thank you.

Let me ask the Minister of Health to answer the issues of Hepatitis B.

4.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to apologise that I could not make it in time yesterday. I was travelling, but I just wanted to appreciate the issue that was raised by hon. Jalia Bintu on Hepatitis B and the challenges in Masindi.

Madam Speaker, I recall that we had informed this House that we are proceeding to provide Hepatitis B vaccines to the entire population, although this will be done in a phased manner, beginning with the hardest hit areas or areas with the highest prevalence, moving to those with the lowest prevalence. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, allow me to inform Members that we covered the districts of northern Uganda and then we went to the districts of Teso, which followed in prevalence, and then West Nile. Towards the end of the last financial year, we went to the Busoga region and hepatitis B vaccination is still going on there. This financial year, we are going to the districts of Bukedi, Bugisu and Kapchorwa. Of course, because of the challenge in Masindi, we shall include Masindi and some districts in the central region areas. Allow me to name those districts; they include Mubende, Nakasongola, Buvuma and then Butambala. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we would like to assure Members that we shall cover the entire country but in a phased manner. Masindi is covered this financial year. 

4.17
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank the Minister of State for Health for the clarification she is trying to make regarding the hepatitis B vaccination throughout the country. 

When this exercise started in the hardest hit areas of northern and eastern Uganda, the Ministry of Health did not do comprehensive work on the ground. There were a number of subcounties across the north and east that did not have health centres III and up to today, they have not been attended to. 

The statement being made by the minister implies that the ministry did a commendable job, which is not correct. Where I come from - Kapelebyong County - there are subcounties that have not been attended to up to now, and these include Okungur, Akoromit and Akeriau. That is why I say that the statement that has been presented on the Floor of Parliament by the Ministry of Health does not have accurate facts regarding the ministry’s attempt to address the question of hepatitis B across the northern and eastern parts of this country. Therefore, we would not like the same situation to continue in Busoga, Buganda and the western regions. The ministry should systematically revisit the previous areas, where they started tackling the problem, before proceeding. 

At one of the Committee of Health meetings, I challenged the officials of the Ministry of Health to respond to these issues I am raising. They told me that they were going back to the affected districts and later on, they would come back. However, up to today, they have not given a report on this issue. That is why I am saying that we cannot afford to address the health issues concerning the citizens of this country in a haphazard manner. We are not victimising the ministry but we are calling upon them to be very thorough in their work. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is it true that there are areas which you did not handle? Are you only at health centres III? 

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, when we introduced mass vaccination of the population against this disease, we sat with the leadership in the various districts. They wanted us to implement this hepatitis B vaccination using the usual campaign mode that we use, which implies providing allowances to health workers every time they go out to the health facilities. However, we told them that it was not possible for us to do that. Therefore, we agreed with the district teams that we should have these vaccines in all health facilities and this is what we did. 

We also advised that where they do not have health centres III in districts, they should make their own local arrangements to go down to the people and reach out. However, it is a pity that some of the districts did not pay attention to this. 

Of course, we also held meetings with the district leadership in all the districts that were given vaccines. I think this was last year in October. We invited Members of Parliament, told them our challenges and asked these people to go back to the ground and see how best to implement and provide these vaccines to the population. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, the challenge is at the district level. This is why we could not leave – You heard about the vaccines finding their way into private health facilities. We have had to withdraw vaccines in certain areas so that they do not expire in these facilities. The problem is really with the districts that want us to facilitate them with allowances in order to provide vaccines to the population. 

I appreciate the challenge that was raised by the Member of Parliament from Kapelebyong, but it is something that we shall gradually go back to and correct. As a result, we are not ending the vaccination exercise; we have to move on. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MS LILLY ADONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. 

We are all aware that hepatitis B has got a social-economic impact on the community, more or less like HIV/AIDS. I remember when the vaccination was taking place in Nwoya District, many families fell apart just because after testing positive, there were a lot of accusations that went around. There were families that broke down and even some people went as far as committing suicide because they were told that they were sick. All this happened because there was no proper pre-testing and post-testing counselling carried out. 

I would like to find out from the minister if they have a plan or something related to that, so that this can move hand in hand with the HIV/AIDS programme. This is because even when you test positive for HIV, you can live long because you are placed on antiretroviral treatment. I would, therefore, like to find out how they are integrating it either with the HIV/AIDS programme or a different programme to handle the testing and counselling exercise, like it is done with HIV/AIDS programmes. Thank you. 

MS PROSSY MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas we are talking about the hepatitis B vaccine, are you aware that there are even no polio vaccines in hospitals? 

Yesterday, I took my daughter for immunisation. I am actually supposed to be on leave but I had to come and present this on the Floor of Parliament. There are no vaccines in hospitals. There were long lines and mothers were moving from hospital to hospital trying to find out which hospital had polio vaccines. Therefore, I am seeking for clarification from the minister as to whether she is aware of what is going on in the country. Thank you very much. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to acknowledge that we had challenges. We discovered that at the time when we were implementing this hepatitis B vaccination, we did not have adequate information about this disease. We have corrected that. Before we go to a district, we actually convene meetings, train the health workers and also encourage them to ensure that they just do not give the information to those who are found positive but they also give them some counselling and assurance. 

This is because not every person that is tested positive for hepatitis B will actually develop chronic hepatitis B. From statistics, it is just about 30 per cent of those who are positive that graduate to chronic hepatitis B. Therefore, I just want to assure you that we are doing everything possible. We are encouraging our health workers not to just break the news to them but we have also trained them and as we speak now, we even have treatment guidelines, which were lacking before.

Regarding the polio vaccine, allow me, Madam Speaker, to follow up this matter. I will give a statement on this on Tuesday. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATE OF SECURITY IN THE COUNTRY

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you speaking for all the ministers?

4.26
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Gen. Elly Tumwine): Madam Speaker and honourable members, peace be with you - (Interjection) - That is the way greetings start in every language; it is about wishing everybody peace.

Madam Speaker, my colleagues, the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, had commitments regarding security matters. They are therefore not able to make it and so they requested me to ask the House to give us time next week so that we can give a statement as required.

However, I wanted to give an explanation on what was specifically raised yesterday - the messages. On the security situation, it is not long ago when the President - (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the statement by the ministers is an item on the Order Paper, which is governed by our rules and even by how we will intervene. It was not meant to be a casual statement or an afterthought, like the way it is being presented. He said that although they are not ready to give a statement, they can say something about what was raised yesterday; how then do we deal with this within our Rules of Procedure because we are supposed to raise issues after a statement has been presented?

The point of order I am raising against the minister, who is one of the longest-serving Members of this Parliament, is whether he should casually deal with a matter of security that is itemised on the Order Paper to be processed by this Parliament. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when we requested the three of you to come, we really wanted a comprehensive statement - written and uploaded - which we can debate. Therefore, we shall not allow you to just speak casually today. Come together with your colleagues with a written statement, circulate it to Members and then come to the Floor. Thank you.

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought that is what I actually said. I said that we are going to prepare a collective statement about the security situation in the nation as required by this Parliament and bring it next week. However, I just wanted to remind you that not long ago, the President explained the security situation in this country; he spent a whole day with Members of Parliament. 

I want to assure the Members and the public that the messages on social media, which are alarmist, first of all are criminal; anybody who propagates, broadcasts, and/or amplifies them is participating in that crime. Threatening, worrying or scaring the public is not good. Ugandans are safe, secure and free to exercise their duties, to do their work and nobody should stop them. The security of the country is in the hands of the agencies that are assigned by the Constitution and not in the hands of social media. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE RISING POWER TARIFFS

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In 2017, this Parliament approved a tax waiver specifically on income tax. On top of that, we have also been holding protracted discussions with the developer of Bujagali Energy Limited and their lenders. These discussions ended last month and we have certain proposals regarding the tariff –(Interruption)

MR KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I thought the minister would have taken a lesson from the previous situation. This is an item on the Order Paper, which says a statement by the honourable Minster of Energy and Minerals on rising power tariffs; therefore, we expect a statement. While this item is fully programmed on our Order Paper, the Minister is here giving a casual brief to Parliament.

Madam Speaker, it looks like they are trying to undermine even the powers of the Speaker of Parliament. For him to simply come and make a casual statement - is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have a statement? Is it uploaded on the iPads?

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, I was still stating the preamble; I have not said anything. (Laughter) However, I beg your indulgence. I was still stating the preamble and I was going to say that on Monday, we are presenting the whole picture to Cabinet. Therefore, I would like to pray that you allow us to come here on Thursday with a prepared statement. Thank you.

4.34
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I recall so well that towards the close of the last session, you gave a directive to the same Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to come and give an explanation to the House pertaining to the issue of the African Development Bank (ADB) loan, which has stalled. It was supposed to be used to serve areas of eastern Uganda and part of central, but the ministry has taken it so lightly.

Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for you to direct the minister that on Tuesday next week, without fail, he brings a statement to explain what has happened? Uganda has already incurred a lot of costs. We have already spent too much and some selfish people at the ministry mismanaged the procurement process. Wouldn’t it be right for the minister to come next week, without fail, and give an explanation on this matter? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lubogo, isn’t that the matter you raised yesterday about the ADB loan? Are you again raising it today? Honourable minister, the issue of the rising tariffs by Electricity Regulation Authority is a matter of grave concern to this country. We want answers quickly.

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, I pray that this House gives us up to Thursday next week. On Monday, we are going to Cabinet with this matter. On Tuesday and Wednesday, we will prepare and incorporate everything. I would like to bring a complete picture of these tariffs to this Floor so that we discuss it once. I would like to request that on that same day, you permit us to present a statement on the $100 million loan from ADB. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Both those items will go on the Order Paper on Thursday without fail. That is a Government assurance.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You have ruled that they will come on Thursday, but I think Government needs to take this Parliament seriously. Every minister standing – the one in charge of security will always say that because of security issues, the ones of defence and internal affairs were not able to attend Parliament. Can the Prime Minister explain to Parliament whether Government is on recess so that we can deal with other issues in Parliament? (Laughter)

LAYING OF REPORTS

4.38
THE CHAIRPERON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Jovah Kamateeka): Madam Speaker, I rise to lay on the Table the 20th Annual Report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission, 2017. I beg to lay. 

In the same vein, I would like to lay on the Table the braille version of the 20th Report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission, 2017. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. They will be sent to the committee. However, I would like to thank the Uganda Human Rights Commission for preparing a braille version as well as the other ordinary version. The report is sent to the Committee on Human Rights. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO UA 57 MILLION ($76.95 MILLION EQUIVALENT) FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK TO SUPPORT THE AGRICULTURE VALUE CHAIN DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (AVCP) – PROJECT 1

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? Okay, let us move on to the next item.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE LIST OF ACCOUNTING OFFICERS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, we asked the accountability committees of this House to evaluate the presentation by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and give us a report. Let me invite the Chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts. 

4.42
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENT) (Mr Reagan Okumu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We were given this assignment yesterday. We sat as a committee and looked through the new appointments. We found that there were a lot of shifts by Ministry of Local Government; these accounting officers have been shifted from their previous dockets yet we have over 200 accounting offices for us to cover. 

To be thorough, we were only able to cover a few; we were unable to cover all the offices. We need sometime in order to be thorough by looking at our past reports because I think there is a lot of trickery. When reports like these are presented to Parliament, they bring you both the postings and assignments. We need to harmonise both the postings and assignments in order to present an adequate report to this House. Therefore, I beg that you give us some time to complete this work. You can even give us a day; we will do it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE).

4.44
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES) (Ms Annita Among): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As already stated by my colleague, we were given this assignment yesterday to verify the accounting officers using a list that was issued by the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury. The Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) has 120 entities. Upon our verification today, we realised that only 43 accounting officers have been reappointed. When we looked at the appointments, there are a lot of contradictions.

We agreed as a committee that we come back to the House and request you to allow us reconcile the list that we have. We have a list where we have accounting officers with a qualified opinion and they have been reappointed. Please, give us time and we reconcile with the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury (PS/ST) so that they take full responsibility when they reappoint these persons. So, give us time to reconcile with PS/ST and with other committees on public accounts. Thank you.

Additionally, Madam Speaker, you may have to give an order to the PS/ST to ensure that we have this reconciled as fast as possible.

4.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) (MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Just like my colleague has said, we looked at the document that was laid before this House yesterday and we also looked at the reports we have been considering as a committee over the years. We noticed that there are some requirements by the Public Finance Management Act that the PS/ST was supposed to comply with that were not complied with. 

This list was supposed to be submitted at the time of submitting the budget, which was not done. Concerning the document that he submitted to this Parliament, he did not submit another one to say that the situation had changed. Therefore, we require audience with him so that we are not accused of passing judgment without giving them a hearing.

In the same vein, we are asking that we are given more time so that we bring an exhaustive report to this House concerning all the accounting officers of the entities under our purview. I beg to submit.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the chairs of these three committees. Since the financial year started on 1 July 2018, there are some transfers which have been made. Does this mean that these people who were transferred should go to their new postings or should they first stay? Thank you.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, in addition to what hon. Waluswaka has said, it is okay for us to spend as much time as possible to verify these names, but we changed the budgeting calendar. The budget should be ready by the end of June so that by the 1st of July, it becomes operational. We did this so as to do away with issues of vote-on-account where money used to delay.

It is now almost shocking that we are getting into mid-July and accounting officers are not in place. The PS/ST was supposed to have submitted the list –(Interjections)– the Members are saying that they are there. The fact that we are trying to put them in place now means that they are not there. Their names were supposed to have been submitted to Parliament and we should have Okayed them so that the budget becomes operational.

Madam Speaker, even Members of Parliament have not been paid their allowances for July. They cannot be paid because Parliament has not passed the list of accounting officers. Therefore, the clarification I am seeking is: Are there no sanctions against an accounting officer, like the PS/ST, when they are inefficient? The budget should be operational right now. How long is this exercise going to take because departments are suffering?

THE SPEAKER: We shall respond to that.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I think the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is letting us down. When we amended the Public Finance Management Act to include the budget, it was so that the budget moves in tandem with the Chief Accounting Officers (CFOs). Currently, where monies have been uploaded into the financial integrated system, money has been transferred and some Chief Administrative Officers are working. 

These people delayed to bring the names before the budget and we are now stuck. Nobody can touch the money until we have a work plan which is supposed to be implemented and we shall lose one month. That is why you find that the finance minister submits the money late and it is returned to the centre.

I think we need to deal with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We need to check the way their work is done. They were convinced beyond reasonable doubt that before the financial year ends, everything must have been accounted for and the financial year closed on the 31st of June. The money is now uploaded on the system but it cannot be transferred –

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to allay the fears of Members. The office of the Chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) has been receiving letters of appointment of these accounting officers, although they are for the districts. What I would like to say is that this has already been done and that is another problem that we have to grapple with. These officers have already been appointed and the ministry is just bringing the names for Parliament to rubber stamp.

Secondly, they already failed on their part because the Public Finance Management Act stipulates clearly that they should have been submitted at the time of submitting the budget. The purpose of that was to help us to verify and look into the reports that we have been looking at, to be able to make a decision. They did not do that. They have done it after we have passed the budget.

Madam Speaker, there is no need to hurry. We should not be boxed into doing something that is not neat, smart and that somebody can challenge after we have made our decision. I would still beg that we are given time to do a thorough job as Parliament. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I would like to say that I am happy with what the House is doing. We have now discovered that under COSASE, there are more than 60 entities that do not have accounting officers. If we had not asked for verification, we would not have got this information. If we can give you up to Thursday, would that be okay? Can you report on Thursday next week?

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, I think Thursday would be okay, if my colleagues are okay with it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us give our committees time so that they can handle this issue and we deal with it properly and soberly. 

MR KYAGULANYI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter, and I quote rule 81 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament under which I was ruled out of order.

Madam Speaker, in this very House right now, I see various Members putting on caps. An example is the Right Honourable Gen. Moses Ali. (Laughter) People wear caps to signify various meanings. I wonder if it is procedurally correct to single me out simply because of the colour of the cap I was wearing when there are Members in this House putting on headgear of the same colour. Is it procedurally correct to single me out and leave the rest to sit?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have ruled in this House that the Muslims are entitled to wear their attire. It is on record in this House. Hon. Wambede is a Rabbi. He is a bishop of his church and that is why he is wearing that cap. You are not a bishop of anything and that is why you are out of order. (Laughter)

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Back to the issue of accounting officers, a week in terms of Government operations is a very long time. In the interim, what can we do? This is because we have the business community, money is on the account, loans are incurring interest, banks are compounding, money is available but you cannot pay people. Can we think of an interim solution as we await parliamentary approval?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those people already have appointment letters. 

Honourable members, I think we have come to the end of today’s business. House is adjourned to Tuesday, 17th July at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.57 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 17 July 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

