Tuesday, 17 July 2012

Parliament met at 2.20 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are welcome to this afternoon sitting. I wish to formally announce the death of Mzee Andrew Adimola, one of the few remaining elders who are associated with the independence of Uganda. Mzee Andrew Adimola was a seasoned administrator who held the position of permanent secretary for over a decade. He was a diplomat and represented Uganda in the Palace of St James in London as the first black High Commissioner just before independence. 

He was at the centre of the Lancaster discussions on the independence of Uganda. He served as a minister during the Uganda National Liberation Front Government immediately after the Tanzania Peoples Defence Forces together with the Ugandan liberators took over the reins of government in 1979.

He served as a Constituent Assembly delegate and had been living in retirement in Gulu. It is a great tragedy as we prepare to celebrate the 50th year of Uganda’s Independence that this great man will not be with us. He joins the likes of Prof. Kakoma, Prof. Senteza-Kajubi and hon. Cuthbert Obwangor who were icons of the national independence movement of Uganda and have now passed on. 

I wish to inform you that Cabinet has taken a decision that he will be given an official burial and all the arrangements for his burial are to be met by the Government. He will be brought to Parliament on Thursday, 19 July 2012 at 9.00 a.m. and lay in state where mourners will view his remains. The sitting of Parliament on Thursday afternoon will be dedicated to paying tribute to this gallant son of Uganda. Honourable members are requested to come in large numbers and give a befitting farewell to Mzee Andrew Adimola. 

Other details about the programme for his official burial and other matters will be communicated in due course. In the meantime, be informed that hon. Betty Bigombe, the Minister of State for Water, is coordinating all the burial arrangements. Let us stand and observe a moment of silence in his honour.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to, on a different note, pleasantly announce that the copies of the Rules of Procedure 2012 have been delivered and are available for collection from the South Wing reception. They are this time in black binding, like the one I am holding. They replaced the red to mark a difference.

Let me take this opportunity to once again thank the House for the time and effort put into the review of the Rules of Procedure. Special tribute goes to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline for the hard and good work done on this sacred guide of Parliament. We take this time to thank the chairman of the committee, hon. Fox Odoi. (Applause)

Honourable members, I urge you to read these rules and internalise them. Some provisions may have shifted and so you need to recast on them. I would not like to keep on ruling members out of order in the House because of not quoting or citing the appropriate rules when we are seeking to deliberate in the House. Under the rules now, for example, no committee exists as sessional; they have since been renamed sectoral committees. Further, no position exists as vice-chairperson of a committee. The rules describe such officials of Parliament as deputy chairpersons. 

The message is that for you to be a good and effective parliamentarian, you must master the Rules of Procedure which govern the conduct of deliberations and all matters in this Parliament. There is no shortcut whatsoever; you have to either master them or you are completely doomed. 

Honourable members, we have a very elaborate Order Paper and I want us to handle as much business as possible. We have a tight legislative calendar. We have to commence on the debate of the State of the Nation Address and thereafter, embark on the budget process. I will therefore allocate time to each specific item and strictly stick to the timelines agreed.  

With effect from today, all matters of urgent public importance will be presented at the end of the Order Paper or at the time when the Speaker deems that the Order Paper business should be suspended or concluded before. (Applause) So if you have an urgent matter, patiently wait for the conclusion of business on the Order Paper and thereafter – (Laughter) - This has been a result of many things as you are aware; for example, the honourable member raised the issue of Alito the other day and the minute we finished, he also left. So we do not want this matter to continue, and several of you have done the same. So this time, you will have to wait for the Order Paper patiently until those matters are concluded.  

I would like to make a small adjustment to the Order Paper before we go to the business here. I see we did not capture it in the copy that I have; I do not know whether it is in the copies you have. There is a petition; can I deal with that petition before we deal with anything else. I will alter the Order Paper to bring the petition forward. Is the mover of the petition here? Please, let us go to item No. 6 and we move from there. 

MR OTADA: I thank you. In line with the Order Paper, when I look at item No.7 and 8, I thought that since item No.8 was exhaustively discussed, we could bring it forward other than having item No.7 which is a new report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is okay. I will handle that at the appropriate time. I thank you. 

In the gallery, we have a body of teachers from the entire country, members of UNATO.  (Applause) They have come to listen in to this petition which was brought in this morning and Parliament decided that it should also receive its treatment this afternoon in the House. 

PETITION BY THE CITIZEN ACTION FOR QUALITY PUBLIC EDUCATION

MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

The humble petition of the Citizens Action for Quality Public Education, coordinated under the offices of Uganda Joint Christian Council; Uganda Moslem Education Association; Uganda National Teachers Union; Forum for Education NGOs in Uganda; Uganda National NGO Forum; Action Aid International Uganda are deeply concerned about the deterioration of public education in Uganda, which is now in dire crisis. 

Showeth and states that the Citizens Action for Quality Public Education appreciates the introduction of UPE and USE. However, the retention and completion rates of the enrolled learners in UPE have significantly dropped to lower levels than all the countries in the region, with the girl-child being the most affected.

This has been mainly attributed to overcrowding in schools, poor sanitation especially for the girl-child, and hunger as a result of no lunch which affects the concentration level of children in class, among other factors, to the prevailing high inflation and the economic situation in the country.

The learning and teaching environment in our public schools is not conducive for learning. Many pupils continue to study under trees and in some cases antiquated structures in the name of classrooms. 

The Uwezo Uganda 2011 report revealed that 92 percent of P.3 pupils tested could not correctly read a P.2 level English story, while 78 percent of P.3 pupils could not solve numerical division sums of P.2 level. By implication, all our children in P.3 should be in Primary 1. 

The government policy on automatic promotion of children from one class to another regardless of the grade scored and performances has facilitated the churning out of poor quality students. 

A whole generation, and by extension the country, is in danger of inflicted mediocrity as a result of this sort of education policies and practices. Our country is in danger of being uncompetitive in the world because of the quality of its human resource. 

Teaching as a profession and as a process is in dire crisis. The quality of teaching is wanting. The teachers’ absenteeism is high and teacher motivation is at an all time low. Deployment, management and supervision are inadequate. Moreover, teacher to pupil ratio remains high, at 1 to 60, and worse in many districts, for example in Kaabong it is at 1 to 114; in Kitgum, it is 1 to 93 and Pader 1 to 86 against the desired ratio of 1 to 55. A large number of teachers are not on the government payroll. According to the UNATU report, an average of 500 teachers are cleared off the payroll.

The teachers’ union has been denied their legal rights to collective bargaining over salaries and allowances. Instead, the government has arbitrarily, and contrary to earlier commitment, offered teachers a salary increment that was neither negotiated nor commensurate to the prevailing high inflation and economic situation in the country. The participation of the teacher’s union in the budget process has been restricted to listening to the budget speeches read out by the honourable Minister of Finance, a mockery of the Public Service (Negotiating, Consultative and Disputes Settlement Machinery) Act of 2008 and the recognition agreement signed with the Uganda Teachers’ Union in November 22, 2011. 

Government budget allocation to the education sector has continued to decline from 17 percent in the financial year of 2007/2008 to 14 percent in the financial year 2011/2012. Consequently, funding such as the capitation grant remains at deplorable level.

Now therefore, by this petition, the petitioners pray that Parliament resolves and urges Government that: 

1.  	The Education (Pre-Primary and Post Primary) Act of 2008, Act No.13 of 2008, be amended for parents and guardians to pay a fee for the provision of lunch for all children at school. (Applause)

2. 	Government increases the capitation grant from Shs 10,000 per child per year to at least a minimum of Shs 22,000 per child per year in the UPE system. (Applause)

3. 	Government constructs more decent classrooms as well as rehabilitation and reconstruction of classrooms and construction of latrines. 

4.  	Recruitment of more teachers is very important. 

5. 	Government should ensure the operationalisation and full implementation of the Public Service (Negotiating, Consultative and Disputes Settlement Machinery) Act of 2008, Act No.10 of 2008, particularly the setting up of the Public Service Negotiations and Consultative Council for negotiations of collective bargaining agreements. 

6.    There is also need to increase teachers’ basic salary from the current entry point of Shs 273,000 to at least Shs 546,000 in the financial year 2012/2013. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, allow me to say this – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that a prayer?

MRS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I am going to read the prayers but before I read the prayers, I wanted to –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please read the prayers.

MRS SENINDE: Okay. Mr Speaker and colleagues, now therefore by this petition, the petitioners pray that Parliament resolves and urges Government the following – I have already raised them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, would you like to lay it on the Table for the committee to act on it?

MRS SENINDE: Mr Speaker and colleagues, I beg to lay this petition on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it signed?

MRS SENINDE: The petition has been signed on behalf of the Citizen’s Action for Quality Public Education by Uganda Joint Christian Council, by Rev. Fr Dr Sylvester Rwomukubwe, the Executive Secretary of UJCC. It has also been signed by Uganda Moslem Education Association, by Alhaji Abubakar Kakembo, General Secretary of Uganda Moslem Education Association. It has been signed by the Uganda National Teachers’ Union (UNATU) by Ms Teopista Birungi Mayanga, General Secretary. It has also been signed by Forum for Education NGOs in Uganda by Fredrick Mwesigye, the national coordinator. It has been signed by the Uganda National NGO Forum, by Richard Ssewakiryanga, the Executive Director. Finally, it has been signed by ActionAid International Uganda by Arthur Larok, who is the Country Director. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay this petition on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MRS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, allow me to say one word.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member. Let the records capture that the House has received that petition very well. Honourable members, we know the situations involved in these issues. The matter stands referred to the appropriate committee to handle within the timeframe allowed by the rules of this House. 

Petitions are normally focused on short issues and they are direct, not like Bills. So, we urge the committee to act on this expeditiously and report to this House so that we can take an appropriate decision. We are at the time of dealing with the budget and some of the issues raised in this petition relate to the budget. That is why the committee should find time to deal with these issues expeditiously.

Lastly, now that Parliament has taken over this matter, I would like to urge the teachers throughout the country to wait for action from us. There is a saying that if you have reared a dog to guard your compound, you let it bark; you don’t have to bark yourself. So, I would like to urge the teachers to stay calm while we do the barking as Parliament, and even biting. (Laughter)

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have teachers’ leaders and representatives of the coordinating organisations. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Also in the gallery we have pupils and teachers of St Mauritius Mixed Boarding Primary School, represented in Parliament by hon. Kaddu Mukasa, the Member of Parliament for Mityana South. They have also come to observe the proceedings. I ask you to join me in welcoming them too. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE EAST AFRICAN EXCISE MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2012

2.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on the Table the East African Excise Management (Amendment) Bill, 2012. This Bill is supported by a certificate of financial implications. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you also asking for the Bill to be read for the first time?

MR KAJARA: Yes, Mr Speaker, I beg that the Bill be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That is captured on the records and is hereby referred to the appropriate committee for action within the timeframe provided by the rules. In 45 days, we will need a report on that Bill in Parliament.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012

2.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2012. I beg to move that the Bill be read for the first time. It is duly supported by a certificate of financial implications as required by the law.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee to act within the timeframe stated earlier, which is 45 days.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill 2012”, be read for the first time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. That has been captured by the records and the Bill stands referred to the appropriate committee. The 45 days apply.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FINANCE ACT 2006 (AMENDMENT) BILL 2012

2.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Finance Act 2006 (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read for the first time. The Bill is supported by a certificate of financial implications as provided for by the law. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that, and it is hereby referred to the appropriate committee for action within the timeframe provided for in the rules.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE EXCISE TARIFF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012

2.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read for the first time. This Bill is also supported by a certificate of financial implications in accordance with the law.  I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let the records capture that. Thank you so much. The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee.  Honourable members, you will realise that all these Bills presented today relate to the supplies side of the budget. So, urgent action is required from the committees to respond to these within the timeframe provided for by the Budget Act.

PRESENTATIONS BY CHAIRPERSONS ON THE STATUS OF BUSINESS IN COMMITTEES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that this has been caused by the unavailability of information from the committees on the status of matters before them. That is why we have taken this step to make Parliament get abreast with what is before these committees, what the status of these businesses is and how many days are remaining for them to present their reports to Parliament. We will start with the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

2.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Kasirivu Atwooki): Mr Speaker, there are two petitions with this committee. There is a petition on cotton and the other is on tobacco. I would like to report that the reports in respect of these petitions are ready for presentation before this House.

There are also two Bills, one on plant protection and the other is the Plant Health and Variety Bill. The report on the Bill on Plant Protection requires some fine-tuning and legal opinion before we can present it to this House. The other Bill on Plant Health and Variety is still under consideration. That is the status of the activities in my committee, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairman. You need to expedite your actions in order to satisfy the rules. 

2.46
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Milton Muwuma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The business before this committee stands as follows: 

1. 	Report on the state of the Uganda Prisons farms. On this one, I would like to say that the draft report is ready for consideration by the committee; we are in the final stages. 

2. 	Report on the state of accommodation at the Uganda Police Force. The draft report in respect of this business is also ready for consideration by the committee. 

3. 	Inquiry into the acquisition and disposal of the UPDF/Ministry of Defence land. On this one, I would like to say that business is still ongoing.

4. 	Eviction of civilians from Kal Parish, Pabbo Sub County in Amuru District tabled by hon. Gilbert Bukenya –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which honourable member? (Laughter)

MR MUWUMA: It was tabled by hon. Gilbert Olanya; I am sorry, colleagues. My apologies to you, honourable member; Sir, he has accepted my apologies. 

5. 	The inquiry into clashes between the Basongora and the Bakonzo in Kasese and Bundibugyo districts. This one was presented last week and we are yet to start. We are working on a programme on when to begin. 

6. 	The report of the delegation that travelled to Somalia to assess the situation of the UPDF under AMISOM. The report is ready. We just pray for space anytime to give an update on the AMISOM forces in Somalia.

7. 	The report on the disarmament assessment. The committee visited some regions, specifically Teso sub region and Karamoja sub region, to assess the impact of the disarmament exercise. That report is also in its final stages. 

Mr Speaker, it should be noted that while business from the Eighth Parliament was saved, the only Bill that is supposed to come to the committee is the Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Control Bill. However, as we speak, the Minister of Internal Affairs has not yet tabled it. It is our prayer that Government gives the committee business because at some material time, you will be assessing performance and since there is no Bill before the committee, we may be judged wrongly. It is our prayer, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of Government Business, can you take note of that particular item. The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Control Bill was brought forward by a resolution of Parliament and a reprint was ordered so that it could be sent back to the committee. Please ensure that this happens within the timeframe so that the committee can finish its work. 

2.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Ms Sarah Mwebaza): Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, the Committee on East African Affairs is just going to sit to generate business. I had not yet been allocated a clerk and I got the communication today. I have only got business regarding the policy statement and recently, the East African Excise (Amendment) Bill was tabled and I promised that when we sit, we shall forward the report. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that this is a new committee that was just created. So, I am sure the business is still flocking in. 

2.51
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Sylivia Namabidde): Mr Speaker, the Committee on Education and Sports is also a new committee, but when we still had the Committee on Social Services there were petitions that had been presented to that committee, which we have taken on. One was the petition of the head teachers of Wakiso District Teachers Association. There is also this new petition that has been presented today to the House by hon. Rosemary Sseninde, which we still have to handle. 

We also have a report which we inherited from the Committee on Social Services that was ready, and this is a report from the petition of Makerere University students. We are yet to look at it as a committee but when we agree as members of the committee, we shall present it before the House. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

2.53
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Mr Speaker, we have the following business in our committee, and I will be briefing you on the status of each: 

•	The Accountants Bill is ready for presentation. We concluded with all the people we wanted to meet. Our report is ready. It should be on your table maybe tomorrow for scheduling on the Order Paper.  

•	The Population Council Bill is in the final stages. A few days from now, we will have it on the Order Paper. 

•	The Public Finance and Accountability (Amendment) Bill was tabled here as we wound up the other session. We shall be considering it together with the Budget Bills. 

•	We are beginning on the Anti Money Laundering Bill, which was re-tabled here as a reprinted copy, in the coming one week. We shall be working on it as we work on the budget and the Bills thereto. 

•	The Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalization Bill; ideally this was saved from the other Parliament. It is before our committee but there was a need for the Ministry of Finance to re-table a reprinted copy. They have not done that and we cannot proceed unless you advise us otherwise. 

Mr Speaker, there is pressure from the sector players who had hoped to see this Bill progress, and we are getting petitions. They want to come and appear, hoping that we are considering it but we are actually not considering it because of that procedural hiccup. Maybe the minister could tell us because unless it is withdrawn, we consider it business to proceed with. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, we have already planned for the very Bills you just committed to the committee. We start Monday. Thank you so much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable ministers, you have heard about this particular Bill for a reprint. Mr Chairman, I did not follow the Public Finance and Accountability (Amendment) Bill – is it an old Bill? I thought it is a brand new Bill.

MR TUMWEBAZE: No, it is an amendment. It is amending the existing Public Finance and Accountability Bill. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which one is repealing the Budget Act? 

MR TUMWEBAZE: That very one. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So it is not an amendment Bill? 

MR TUMWEBAZE: I may not understand the details really but that is it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not an amendment Bill, I recall; it is a completely new Bill. Honourable minister, is that the position?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Yes, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is it? 

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, you asked me whether there was a new Bill and I have religiously said, yes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, it is not an amendment Bill?

MR OMACH: No. However, it is repealing some two Bills, one of which is the proposal to repeal the Budget Act and the Public Finance and Accountability Act.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I thought. 

2.56
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Margaret Baba Diri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Our programme is as follows: 

We have the National Council on Older Persons Bill. The report is ready and we can present it anytime if we are put on the programme. 

Secondly, we have the National Council for Disability (Amendment) Bill, and this week we have got a programme. I think by the end of next week, we shall have the programme ready. 

We have two petitions - one on children tabled by hon. Florence Mutyabule, the chairperson of the Forum for Children. We are going to discuss it. We have an older petition on the women who are working in Iraq. I do not remember the honourable member who tabled the petition. Actually, the Committee on Equal Opportunities would like to take it over but it is ours. We are going to discuss it and we shall present it.

Last but not the least, of course we shall have the policy statement from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. We are on the programme. Thank you very much.

5.58
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Banarbas Tinkasimire): Mr Speaker and honourable members, my committee is considering a petition concerning the eviction of bona fide owners and occupants of the land in Rwamwanja, Nkoma Sub County in Kibaale County, Kamwenge District. We have practically concluded this report. However, for avoidance of violating rule 64, the sub judice rule, we have decided that we shall publish the report when the people who went to court, the bona fide occupants, have got the answer from court.

We also have another petition, which concerns the unjust removal from service and breach of contract by KCCA, which was brought by hon. Yona Musinguzi. We finished the report but as we were trying to see that it goes on the Order Paper, the petitioners ran to court. We cannot at this stage publish the report in order not to violate our rule 64. 

We have an inquiry, and it included a field trip to Nairobi, about the settlement of refugees. The report is ready, Mr Speaker. When we are accorded an opportunity, we shall be able to present it. We equally have another report which is ready on monitoring of PRDP activities under the Prime Minister’s office. When we are accorded an opportunity on the Order Paper, we shall be able to present. Thank you.

MR SEGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My colleague, hon. Tinkasimire, has referred to rule 64, the sub judice rule. However, when I read this rule, particularly sub rule (1) and (5), which must be read together, they provide that a matter can only be sub judice if the Speaker rules that it is sub judice; and the bar is not about presentation of the report but discussion of the report. 

I wish to be guided whether we are proceeding properly. Before you make a finding that the presentation of this report is sub judice, is the chairperson of the presidential affairs committee procedurally correct to say that the committee cannot present this report? My understanding is that there are two elements: First, it must be on a matter of discussion and two, it is only the Speaker that can make that finding that the House cannot debate because it may be sub judice.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those are matters that are handled administratively. The details of the delay were not brought to the attention of the Speaker. Now that it has come up, it will be handled administratively.

3.03
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Ms Paula Turyahikayo): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker, for this opportunity. The Committee on Information Communication Technology is currently finalising a report on the Uganda Communications Regulatory Authority Bill. I am sure by the end of this week the report will be ready for presentation to this House.

The committee has also developed a work plan for this session and it is awaiting a budget for it to start being operational. We are also starting to review the policy statement with effect from this week. I beg to present.

3.05
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Alex Byarugaba): Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable colleagues, the Committee on Foreign Affairs has the following business before which we hope to conclude, with your permission:

We have a report of the committee on its activities and visits to foreign missions conducted in the first session of the Ninth Parliament. The committee never had the opportunity to present it to this august House. We thought that given an opportunity, we should be able to make this kind of presentation because it is so comprehensive and gives us a lot of insights as far as our embassies and missions abroad are concerned.

The committee is also considering a petition by Ugandans living and working in the United Arab Emirates (UAE). They petitioned Parliament seeking intervention in matters pertaining to the operations of the Ugandan embassy in UAE in relation to their welfare and other matters incidental thereto. This has been an outstanding petition and I think if we got an opportunity, it would be very opportune for us to make this kind presentation to this august House. 

The committee has so far held meetings with all the stakeholders including the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; hon. Betty Bakireke Nambooze and hon. Hussein Kyanjo who sponsored this petition; the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; the Ministry of Internal Affairs and labour exporting companies that send Ugandans to work abroad, most especially to the UAE. The committee further sent a delegation to the UAE to meet the following people: Uganda’s ambassador in Abu Dhabi, UAE; Ugandans living and working in UAE; and Ugandans living and working in Dubai. The draft report is ready to be tabled before this Parliament.

Finally, the Committee on Foreign Affairs will also proceed with the scrutiny of the budget of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs as required under the statute and report to this House as and when given an opportunity.

3.06
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Steven Tashobya): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has a wide mandate. 
We exercise oversight function on 11 accounting institutions plus the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. The committee has the following Bills before it: 

•	The Anti-Homosexuality Bill, 2009; 
•	The Implementation of Government Assurances Bill, 2008; 
•	The HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Bill, 2010; 
•	The Anti-Pornography Bill, 2011; 
•	The Marriage and Divorce Bill, 2009; 
•	The Chattels Securities Bill, 2009; 
•	The Geographical Educations Bill, 2008; and 
•	The Industrial Property Bill, 2009.

As you are aware, we got these Bills late, after the commencement of the session, but nonetheless two Bills were considered and passed by this House, that is, the Companies Bill and the Prohibition of Torture Bill. The Public Order Management Bill is before this House; it was read the Second time and awaits debate and subsequent consideration by this House.

Regarding the Marriage and Divorce Bill of 2009, the committee in the Eighth Parliament considered this Bill in detail and came up with a draft report. In December 2011, the committee communicated to the Attorney-General to submit the concerns that he had received from numerous stakeholders, which led to the postponement of the debate in the Eighth Parliament. The Attorney-General has not come back to us. The view of the committee is that we shall continue to consider the draft report with the committee and present this Bill in the shortest time possible.

We also have a draft report for the Inspector General of Government for the years 1999 to 2006. We shall shortly consider this draft report and present the final report to this august House. 

Mr Speaker, my understanding of this session is to enable us as committees to pray for more time so that after considering the Budget, we have more time to consider these Bills, which we should be able to conclude before the end of October of this year. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence. There is a Bill that was wrongly committed to our committee, the HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Bill of 2010, and yet substantial work had been done on it by a relevant committee. This is to seek your indulgence that you recommit this Bill to the right committee of the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, the particular Bill referred to stands committed to the appropriate committee.

3.12
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESPOURCES (Mr Michael Werikhe): Mr Speaker and colleagues, the Natural Resources Committee is currently handling two Bills, namely, the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill (Bill No. 1) and the Petroleum (Refining, Gas Processing and Conversion, Transportation and Storage) Bill (Bill No.2). We are in the process of finalising our first draft and we hope to have the report for the two Bills ready by the end of this month. We will be ready to present from the first week of next month.

There is also an inquiry into the appointment of the Executive Director of NFA, which we believe will be ready in the third week of next month. The petition by timber dealers and transporters will similarly be ready in the third week of next month.

On the ad hoc committee on the regularisation of the oil sector, most of the work that has been going on within the country has been done. We are remaining with the external leg of investigations and I hope that by the end of next month, we will be doing that. Thereafter we will be in position to present our report.

We are also considering the policy statement this week for Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and the Ministry of Water and Environment. We hope that in the first week of next month, we will be ready to present our report. Those are the assignments to the Natural Resources Committee. (Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you know what is before the committee, just go to the committee. This is just an update of what is going on, how do you seek guidance on it? You are a member of the committee; go to the committee for the details. 

Honourable members, there are seats right at the back there; why are we seating here? That place is completely empty. Please be comfortable; there are seats in the House. Honourable members, please move forward so that members can be seated.

3.15
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Samuel Ssemugaba): Mr Speaker, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure has the status report on infrastructure development in Uganda, which is about to be tabled to this Parliament. We are also handling the Building Control Bill and the report is in its last stages before presentation to this Parliament.

We are handling a petition of the Acholi Parliamentary Group on the Adjumani/Amuru conflict. We are about to present the report. We are awaiting the technical report from Ministry of Lands.

We are also handling a petition about Kalangala Infrastructure Service (KIS). We have not yet started on it because of some logistical support, which we are still awaiting from the Parliamentary Commission so that we can be well facilitated to work on that.

Lastly, next week we are beginning with financial policy statements on the Ministry of Works and the Ministry of Lands.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What about the issue of Moyo, Yumbe and Otuke, which was referred to your committee?

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Speaker, we have not yet handled this because of logistical support but since we have passed the vote-on-account, we shall be well facilitated to handle all those cases.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Re-adjust the list of business on your committee.

3.17
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the vice chairperson of the committee and I got the information today. However, I can competently speak for the committee on the status of work. 

We have handled the petition by hon. Betty Nambooze on behalf of Kiira, Mukono and other town councils on the operations of Pioneer Easy Bus. The report is being compiled and I believe that it will shortly be ready. 

We have also had a discussion regarding the investigation on the Public Service College with the Committee on Social Services. That discussion was not yet complete, and I believe it is work on-going. Other pending work includes the Local Government Act (Amendment) Bill to facilitate and pave way for the elections of LC I’s and LC II’s. 

We are also handling a petition by hon. Ssemujju Nganda from Kiira Town Council and a petition from Mbale councillors regarding the mismanagement of affairs in Mbale District local government. We still have on our table the Regional Government Bill. We also have the consideration of the policy statements of the Ministry of Public Service, the Ministry of Local Government, Public Service Commission and the Local Government Finance Commission. That is my report.

3.19
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Stephen Kasaija): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have two Bills at report stage, the Counterfeit Goods Bill, 2010 and the Uganda National Bureau of Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2010. 

We have petitions from Jinja market traders; from hon. Todwong on UWA encroachment in the North and from the Busongora South MP on UWA encroachment in the Queen Elizabeth National Park. There is also a petition on the Mpokya evictions and a petition by Uganda Traders Association of South Sudan. 

We are proposing trips to see the warehouses in Kapchorwa and Jinja. We also have proposed trips to areas of conflict between the communities and UWA in northern, eastern and western Uganda. We have a visit to Management Training and Advisory Centre (MTAC). We also have a visit to the border markets, and we shall start with Bibiya as a pilot project. We also have a trip to Queen Elizabeth National Park and other parks to see the projects there. 

We are also starting on the ministerial policy statements by meeting the concerned government agencies and the two ministries – Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, and Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage. That is what we have in the short run. 

3.21
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Ms Margaret Iriama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have had a work plan that we are finalising and we are also organising a meeting for members to consider policy statements and ministerial statements. However, we are also waiting for the Bills that were handled by the Committee on HIV and AIDS. That is all we have at the moment. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. That is the status report on the matters pending before the sectoral committees. I think we have taken enough time on this for now. We will deal with the standing committees tomorrow. As for ad hoc committees and other committees with pending business, we shall handle them tomorrow afternoon. 

3.22
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Mr Speaker, the honourable member presented on physical infrastructure and I do not know whether it was an omission, but there was business pertaining to the delayed implementation of the road construction of Kyetume-Katosi-Nyenga which was not mentioned. I think it was a petition which I presented to this Parliament, which was part of – I do not know where that reached because he did not comment on it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, you heard me also pointing out some other matters which were sent to the committee. They will have to harmonise the list. If a member has a matter that was brought to this House but has not been captured in the presentations, this is the moment for you to come, through the Clerk’s office, and have the matter updated so that the committee is aware. They may not be aware because sometimes this work gets lost in the process. So we need to move forward and deal with this. We shall deal with the rest of the committees tomorrow.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Alex Onzima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My ministry was on this Floor just last week and we realised that this matter of LCI and LCII elections has a lot of legal technicalities. My ministry has therefore started consultations with the Attorney-General and as soon as the consultations are over, we will be back on this Floor. Thank you.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to remind the House, and particularly the minister, that this matter of LC elections has come up several times before this House. The last time we were in this House, the Ministry of Local Government together with the Attorney-General’s Chamber promised this House that necessary actions would be taken and the necessary roles would be amended to have these elections conducted by May this year. This was communicated to this House. 

As we talk now, we all know that these institutions are acting illegally. We also know that these institutions, other than exercising administrative functions they also exercise legal functions; we conferred to them judicial functions. So these are also stalled. 

In light of the importance of having these institutions in place, will the minister commit himself as to the date when the consultations are going to be concluded so that these rules are passed and we conduct the elections, Mr Speaker.

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, I wish our ministers could take issues of this House seriously. It was last week that the minister himself said he would bring the report and today, even the first one on Foot and Mouth Disease, we still do not know the status. And now again local governments? With LC I and LC II, it started right from the Eighth Parliament. Sometimes, when you go to attend to certain issues, especially in court, issues which are handled by LC IIs are not taken seriously because as of now, LC IIs and LC Is are illegal. And we keep on dragging. I wish the minister had put down something including what he was just telling us verbally to show a bit of seriousness. We lack seriousness. Honourable ministers, let us treat Uganda fairly. (Mr Medard Sseggona rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sseggona, on what point do you rise?

MR SSEGGONA: On this very point, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform my colleagues that the Deputy Attorney-General is in the House. Under Rule 44 of the Rules of Procedure, this statement is supposed to be in writing even if it is to say, “I am not ready.” It must be a statement in writing and that is a requirement of the rules. 

Secondly, this is just to remind the minister and to give information to my colleague. This matter has been litigated upon. The Attorney-General lost this case; Ugandans are paying and that was about three or four years ago. (Interjections) The Attorney-General who defended the country and lost is here. (Laughter) And he is also dilly-dallying in taking remedial action. The remedial action was when we required him to produce this Bill, amend the law and conduct elections. They are asking for a budget. How do we give you money without the necessary law? This is principally the Attorney-General’s work and the minister. To show that they are not serious, he does not even have a statement. That is the information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can we have a clear statement from you tomorrow at 2 o’clock? 

MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, it is not true. When I came here on the Floor of Parliament - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can we have a statement from you tomorrow afternoon? 

MR ONZIMA:  Well - (interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of order. After ably advising the appropriate minister on what should be done, is he in order to show signs of opposition to your ruling?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you stand advised, please. 

MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, under the circumstances, we shall try our best tomorrow. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure, Dr Epetait.

DR FRANCIS EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, this is still in line with the expectations of this House on ministerial statements. The first item on ministerial statements happened to be that on Foot and Mouth Disease. Shortly before the chairpersons of various committees made presentations of the status of business in their committees, I saw the Minister of Agriculture walk away. However, in the House, there is a Minister of State for Agriculture who would ordinarily help us out. The situation in the country is very bad, there are many quarantine roadblocks everywhere; farmers are not able to take their children to school. People are not doing any trade in livestock and many animals are dying but Government is quiet. Can we get a commitment? In fact, can we get a response from the Minister of State for Agriculture on FMD? We just cannot leave it hanging like that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister -

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (Prof. Zerubabel Mijumbi Nyiira): Mr Speaker, the report on the Foot and Mouth Disease is ready -(Interjections)- the report on Food and Mouth Disease is ready. At the same time, there came a need to report on the status of the lumpy skin disease. At the same time, there was also need to present the status report on East Coast Fever. So, the ministry felt it prudent that it should have -(Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But he has not finished. Can he finish what he is saying?

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, I am up on a point of order. Last week, we talked about Foot and Mouth Disease and right now, if other diseases have come up and the report of Foot and Mouth Disease is ready, I do not see why we cannot have it laid on Table or in our hands for reading. 

Is it in order for an honourable minister, who is also very new to some of us -(Laughter)- to come up and say something is ready and yet he does not have it? Is it really in order for him to allege that the report is ready when he cannot give us that report? Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, Foot and Mouth Disease falls under animal husbandry and the person who made the commitment to make the statement is not in the House. The honourable minister, who has offered, after being called upon to say something, has done his best to update the House in the circumstances. In the absence – really, in the absence of the sector minister who made the undertaking that a statement will be made today and he is not here - We will make some directives concerning that minister but surely, the honourable minister has tried to give whatever he knows –(Interjections)- he was not - (Interjections)- he was not -(Interjections)- he was not obliged to. Honourable members, he was not obliged to. He has been asked by Members to say something. Let us be fair to the minister, please –(Interjections)- if the other one was here, we would have –(Interjections)- but the minister is not here. You want him to answer? (Interjections) The minister who made the undertaking that he was going to make a statement is not here. We would do those sanctions at an appropriate time?  Procedure?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, we have a procedure that we adopted and unfortunately, we have people in the gallery watching. We have an Order Paper which guides the business of this House and on the Order Paper, we have something called “Statements by ministers” and these ministers are led by somebody called a Leader of Government Business, whose deputy is in the House. (Mr Ssekandi withdraws from the Chamber.) Even the Vice President -(Laughter)- I do not want to assume that the Vice President is escaping. (Laughter) I assume that it was his schedule to leave.  

The Minister of State has committed himself by saying the report is ready. First of all, we expected him to tell us in writing that the report is ready. That one he did not do. Secondly, the report is ready, which means he has knowledge and that is why he deputises the minister. Guide us on the procedure, Mr Speaker, what is the purpose of this Order Paper?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the Order Paper, I have two other ministerial statements. Instead of spending this time like this, I was hoping that we would go and see if there is no statement at all, then I make my directives. If there are some other statements, the time we have spent now, we would have picked some statements already. That is how I wanted to proceed. Since there is pending work, can we deal with those ones instead of squeezing water out of a stone?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

DELAYS OF RELEASE OF FUNDS TO GOVERNMENT-AIDED AND PRIVATE SCHOOLS UNDER THE UNIVERSAL SECONDARY SCHOOL (USE) PROGRAMME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That statement is supposed to come from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, not the Minister of Education and Sports, as indicated on the Order Paper.

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues -(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, copies are coming in, Please proceed. Let us save some time.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to present to this Parliament a report on the delays of release of funds to Government-aided public and private schools under the USE programme. I beg to apologise for the delays, but these delays occurred in the early months of last financial year and these were largely due to technical processes, following changes in the nature of transferring financial resources to these schools. 

With effect from Financial Year 2011/2012, Government decided to send the USE grants directly to all Government-aided schools using what we refer to as the “Straight Through Processing Facility”. Under this arrangement, the grants are paid directly to the respective schools by the Ministry of Finance. Previously, financial resources were sent from the Ministry of Finance to schools through the Ministry of Education and Sports and the local governments, the districts and municipalities. Thus, the objective of using the Straight Through Processing Facility was to ensure that funds reached the schools in time for the implementation of the planned activities.

However, this new initiative involved collection and validation of data about the beneficiary schools. The data was either provided late or without the required level of accuracy. Inevitably, this led to delays in the start of the implementation of the facility in the first quarter of Financial Year 2011/2012. I am, however, happy to report that effective the third quarter of last financial year, all schools have started receiving funds directly through this Straight Through Processing Facility.

Secondly, there was delay in the releasing of USE funds in schools in 39 districts and municipalities during the third quarter of 2011/2012. This delay was specifically due to inconsistencies in the local governments’ indicative planning figures submitted to the Ministry of Finance. The inconsistencies arose from the use of different sources of data. Whereas the first submission of indicative planning figures to the number of children in various schools per district was based on enrolment projections of the academic year 2010, the subsequent submission was based on the head count of April 2011.
 
The difference also related to listing of some schools in the old districts instead of the new districts following the introduction of new district boundaries. For example, schools in Lwengo District and Masaka Municipality had been listed under Masaka District. In view of the above, the budgets for 94 local governments had to be revisited downwards in order to release the resources for the 39 local governments that needed more resources. Accordingly, there was a need for a supplementary process to reallocate resources from the 94 local governments to increase the budgets for the 39 local governments. This process caused a delay in the release of the USE funds to the respective schools in the 39 districts or local governments.

The USE grant is now being operated without any delays or other inconsistencies. The last release made in May 2012 was received on time, except a few cases where payments may be delayed for reasons between a school and the local bank.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to submit. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, I see the whole House up. (Laughter) I see this matter as straight forward, so, I am going to limit the entire debate to 10 minutes; each Member taking two minutes.

3.45
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not find the minister’s statement convincing because this has gone on for a long time. I think since the introduction of USE, this anomaly has been happening and I had hoped that the minister would come to this House in a bid to convince us. You should have brought us the breakdown of disbursement which the ministry made to these secondary schools in an attempt to rectify the anomaly. 

As it was, this statement is attempting to make us believe that something has been done. I would like the minister, if possible, to retract this statement. If not possible, he should bring an addendum to this statement and show us that during such and such a month, we submitted such and such an amount of money to private schools because the private schools are still complaining and the implication is that when the government delays to send them money, operations become impossible. Private students suffer and there is no money to pay the teachers. This effectively undermines the implementation of USE. Can he bring the proper breakdown and convince Uganda that he has saved money for the children under private schools? I thank you. (Applause)

2.47
MR GONZAGA SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. But really, honourable minister, why don’t you sometimes tell the House the truth? Right now, in your statement, you are saying by May, you had paid the schools and yet the head teachers of private schools petitioned Parliament on 28th June. This petition is before Parliament.

You are talking about secondary schools, yet even primary schools do not have money. Government is paying for a UPE child Shs 1,750 per term -(Interjections)- instead of Shs 7,000 and that money is not there. Why do you fear telling the truth? The truth will save you. You say there is no money in Government, we find otherwise. We are spoiling children, we are spoiling a nation, and we are killing ourselves.

As I wind up, do you have the memorandum of understanding you signed between private secondary schools and the government? These people are going to take us to court, we shall not win the case and we are going to suffer. So -(Interruption)

MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: I would like to thank my colleague for giving way.  This report is misguiding this country. As I speak, out of the 59 primary schools in Ngora district - and by yesterday, Monday – and some secondary schools which I can actually name here, Light SS, Teso Integrated and other private schools in Ngora district - I am giving an example of the district, which I represent. As we speak now, children are going to primary schools and there is no teaching going on. That is for your information. I do not know what is happening to other districts. So, I would have loved -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you debating now? 

MR SSEWUNGU: As I conclude my two minutes, Mr Speaker -(Interjections)- just within the minister’s statement on page 2, the fifth paragraph, he says, “However, I am happy to report that effective the third quarter of Financial Year 2011/2012, all schools had started receiving the funds directly –(Member timed out.)

3.52
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When you read this statement from the minister, it seems local governments are not consulted, especially when they are implementing issues related to UPE. At the district level, the district education officer is a key person during the counting of the number of students and pupils in these schools. However, they are not usually consulted. That is why we get these delays. I am shocked the minister told us that in Masaka district, when they counted, they discovered ghost students. I think it is a big problem. We should consult local leaders. 

This is an appeal to the Ministry of Education and other ministries; whenever you want to do something at the grassroots, consult these leaders at the local government because there is a complaint that they are not consulted. You move from here to the districts without informing them and do whatever you want to do in those schools, privately. At the end of the day, you do not get information. That is why we are getting these delays. I think it is a problem and it is high time these people are consulted, so that we can cushion these activities.

Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.52
MRS SARAH TEMULANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement he has made. (Interjections) The students who are getting education in USE secondary schools are the students who are coming from poor families. The cost of living today is very high. Head teachers are surviving by borrowing here and there to make sure that they survive.

Now schools have closed. In my district, some of the schools have closed -(Interjections)- the beneficiaries of the USE capitation grant. Those students have just a few weeks to do their final exams. How do you expect such a student to do exams, pass and become a beneficiary of another programme?

The minister has said that the amount given to the beneficiary schools is based on a head count. How has the government handled the issue of non-Ugandans – because, if it is based on a head count, how is that issue being handled in schools where non-Ugandan students are found?

3.55   
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This issue of not sending school grants on time is very serious. It is affecting our schools and the performance of our schools. I have a private school, which is benefitting from USE. Since the beginning of the year, last term, they received only Shs 2 million and that is all they were given. The money – the rest of the students are benefitting from students who are paying and that is the same with Government-aided schools. The private students are the ones who are supporting Government students. The schools are in big debts. They borrow hoping that the money will come on time, but the money is not forthcoming. As a result, they have big debts and I am worried that -(Interruption)

MRS GALIWANGO NAKAYENZE: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. Just as you have said that some of the schools received some money, maybe last term, I would like to inform you that even though some little money was given, it is unfortunate that the money is given on a quarterly basis and yet the schools operate on a termly basis. I do not know how we can connect the two. If the school works on a termly basis, how do you give them money quarterly? That is the information that I wanted you to -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members should stop negotiating amongst themselves. (Laughter)

MRS BABA DIRI: I thank you very much, for enriching my debate. We complained that the students are not performing. They are not performing because they are not taught. The teachers, for example, in the private schools are not getting their salaries and so they do not come to teach. 

If you really want to see that USE, which we feel is to benefit our students and children, then honourable minister, please send the money in time. If the money is not there, declare to us that you cannot afford so that we can pay for our children. I thank you very much. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, join me this afternoon in welcoming hon. Charles Angiro Gutomoi, former Member of Parliament for Erute North. He has come to observe the proceedings. You are welcome. (Applause) 

3.58
MRS SYLIVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This morning, the Committee on Education and Sports was interfacing with the association of private secondary schools which are under the USE programme and the members were raising two issues. One issue was about the continuous delay by Government to pay the only Shs 47,000 per student per term and the unfairness in the way Government treats Government-aided schools and private schools implementing the USE programme. 

What came out is that Government is very insensitive and when I look at this statement by the minister, Government is very insincere because the minister is telling us that they last paid money to schools in May but the information we have from the private secondary schools under USE is that even the money for the first term was partly paid. Since the beginning of this term, Government has not paid any single shilling to these schools. So, who is telling the truth? 

Mr Speaker, in the memorandum of understanding that was signed between Government and these schools, schools are not supposed to charge any shilling –(Member timed out.)

4.01
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. At the end of June, I represented your office as a Chief Guest in Namboole at an annual general meeting of all the private schools that participate in USE. All schools from across the country were present and they had also invited the Ministry of Education. However, the ministry did not send a single representative, be it political leaders or technical people. [Hon. Members: “Shame.”] 

In the meeting, the head teachers and owners of private schools presented a memorandum which had a number of issues. The cardinal ones were that the memorandum of understanding signed between Government and them was only developed by one party and they did not participate.

Secondly, they also had issues to do with the amount of money paid, per child. They were also concerned that according to the memorandum of understanding, they are not supposed to charge the pupils and students any other monies. Actually, most of the schools are collapsing. The most urgent one was that they had not received money from Government and I am shocked that the minister comes here to say that they have given money because they complained that for the last two terms, most of the schools had never received money. Actually, they threatened to close the schools on 15th July. I sent that memorandum to the chair of the education committee and that is why hon. Ssinabulya and her committee were meeting the members of this association. 

Therefore, I want to move that the minister withdraws this statement -[Hon. Members: “Yes”]- and provide – one of their complaints is that the ministry had not released money for the first term and that Government had said it will not reimburse that money because most of the schools borrowed –(Interruption) 

MR SSIMBWA: Honourable members, there is a proposal that the statement be withdrawn. [Hon. Members: “Yes.”] The honourable minister -

MR OMACH: The purpose of this presentation was to explain the delays in the release of funds under the USE grant to all Government-aided public and private schools. I have taken note of what hon. Alaso has said that there is need for us to bring to this Parliament the details of the disbursement that has been given as far as these particular grants are concerned because once we bring this, then all the evidence will be very clear, otherwise -[HON. MEMBERS: “When?”] 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the minister finish.

MR OMACH: We undertake to bring the details of the submission of all the grants to the various districts and to the various schools and municipalities so that you can see the details of what has been submitted. Secondly, the petition of Dr Baryomunsi is talking about - we have received it. The committee has invited us to appear in front of them tomorrow, but we have prayed that we present our position to the committee on Thursday so that we are able to attend to Cabinet tomorrow. So, all these issues will be responded to by the Minister of Finance. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When, honourable minister?

MR OMACH: The disbursement figures can be presented here by Thursday this week. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Details of the disbursement per school will be presented to this House on Thursday. (Interjections) Please, can I summarise this. It is completely out of courtesy, when the Speaker is speaking, for you to shoot up like a bubble. (Laughter) Let me finish summarising how far we have gone and then we will see how to move on from there. Is that okay? This fountain kind of behaviour is not very good. 

The undertaking is that by Thursday, detailed disbursement per school will be presented because you said you are no longer going through districts. You said you were going straight from Ministry of Finance to the schools; so, it should be per school.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am grateful for the training on courtesy, Mr Speaker. The point of procedure that I rose to make is to guide this House. In light of that guidance, the procedural aspect that comes with it is what happens to this document presented as a statement? I expected my honourable colleague to take the guidance of the House. We are trained as lawyers to read the lips of the judge. Honourably and courteously, withdraw this statement because we cannot have it. 

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, this paper is dealing with two aspects of what took place in the last financial year as far as grants to secondary schools under USE is concerned. 

The first one is to deal with the delay and the second one is to deal with the amounts that have been given to the various districts and to the various schools. I have explained the delays and now what you request further is the details of the funds that have gone to the various districts and municipalities. And I have said this will supplement this paper on Thursday because what you need is the amounts that were sent to the different places. That is my submission.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us handle this properly. There is a standing invitation for the minister to come to the committee. Can we refer this matter to the committee so that they can report on it at the same time with the minister?

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The point Commissioner Baryomunsi raised and the view of the Members is that this statement of the minister is full of inconsistencies. In fact, we need to raise the requirement that the minister should sign and certify the documents he brings to this House because they are full of inconsistencies; it should not form part of the Hansard of Parliament. That is why Hon. Baryomunsi moved cautiously; we should have even moved a motion that the statement be rejected. However, the House is just requesting you to withdraw it so that it does not form part of our Hansard because it is full of inconsistencies.

Based on that, Mr Speaker, may I seek your guidance that you advise the minister to honour the request of this House to withdraw the statement. May I seek for your intervention? 

4.13
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Mr Speaker, in respect of what has taken place, I beg to move a motion. The motion is:

“AWARE of the fact that the report presented does not give details of what we want and lacks the statistics of what would provide what we want, let the report presented be withdrawn.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) Who seconds this motion? The motion is seconded. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, there was already a motion on the Floor by the commissioner, hon. Baryomunsi. (Interjections) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I was brought up in a Christian family in a very humble manner and not in a beer party. In this case, I would like guidance. Why can’t we first dispose of the first motion, which was –(Interjections)- brought by hon. Baryomunsi, then later on we consider his, if possible. Otherwise, it looks to be the same motion. You have not added any value.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Katuntu, you wanted to say something?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I am standing up to seek your guidance. There is a problem in the sector and the private schools need a solution. We thought the solution would come as a result of this statement and the debate in the House. If we go ahead and reject this statement at this point, what happens to the problem?

My view is that if there is an opportunity for the minister to come back on Thursday, whether with facts or without facts, then we can take it up from there and we can even have resolutions. I heard from hon. Dr Baryomunsi that the facts he had are different from the statement given by the minister and yet the minister is saying he is correct. I think he has a problem with his statement. His statement is so vague and brief that it does not have any details even for us to judge whether there are facts being contradicted. 

Honourable colleagues, I would request that for us to move forward and have a solution to the problem and for this Parliament to take a decision from an informed position, we will need the minister to come back. That is my view. But if the House thinks that we can just reject this problem and we go to the next item, so be it, but we will not have solved the problem.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is one of the rare occasions where I disagree with my own Attorney-General. The most incorrect thing is to think that you are correct when you are incorrect.

We have agreed and made an extensive courtesy to the minister by saying that he comes back on Thursday with a statement and we will be waiting for that statement. This one, in our interpretation, does not amount to a statement we asked you to bring. Please go and bring us a statement on Thursday with details. (Applause) That is number one.

Two, about the solution asked for by my learned friend, it is not a solution. We expect the solution to come here on Thursday in a comprehensive and detailed statement. I would like to beg – I did not want to move a motion at this point – I am restraining myself, but there is a motion that was moved and seconded, which reads as follows: “We reject this because it does not amount to a statement and we get a statement on Thursday.” It is as simple as that.

MR REMEGIO ACHIA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. The issue at hand – what is being answered today by the minister – we need to recall that a week ago, a Member asked an oral question about the delays in the release of funds to private-aided schools. And the minister has come to specifically respond to that.

What I see coming from some of us – who are either linked to private or Government-sided schools in our constituencies or own some of them - is that we have major problems with respect to the release of funds to these schools. We also have issues with the amounts sent to them.

But if we are now asking the minister to give us a comprehensive statement - first of all, on the amounts and the time of releasing these monies to these schools – how shall we get that information if we reject this statement  -(Interjections)– that is very important. Let us try to listen to each other. 

What I am saying is that every fact in the search for information is usually very important. For example, in this statement we have been able to know that Government has changed from sending these monies to the district local governments to using direct transfers to the respective schools. That is a very important fact.

Two, we have been able to know that the monies were released in quarters. It was on the basis of that that we have been able to say that the system should be improved to term system.

Fact number four, we want Government to come clear on the amounts going to both UPE and USE schools. Any information we get from Government is very important. I beg that we ask the minister to give us more details on Thursday in answering these four questions – first on the releases, two, on the facts of these releases, and three, on the amounts, since the figures have been revised and they are using a new system. That will help us make resolutions on what Government should do with the real issues that relate to education in this country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have noticed a trend where our senior comrades on the front bench come here with substandard documents. (Laughter) I am getting worried because we might just be looking at the symptoms and not the causes. Why is it that they usually bring here insufficient documents yet they are not only senior, but also experienced? I think they owe us an explanation because as Parliament, we should not lower our standards. 

What I know is that the principles and doctrines of separation of powers and accountability require Parliament to hold the Executive accountable. One way of doing that is for us to demand for accurate information. So, at no time should we tolerate substandard information in the guise of even saying that if we allow this to be withdrawn, then we might not get it again. I cannot believe a Member of Parliament talking like that, with all these rights? You were voted to hold people accountable and you come here and start to fear to demand information from the Executive? It is our right and by all means, whether they like it or not information has to come here. That is the principle. So, we should not lower ourselves to that level. We must be able to demand for accurate information.

Therefore, I would courteously require, my friend, hon. Omach, to be kind enough – you know, it is all about being gentle – just say, “let me withdraw this because it has caused inconsistencies –”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members – 

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I have never, at any one point - whether before coming to this Parliament or while in this Parliament or after leaving this Parliament - been afraid to seek for information. So, is it in order for the honourable member holding the Floor to impute that I, Remigio Achia, a son of a full-blooded Karimojong, can be afraid of –(Laughter)– asking for information when I have more facts to the extent that the information provided by the minister is, to a large extent, true with respect to the change of the system of transferring money to primary and secondary schools in this country? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Chair is not aware of how much contribution, a name of a Member of Parliament or their tribe can add to the person’s status of either being fearful or not. The Speaker is unable to rule. (Laughter)

The issue is; there was a proposal from hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi that the minister withdraws this statement. But the minister did not do that. Now, there is a motion from hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi that the statement presented by the minister be rejected by this House. That motion was seconded and it formed a basis for the discussions we have had. I think we had sufficient debate on this matter. I put the question to the motion that the statement by the honourable minister be rejected by this House.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. After the rejection of this statement by this honourable House, the problems raised still remain the same and the minister still has the obligation to explain to this House what happened. The point of procedure I rise on, therefore, is, do we go back to your earlier ruling that actually, since this statement has been rejected, the minister should come back on Thursday with a detailed statement giving the answers to the issues raised by the honourable members? 

MRS SSENINDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek guidance. Since the minister is supposed to bring the report on Thursday – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not ruled on that yet.

MRS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I would like to suggest that if he is to bring the report on Thursday, if you rule on it, I beg that he gives the list of schools and the amount of money already released; the dates, together with how much money is expected by the various schools. This is because if we do not get that information, it will be confusing information. So, we need to get clarity on what is expected by each school and how much has been released so far. It will help this House to know very well even as we debate the Budget. That is my humble request. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the implication of the vote just taken by the Members of this House is that the House is not satisfied with the content of the statement brought by the minister. The House would be more comfortable receiving information that has more coverage and more detail in the subject matter and gives details on how much funds have been disbursed as stated by the minister. The obligation is on the minister to come back to this House on Tuesday next week with a comprehensive statement, with comprehensive coverage of this entire subject. It is so ordered. (Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE YOUTH VENTURE CAPITAL FUND

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi, would you like to resume your seat? (Laughter) Honourable members, we have a statement that has been pending for a long time on the Youth Venture Capital Fund. We need to cross-check and confirm that it has everything so that we do not spend too much time on the minister’s statement and then do exactly what we have just done. We need to subject it to some other level of scrutiny before it comes back. Therefore, I am using my authority to suspend this statement from coming now and ordering that we go to item 8 on the Order Paper. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE INQUIRY INTO THE PROCUREMENT OF EQUIPMENT FOR THE NATIONAL SECURITY INFORMATION SYSTEM AND THE NATIONAL IDENTIFICATION PROJECT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that we had a lengthy debate on this subject. We had reached stages where decisions were being made. We could not proceed based on some technical difficulties that we faced. We are prepared to proceed with this. Can we go to page No.14 of the report of the committee? (Members rose_) Please, honourable members, would you like to sit and take decisions? (Mr Mudimi withdraws from the Chamber_) Hon. Mudimi, come back to the House, please. I will ask the clerk to read the recommendations on page 14. 

Page 14

Recommendation: The former minister, hon. Ali Kirunda Kivejinja, as the overall political head of the procurement of the project should take full responsibility – political, financial and administrative - for the anomalies and losses occasioned and observed in the conduct of the procurement of the NSIS equipment. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the recommendation of the committee. Honourable members, where are you going? (Laughter) I put the question to this recommendation of the committee. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Constitution of Uganda and the Public Finance Act are very clear. For any individual who causes Government to lose money, taking political responsibility alone is not adequate. The Constitution reads, “Anybody who concurs in the use of public funds contrary to the established procedure shall make good the loss that has occurred even if he or she has left office, whether you are a civil servant or a politician.” Therefore, I beg to move an amendment that the named minister and permanent secretary should make good the loss that has occurred as a result of the loss, as provided for in the Constitution. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable  members, the recommendation by the committee is that it should take full responsibility; political, financial and administrative. What is the implication of financial? Isn’t it to make good financially? Isn’t it under what is covered by the Constitution? So, do we need to amend this particular one to deal with it - because he said political, financial and full responsibility? 

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, we have, as a ministry, considered the recommendation of the committee. In our own report read by my senior minister last week, we made two observations.

One of the observations we made, which relates to this particular recommendation, is that all persons mentioned in this report –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, why this immediate movement?

MR BABA: We made observations, and we would like to recommend to the House, that all persons mentioned in this report be subjected to investigations and if they are found culpable, be subjected to the rule of law. This is my firm recommendation to the House which I would like it to consider. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, does that amount to a formal recommendation?

MR BABA: That is correct, Mr Speaker; an amendment to the recommendation that all persons mentioned in the report, including the former Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Internal Affairs, be subject to investigations arising from the recommendation of the report. I beg to move.

4.39
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to throw some more light on the fact that the issues related to loss are in a detail available on term of reference three, which is on pages 35,36 and through to 37. For avoidance of doubt, I would like to state that the committee relied on information from the Auditor-General, regarding the occasioned loss arising out of wasteful expenditure in the project.

I will lay on Table this document, the letter to the chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs dated 11 April 2012 signed by the Auditor-General.

Paragraph 5 which deals with wasteful expenditure states: “Our estimate of the wasteful expenditure incurred or likely to be incurred on the project is as follows:

•	Tax penalty is Shs 8.869 billion,

•	Interest to Bank of Uganda resulting from borrowing as a source of funding this project amounted to Shs 4.196 billion,

•	Lack of provision for forex fluctuations, and which indeed occurred giving rise to a cost of Shs 5.402 billion, and

•	Also the interest payable on the outstanding quarterly balance for the contractual obligation amounting to Shs 1.055 billion and this totals to Shs 19.523 billion.”

This notwithstanding, the fact that the Muhlbauer company was supposed to pay taxes to the Government of Uganda, but the committee was disturbed, when again in the contract the Government of Uganda agreed to be the one meeting the very tax obligation and this amounts to Shs 30 billion! So, the Shs 30 billion could have been avoided, including the Shs 19.523 billion that the Auditor-General confirms here that it was incurred as wasteful and, therefore, a loss.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have two propositions now; the recommendations of the committee and now other recommendations by the Minister of Internal Affairs.

4.42
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, the committee recommended and I am happy the chairperson has mentioned some figures. But, I want to refer you to a letter written by the minister on 4 March 2010. It is attachment 3(1). 

Mr Speaker, the minister was writing to the Executive Director of PPDA and asking for a waiver. This function is basically for the accounting officer. By the minister overstepping his mark, it was wrong. From here, I do not see why we need to subject it to another investigation. The minister is totally responsible and I think we should really vote on this.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will put the question.

4.35
THE MINISTER OF LANDS (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, there is a matter that is not clear to me and that is the source of funding for this project, which was money borrowed from Bank of Uganda that would attract interest, and this being attributed to the Minister of Internal Affairs at that time. From my own experience, it cannot be the duty of a minister in a given ministry to determine where resources are procured from by Government.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to inform the hon. Daudi Migereko that as Chairman Public Accounts Committee, this was one of the major audit queries which has been handled by my committee. The problem is that the procurement of this machine from Germany was not in accordance with the procurement plan. It was forced in by the political leadership. That is why the minister then should take responsibility. If he had allowed the civil servants to follow the procurement plan - it was nowhere - and the permanent secretary would not have gone the extra mile to borrow from Bank of Uganda, which made us lose a lot of money in terms of interest.

MR BABA: Mr Speaker, that is why I am proposing that this matter be investigated. I have authority in form of a letter from the Ministry of Finance dated 4th March, to the permanent ministry of Internal Affairs, basically instructing the PS, “...clear the contract, procure this equipment, we shall provide the finances.” That is why the chairperson of the committee has just presented here - and that really calls for investigation to establish who is culpable. Let us investigate this matter, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the amendment to the recommendation as proposed by the minister. Instead of taking the committee’s recommendation, the minister proposes that the persons be subjected to investigation and those found culpable should face the course of the law. I will put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will put the question to the recommendation of the committee.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I basically want to benefit from your wisdom as a celebrated counsel. Normally, the parliamentary practice is that we make recommendations and based on our recommendations, Government goes, investigates and implements. Now we are going to pass this recommendation the way the committee has put it and it will become a resolution. I hope that Government will not say that they cannot take action on the decision we have taken. So, I need your guidance on whether, based on this report, Government will still move to take action after the question. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have I put the question on the recommendation of the committee? So, what guidance is the honourable member seeking? I will put the question to the recommendation of the committee that the former minister -

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It seems in the recommendation here we are passing judgement on the people mentioned in this report. Can’t we do it in another way so that Parliament - because some of the recommendations we pass here have been challenged. I have no problem with the recommendation, but my main worry is for Parliament to act as an investigator, comes as a prosecutor and passes a judgement. I have no problem with the recommendation; my main worry is Parliament to act thus and pass a judgement, which will be challenged.

4.51
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to seek your guidance. It has been a practice that this House does a number of investigations. In the last Parliament, I was a Member and privileged to be part of these committees. The practice of this House has been that we carry out an investigation, arrive at certain facts that help us make recommendations on the actions that must be taken, and debate and proceed like that. 

Now, is it the opinion of this House that based on the fact that we have the preliminary findings, we go beyond the recommendations and even going further to state that someone should immediately take responsibility and refuse investigations? Because what we are saying is that we proceed as it is without accepting further investigation as proposed by the minister.

In my opinion, on matters of criminal offence, this House allows the right institutions for which the Constitution has stated that it will be in their tasks to do investigations through their work - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation and staff of Gauteng Provincial Legislative Parliament of South Africa. They are led by Hlengiwe Bhengu, Executive Director Core Business, and they are here to share experiences with their counterparts in the Parliament of Uganda. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The information I want to give my fellow ex-seminarian is derived from what we went through in March. In March this year, the Public Accounts Committee handled a similar matter involving cabinet ministers. In our wisdom and in the wisdom of Parliament, we recommended that those implicated officials take political and personal responsibility, which they did and stepped aside. 

Thereafter, the committee went further to refer the matter to relevant investigative institutions for further investigation in order to prefer charges against them if found culpable. So, this recommendation is in order and that is the information I want to give you.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Let me conclude, Mr Speaker. I am in total agreement with hon. Wadri, but what I was not in agreement with is that this House rejects any investigation because the minister proposed that the people involved be further subjected to investigations. I agree with you politically. That was the guidance I was seeking from you, Mr Speaker.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. We received this report from the committee and discussed it. We are now at the point of decision-making. There is a substantive motion on the Floor and the honourable member is not raising any amendments to the motion. Instead, he is debating and attempting to derail our debate.

Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to attempt to derail our debate rather than moving either to support the motion or to make any amendments. Is the Member in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this report has received almost five days of debate. We concluded and now we are handling decision point by decision point. Now, we have reached this particular recommendation and the honourable minister has proposed an amendment, which has been rejected. I will now put the question to the recommendation of the committee. That the former Minister, Al Hajji Ali Kirunda Kivenjija, as the overall political head of the procurement of the project should take full responsibility - political, financial and administrative - for the anomalies and losses occasioned and observed in the conduct of the procurement of NSIS equipment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Page 16

Recommendation (a): The accounting officer, should in line with Section 26 of the Act, take full responsibility for the anomalies in the conduct of the procurement process. I put the question to that recommendation.

MR BABA: Mr Speaker, I wish to move an amendment on (a) to read, “The accounting officer should, in line with Section 26 of the Act, be fully investigated in the conduct of the procurement process” and then (b) follows.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, because these recommendations will be extracted, they will not form part of the rest of the report. It will be proper to state which Act we are talking about because it is going to be extracted.

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We missed it because all through we have been referring to the PPDA Act. But it should be the PPDA Act. [Hon. Member: “Who is the accounting officer?”] The accounting officer we are talking about is Dr Kagoda who is the Permanent Secretary for the Ministry of Internal Affairs. I beg to move.

5.01
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Mr Speaker, we had similar recommendations during the report on bicycles and I remember clearly that the recommendation to deal with the accounting officer also had a provision to include interdiction. If you look at the Public Finance and Accountability Act, it spells out the duties of the accounting officer in Section 8, where the accounting officer is supposed to exercise due diligence in respect to protecting public finances. In this particular circumstance, I also know that investigations are going to continue – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Propose the amendment and then you speak to it.

MR MULIMBA: My proposal, Mr Speaker, is to the effect that on (a) “The accounting officer, should in line with Section 26 of the PPDA Act, take full responsibility for the anomalies in the conduct of the procurement process and caused to be interdicted.”

MR BABA: On the interdiction proposed to this amendment, why don’t we first investigate this accounting officer before you hang him? Why don’t you first establish -  

5.03
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am in support of the amendment which has been brought up by hon. Mulimba because of the following reasons. The PS acted well aware that he had been warned of the consequences of his actions. When you read Annex 4 in our report, there is a letter written on 12 March 2010. The then executive director warned – and I want to quote verbatim: “In the event that the above position is not acceptable to your entity and you decide as the accounting officer to proceed under national security concerns, you should take full responsibility for the conduct of the procurement process in accordance with Section 26 of the PPDA Act.” So, he acted well aware that whatever will come out of his actions, he will take full responsibility.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, hon. Ssimbwa for giving way. I just want to give some information. In the copy of the Auditor-General’s letter dated April 11th, which I believe all of you have – The effect of this letter on Section 5 is that we have lost funds to the tune of Shs 19.5 billion plus Shs 30 billion. That is a total of Shs 49.5 billion under the careless eye of the accounting officer! And under Section 6, the Auditor-General now clarifies a question which we earlier had: Did the PPDA actually give a waiver? He clarifies here that, “We wish to clarify that PPDA did not grant a waiver. Therefore, the accounting officer flouted the procurement regulations. He incurred loss of up to Shs 49.5 billion of our public resources.” Mr Speaker, I believe that this accounting officer should actually proceed on interdiction immediately. Thank you. (Applause)

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Speaker, when you proceed within the same document which is attached to our report, that is Annex 5, this is a letter written by the PS on 15th after receiving advice from the executive director PPDA on 12th. He wrote back to the executive director on 15 March 2010 and in one of the paragraphs he says, “The intention for my communication to you was to notify you that this procurement was not a business of PPDA.” This is now the PS running away from Section 26 of the PPDA Act and it is written here. So, Mr Speaker, allowing such an officer to remain in office after flouting all laws which he is well aware of will not be good for our House here. As my colleague is saying, he is very dangerous as far as promoting corruption is concerned. So, he should be interdicted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the procedure requires me to deal with the motion that is farthest from the subject first. The motion that is farthest from the subject is the one proposed by the honourable minister, so we deal with that one first. 

MR BABA: I want to elaborate further. In the annex provided by the chairperson of the committee in relation to paragraph 5 which tabulates the penalties, the interest payments, Bank of Uganda and so forth, my accounting officer cannot be held responsible for this because the payment arrangements were between the Treasury and Bank of Uganda. That is why I am calling for investigations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us listen. We shall take the decision.

MR BABA: And that is why I am calling for full investigations into this matter because there are many players in this procurement process. If we want to make a clean sweep of these anomalies let us do it properly through investigations, and not just passing resolutions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members -

MR BABA: So, the issue of interdiction should not arise at this stage; what is important is investigation and establishing of the facts. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion: the amendment proposed by the honourable minister that in respect of the original recommendation of the committee that that be substituted with what he has proposed; that the accounting officer should be subjected to investigation and if found culpable – so, I put the question to the proposed amendment by the minister. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the honourable member for Samia Bugwe on the aspect of interdiction. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the recommendation as amended - honourable members we are going by the amendment as proposed by the Member. That is what we have voted on. I now put the question to the recommendation as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation (b): The accounting officer should suffer the administrative and financial consequences thereof.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is (b) not subsumed in (a)? Mr Chairman, (b) and (a) after taking full responsibility –

MR SIMON MULONGO: Mr Speaker, the administrative aspect was expected to include what was recommended in the amendment about indictment and since indictment has been proposed in the first recommendation then (b) is subsumed in (a). 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I stand before you to elucidate on a matter that is of concern in the way we are proceeding. I know this is a very sensitive moment. Every one of us is very concerned about the vices that we are doing our best to fight corruption. But we have more often than not been guided on the way we have to proceed. 

Mr Speaker, actually in the very recent past, there was a constitutional case -  and I am very happy that hon. Kassiano Wadri hinted on it because you pointed out that we sat here during the oil debate and we recommended, actually urged, if not directed, that certain people step aside. Some indeed stepped aside, others preferred to go to court and we had the proper ruling of the Severino case - 

MR WADRI: Information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can he finish.

MR RUHINDI: Can I first finish before you inform me? What the court guided on is separation of powers, separation of roles. There are those statutory obligations where Parliament can direct. Those are statutory and constitutional provisions. For instance, in the budget process, that is the role of Parliament. You can decide to do a, b, c, d because those are statutory. There are matters where, for instance, in this case the best we can do is to advise the Executive to take particular action. But when, for instance, you say, as Parliament, that from today the PS of Internal Affairs is interdicted, in my opinion that is certainly not tenable in law.

So, I beg to advise, Mr Speaker, that we proceed properly and within the confines of our powers. Otherwise, we are going to become legislators, we are going to become prosecutors, and we are going to become the Judiciary. We are going to become everybody in this country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please. This Parliament does not interdict. And if anybody goes out with the understanding that we have interdicted anybody, that person will be wrong. What we have done is that we have recommended the interdiction. (Applause) These are recommendations. Honourable members, this is now normal procedure we have adopted. 

In the past, the report of the committee would be adopted as a whole. We used to adopt reports of committees in total like this. Omnibus if you want to call it that. Because of the specificity of some of the issues, over time, people started getting more interested in particular recommendations being singled out and voted on because some of them attracted amendments. Some of them attracted a lot of discussions so it became a matter of interest. Otherwise, I would have only put one question in relation to the committee report. That is how I used to understand it, but the practice has changed over the years, so, I am going by the changed practice. Otherwise, I would have said I put the question that the report of the committee be adopted and we would have taken one vote and gone home. Okay?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, there have been changes overtime. 

5.20
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I know why the learned Attorney-General is taking that sort of line and that is the only reason I have risen up. I think the learned Attorney-General wanted to go on record that he had cautioned us and we had rejected that caution and I think that is very dangerous. What powers does Parliament have under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda? We do have undisputed and uncontested powers of oversight of the entire Government of the Republic of Uganda. Whatever business we do transact in this House is based on the powers, duties and functions we have as a Parliament. 

On matters of accountability, especially by the accounting officers, we are governed by the Constitution, more particularly Article 164, which says: “The permanent secretary or the accounting officer in charge of a ministry or department shall be accountable to Parliament for the funds in that ministry or department.” And how are these accounting officers accountable to us as Parliament? They must account to us that the funds we have appropriated for that purpose have been used according to the purpose and according to the law. We have got powers under the Constitution in that after a thorough investigation that the committee has done and if the accounting officer has not done what he is supposed to do under Article 164, then we go to 164(2) which holds that a particular political or public officer is held responsible, and that is what we are saying. 

Monies were disbursed, and misused, and somebody should take responsibility, and we are saying that the people whom we gave that money should take responsibility. How do they take responsibility? In our view, it is for them to vacate their offices. In the earlier recommendation we said that they should take political responsibility.

There is no court that orders you to take political responsibility. A political responsibility judgement is for this House. We are the ones who possess the powers to ask somebody to take political responsibility because that is where we end. Other responsibilities are for purposes of court, and are now enforceable. They can go to jail, they can be asked to refund the money and so on. For us, we stop here and this is our recommendation and it is well within our powers. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to leave these things at the level of recommendations because if you go into those aspects of constitutional things; you are talking about appropriation, you are going to start investigating whether those monies were actually appropriated by this House. You are going to go into that debate and it might be more involving than these simple recommendations we are making. Why don’t we restrict ourselves to the recommendations made by the committee?

Has the chairperson withdrawn (b)?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I want to plead with the chairman that interdiction leaves the question of financial responsibility, which was very well elaborated, and is the cornerstone of your report and, therefore, I beg that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question on (b)-

MR EKANYA: Yes, that (b) stand part of the recommendations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are not the Speaker. (Laughter) The Speaker does not rule from the dispatch box. I put the question to recommendation (b).

(Question put and agreed to.)

Part C, agreed to.

Page 19, part A, agreed to.

Part B, agreed to.

Part C

5.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Just a slight amendment. If you read on page 5 of the committee report, this phase of the Ministry of ICT is actually the third phase not the second phase. So, I would like to move that the second phase be amended to read the “third phase.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, that would be the third phase. Chairperson of the committee, is it third phase? Adopted with amendments from the minister? Is it?

5.29
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Simon Mulongo): Mr Speaker, we accept the amendment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The amendment is to replace “second” with “third”. Adopted? Should I put the question?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Amendment agreed to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:I put the question to paragraph (c) as amended. 

Paragraph (c) as amended, agreed to.

5.30
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, on page 17, the committee made observations like (d) - from (c), (d) and (e). They are talking about hon. J.C. Alintuma Nsambu. They are mentioning his bad manners in (c), (d) and (e). When they come to recommendations, they leave him out. I want to recommend that the former Minister of State for ICT, hon. Alintuma Nsambu, should take full responsibility politically, financially and administratively for this deal.

5.30
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Simon Mulongo): Mr Speaker, much obliged from the Leader of the Opposition. Hon. Alintuma Nsambu’s detailed issues will come later from page 22 around which his recommendations or amendments can be accommodated. 

Page 21(a) 

Any use of the NSIS equipment by the Electoral Commission should be defined based on sustainable arrangements to avoid the existing adhoc arrangements.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation (a) agreed to. 

(b) Use of the NSIS equipment should be supported by a clearly drawn up legal understanding that shall include making good the loss or damage arising out of the use of such equipment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation (b) agreed to.

(c) The Ministry of Internal Affairs in conjunction with the Electoral Commission and other stakeholders should undertake to expeditiously and fully implement the remaining phases of the project to provide Ugandans with an updated, clean, accurate and reliable voters’ register.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation (c) agreed to. 

(d) The Ministry of Internal Affairs should undertake to comprehensively insure the NSIS equipment and other associated property against losses and other dangers that could occur to the expensive equipment currently stored with the UPPC in Entebbe.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation (d) agreed to.

Page 23(a) 

Investigations should be carried out to establish the business interests of hon. Michael Mawanda Maranga in context as well as in the NSIS project.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question – amendment? 

MR MAJEGERE: Mr Speaker, I want to amend that recommendation (a) be deleted because it is insignificant. Hon. Mawanda was a businessman who did not even get the business. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the amendment is that this particular part(a) be deleted in respect to the hon. Michael Mawanda Maranga in context. I put the question to the amendment proposed by the hon. Majegere.

(Question put and negatived.)

I put the question to the recommendation as presented by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation (a) agreed to.

Part (b) 

Investigations should be carried out to a logical conclusion on the disparity of information related to the funding of hon. Alintuma Nsambu’s trip to Germany. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was supplementary information from the State Minister for ICT which was received by the committee. Would you like to make a statement on this particular issue?

5.33
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Simon Mulongo): Mr Speaker, after tabling the report to the House, we received a communication from the Minister of State for ICT, the hon. Nyombi Thembo, informing the committee that they have since established that the trip to Germany by the hon. Alintuma Nsambu was financed by the ministry.  But this was when the report was already tabled. So, I would like to leave this to the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, there was no further investigation required because the ministry has established that the funding for hon. Alintuma Nsambu’s trip to Germany was from the Ministry of ICT. So, that recommendation would not be anymore because the fact is already established from the ministry. That is what the ministry has written. Yes?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, on page 17(d), it says hon. Alintuma Nsambu included on his delegation two non-officials who were assigned false titles to his comfort. The technical advisor, one Godfrey Seruyange, and a secretary to the minister, one Mrs Joweria Nakabuye. The position of technical adviser to the Minister of State for ICT as indicated on the list of the delegation attached does not exist in the ministry. That one clearly shows there was a reason. Then he goes on (e) and says, hon. Alintuma Nsambu clarified to the committee that the duo travelled with him in private capacity and he personally facilitated their travel and upkeep in Germany. Surely, how can he travel to upkeep people privately with his secretary?

The most interesting one is on page 22(a). It says hon. Alintuma Nsambu was appointed by the Minister of Internal Affairs to head the technical committee on the project. That shows that he was a technical man. That means all these flaws we are having involve hon. Alintuma. 

So, Mr Speaker, we want to move an amendment. We can remove the investigation of the ticket then hon. Alintuma, the former State Minister for ICT takes full responsibility -(Interjections)- listen, we want to get what we gave hon. Kivejinja politically, financially, administratively and morally for the loss of these public resources. 

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When you look at Annex 12 of the report, it has a report submitted by the verification/evaluation team and the two names mentioned by hon. Nandala-Mafabi also appear as names of members of the verification/evaluation team that went to Germany to verify the machinery that was to be delivered here. Whereas they were not qualifying to be on the evaluation team, they appear on the list of the team that evaluated the document.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, part (b) of the recommendation of the committee has been overtaken by events and in its place, hon. Nandala-Mafabi has proposed an amendment to the effect that hon. Alintuma Nsambu takes full responsibility politically, financially and morally. I do not know how you will enforce the moral aspect. (Laughter)

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: We have the Minister for Integrity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Moral? The term previously used was, “administrative”. So, because you are going for moral issues, you may have to engage some bishops and khadis and it may not be – so that hon. Alintuma Nsambu takes full responsibility - political, financial and administrative. Is that the recommendation?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As adopted by this House?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Page 25 (a), agreed to.

Page 25 (b)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that a recommendation?

MR MULONGO: Mr Speaker, the committee would like to request to withdraw recommendation (b) because it was more of an observation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: (c).

Page 25(c)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Amendment?

MR MAJEGERE: I wish to make an amendment on the recommendation that action should be taken –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that new? Can we finish with what is here?

MR MAJEGERE: The other time I made a mistake and you had to leave me behind.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Because we have already read this one and you have nothing to say –

MR MAJEGERE: I have an amendment (d).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, can I deal with (c)?

MR MAJEGERE: Okay. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question on (c)-

MR MULONGO: The committee found it extremely important that all the stakeholders be involved actively and all the time. We would like to this effect to request that the recommendation be amended and retained by deleting the words, “there is need for,” so that it reads, “For smooth and efficient implementation of the project, all the stakeholders should maintain close communication and participation.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: “….should maintain close communication and participation.” That is the proposed amendment from the chair of the committee. I now put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the recommendation as amended.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Page 26 (c), as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Majegere Waira.

MR MAJEGERE: Mr Speaker, amendment (d), action should be taken against –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You propose to insert a new amendment (d)?

MR MAJEGERE: I wish to propose and add on the recommendations of the committee that action should be taken against Geoffrey Nabongo for being an imposter since he was neither sanctioned by UBOS – page 24 (e) - nor by the Ministry of Finance. He should pay back all the allowances or per diem given to him. I beg to move.

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the proposed amendment. It may not exactly fit here on this category of amendments, but we need to agree whether it should be accepted as a recommendation. Hon. Seninde?

MRS SENINDE: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have listened to hon. Majegere Waira’s amendment. He could be right, but my question is that if we move that recommendation, how is it going to be implemented? I would probably propose that he is investigated –(Interjections)- actually not investigated, but we recommend that the necessary court takes action on him. He is raising a pertinent issue, but my question is the implementation part of it because, Mr Speaker, you have just guided in this House that ours are mere recommendations, which can be rejected. 

So, my question is, and I am seeking guidance, how can we amend this recommendation to suit what we want to be done? This is what I am trying to ask myself, because that kind of wording may not really help.

DR EPETAIT: I beg to fully support the amendment moved by hon. Majegere. We cannot procrastinate over this matter. The committee already has evidence. Look at page 24 paragraph (c): “The executive director did not sanction Mr Nabongo to sign the agreement on behalf of either the bureau or the Ministry of Finance.” How could Mr Nabongo go ahead to commit the organisation without authority? This is not subject to any further investigation. The game is finished. The investigation is finished and Nabongo should take full responsibility. I beg to support the amendment and let him be interdicted immediately.

MR BABA: But, Mr Speaker, we should not be selective. On the same page 24 under (e), UBOS, however, received a copy of the directive of 2 April 2009 requiring the Ministry of Internal Affairs to coordinate with UBOS and Ministry of Finance to broaden the 2012 census. So, that area was rectified and so that amendment should not really stand.

MR MWIRU: I thank you, Mr Speaker, and also the minister for giving way. The information that I want to give to the minister and the House is that UBOS has a contracts committee that deals with the activities of this nature. It is not that individuals within UBOS find themselves to conclude transactions on behalf of UBOS. So, as you contribute, I want you to have that at the back of your mind that even the present director denied knowledge. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us finish with this.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, what the minister is reading is different. When you look at (c), this gentleman committed the organisation without authority and this is criminal. Mr Godfrey Nabongo should be held responsible for this crime and should immediately be interdicted because –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not for his crime but his action.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: He should be held responsible for his actions, which are contrary to the rules of Uganda. If you say he never acted wrongly, as the minister is saying, and yet he signed a contract on behalf of the Director without authority and he participated as the technical manager throughout, this is criminal. First of all, he should be held liable, be interdicted and make good the loss. 

MR KABAJO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been wondering while listening to the different arguments. If Mr Nabongo committed the project and the project belonged to Ministry of Internal Affairs and if Mr Nabongo did not commit UBOS, who is his employer, if the person whom he committed is not complaining, what is the problem? I would have understood if the project owners, Ministry of Internal Affairs, were the ones accusing Mr Nabongo of being an impostor. But if they allowed him to work with them, then I do not see any problem. What exactly are you accusing him of? 

He was allowed to work together with other people who were working on the project. In other words, when he signed that contract, he was not committing UBOS; he was committing the Government of Uganda under the Ministry of Internal Affairs -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, let me make myself clear. If, for example, I am the owner of a cow and I allowed that person to slaughter it, now you who is not the owner, what are you complaining about?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson of the committee, why is it that there is no recommendation on this particular person whom you found some responsibility on? Is it a mistake, and if it is mistake, are you supporting the amendment to take care of the omission?

MR MULONGO: Mr Speaker, when we interviewed the Executive Director, he was the one who brought out these anomalies. We did not seem to be aware of the actions of his subordinate staff. The committee did understand that the Executive Director would take action internally. So, we did not deem it fit to make a specific recommendation at that time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member for Masindi District, do you have a contribution to make?

MS BINTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In a normal sitting, every human being after three hours needs to excuse herself or himself and visit some areas. That is what I was going to do. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought you were rising to make a comment on the subject. So, in other words, I am not a normal human being. (Laughter) Honourable members, we need to move quickly.

MR MULONGO: Mr Speaker, we can accept the recommendation that the Executive Director takes disciplinary action on Mr Godfrey Nabongo because there are issues that the Executive Director brought out; for example, he was not fully informing the Executive Director. He even went ahead to do the signing without informing or getting authority from the Executive Director. So, we believe that can be rectified through internal disciplinary measures. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that the recommendation?

MR MULONGO: The recommendation is that the Executive Director of UBOS takes administrative action against Mr Godfrey Nabongo for misconduct in the course of the project.  

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Whereas I buy his amendment, he has used very soft words. When he says “administrative action”, the Executive Director can choose to just warn him and that will be administrative action. We are saying we want zero tolerance to corruption. He must have had a reason why he acted the way he did. He had no authority but he went ahead to sign, therefore he should pay for his sins. We should recommend in strong terms that he should be interdicted - (Applause) - and he should refund all the allowances that he earned during the process. 

MR BYARUGABA: Mr Speaker, when you see a frog running away during the day, there is something pushing it –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You had an amendment? (Laughter)

MR BYARUGABA: Let us go slowly and effectively. Now that we have decided as a House to fight this vice, warning him is not enough neither is interdicting. In addition to interdiction, he should be demoted as a punishment - (Interjections) - An interdiction means nothing to a civil servant. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have gathered from the discussion that a suggestion is being made that a one Nabongo carries some responsibility for his conduct. That is what you are struggling with. Whether frogs are leaping in daylight, that is all we want to say. So, can somebody say it because we are just beating about the bush.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I beg to move an amendment that the said Nabongo takes financial and personal responsibility for his actions and in addition, he is immediately interdicted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the amendment proposed. Can I put the question? The amendment was proposed by hon. Majegere. He has consented to this improvement.

I put the question to the motion as amended in the terms proposed by hon. Geoffrey Ekanya on the proposed amendment by hon. Majegere.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Page 27 

Recommendation (a): The Attorney-General should get committed to their constitutional mandate to advise Government correctly and objectively.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation (a), agreed to.

Recommendation (b): Whilst referring agreements for perusal and/clearance by the Attorney-General, Government should consider allocating reasonable time for the Attorney-General to carry out his function, as spelt out in the Constitution.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation (b), agreed to.

Recommendation (c): Government should consider reviewing the remuneration of its civil servants, particularly the situation in the Attorney-General’s office, to enable attraction and retention of credible and capable personnel for efficient discharge of its functions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the recommendation that Government should consider reviewing the remuneration of its civil servants, particularly in the Attorney-General’s Chamber.

(Question put and negatived)

Recommendation (d): The Executive should desist from influence peddling the technical offers to side step well laid down procedures, most notably the PPDA Act and Regulations thereto, while binding the country to such important procurements.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation (d), agreed to.

Page 28

Recommendation (a): For Government to benefit adequately from due diligence investigations, it should accord sufficient timeframe to its agencies such as ESO.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation (a), agreed to.

Recommendation (b): Instructions/directives to agencies such as ESO need to be in writing and accorded sufficient timeframe. There should also be enough resources to undertake such tasks. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation (b), agreed to.

Page 32

Recommendation: The former Minister for Finance be cleared of any wrongdoing in the procurement cycle.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the recommendation – 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the chairperson to clarify on this recommendation. Under the Constitution and the Public Finance and Accountability Act, no funds should leave the Ministry of Finance or Bank of Uganda without the authority of that minister. In fact, of all the Cabinet ministers, it is the Minister of Finance who has political and executive powers. Therefore, in this case where money was borrowed without Parliament approval and before appropriation, how come you want this House to bury its head in the sand and clear the Minister of Finance?

MR MULONGO: Mr Speaker, the Minister of Finance had limited responsibility in decision making during the procurement of this project. Her role was limited to payments as requested and directed by the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Throughout our interaction with her, we confirmed that she adhered to what she was supposed to do. So, because the whole assignment was about responsibility in the decision to procure, and Ministry of Finance and Bank of Uganda only administered payments, the committee felt that the former Minister of Finance could not be held liable.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee on whether it is true that there was money that was borrowed before appropriation or without the authority of Parliament. I think that is the point that was raised by hon. Geoffrey Ekanya. If it is true, then the argument raised by the chairperson does not arise. 

MR MAJEGERE: Mr Speaker, the content of the letter dated 13 February 2010, which was written by the President - it is Annex 2 and I will read it: 

Paragraph 4 of that annexure says, “I, therefore, have to conclude this matter by requesting you and the Minister of Finance to look at this group with a view to using single sourcing, provided you crosscheck on two points: their recent performance in Congo Brazzaville on precisely the same tasks…” You can see that this part directly involved the Minister of Finance. So, at what stage did the Minister of Finance come out of this? The chairman of the committee should clarify how the Minister of Finance got out of this matter.

MR MULONGO: Mr Speaker, as the committee stated, it is true that the Minister of Finance was involved in the project, but I would like to make it clear that that was only to the extent of sourcing funds. 

I would like to respond to what the hon. Abdu Katuntu raised. Yes, she did request the Bank of Uganda to make an advance payment and a subsequent payment to Muhlbauer; yes, she did that. Of course we were relying on the fact that the strength of the administration of the project was entirely in the hands of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. That was the basis upon which the committee made this recommendation.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I think this House can make the final decision because as far as this report is concerned, it is a report of Parliament in its entirety. 

When the minister appeared before the committee, she had a back-up team and she also appeared with some laws – I think the Bank of Uganda Act and the Public Finance and Accountability Act. She cited something to the effect that there is a percentage within which the Ministers of Finance are mandated to use their powers, which she said she had invoked. It was in that spirit that we referred this report to the House. So, it is not good to accuse the committee. My appeal is that instead of crucifying the committee, the House can pronounce itself on this issue. Thank you so much.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the Minister of Finance has powers over the budget immediately we have passed it. Under Article 152, borrowing money by Government is supposed to be authorised by Parliament. Even for the Ministry of Finance to get money from Bank of Uganda, they must get such approval. Since she never got authority, and from the letter from the President she even never went to Congo Brazzaville to assess these people’s performance, it is clear that the former Minister of Finance, hon. Syda Bbumba, committed a crime and she should be held liable for her crime. 

We have to apply the same thing we applied to the Prime Minister. I want to move an amendment that the former Minister of Finance, hon. Syda Bbumba, be held personally liable for the financial loss, politically and administratively, and make good the losses which have accrued. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that amounts to an amendment to the position of the committee. The position of the committee was that the minister was cleared. The amendment is to bring some responsibility on the former Minister of Finance. I put the question to the amendment as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, the recommendation of the committee falls by the wayside. 

Page 34

Recommendation (a): The former Attorney-General, hon. Dr Kiddhu Makubuya, should take full responsibility for the irregular clearance of the NSIS procurement agreement in total disregard of the PPDA. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation (a), agreed to.

Recommendation (b)

The Executive should desist from erroneously encouraging technical officers to sidestep well-laid down legal requirements such as in this case the waiver from the PPDA. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, if you look at Annex 17(i) at the back, there is a gentleman called Christopher Gashirabake who drafted the agreement. He was the technical officer who represented the Attorney-General’s Chambers. We are now holding only the Attorney-General responsible leaving out the technical officer who was involved in the day-to-day running of the project. Mr Speaker, isn’t it right that we also include this technical officer who was in the day-to-day management of the contract? 

I want to move an amendment that in addition to the Attorney-General, Christopher Gashirabake be held personally liable and be immediately interdicted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now speak as a lawyer. Lawyers draft agreements by instructions. You cannot draft something that the parties have not asked you to do. The point is that he acted as the drafting person. You may advise, but the parties may say, “put it there” yet you are only drafting. I just want to point that out as a draftsperson myself. So, you may want to think about that. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. When you look at the circumstances under which the civil servants participated, it is such that they took direct involvement in this. Whereas Mr Gashirabake was receiving instructions from the Attorney-General in that respect, it would have been very difficult for him to reject instructions. So, I implore the Leader of the Opposition that we abandon that amendment because he has no option. His involvement, in my opinion, was lawful.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, did we pronounce ourselves on this?

HON. MEMBERS: No!

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I just want to seek clarification from hon. Mwiru and the rest of the members who have said that Mr Christopher Gashirabake was taking instructions. There is the draftsman who operates a private firm and the draftsman who actually is a civil servant. I want clarification in the sense that we should get a clear cut distinction between a civil servant who is a draftsman and a person operating a private firm. 

In my understanding, when you are a civil servant and you are drafting any contract or any agreement and it contravenes the laws, then you should be able to tell the person who is instructing you that, “Look, there is this contradiction”. So, this one would only apply if Christopher was writing to a private firm.  

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Speaker, the information I want to give the House, so that we can resolve this matter, is contained within Article 119 of our Constitution. Clause 4 spells out the functions of the Attorney-General and 4 (b) says, “…to draw and peruse agreements, contracts, treaties,  conventions and documents by whatever name called, to which the Government is a party or in respect of which the Government has an interest” 

In this case, whether you have a draftsman or not, he is doing all this work in the name of the Attorney-General. So, I want to say that it is the Attorney-General who is responsible for the actions as indicated in our Constitution. 

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, when you look at the document which is the basis of the recommendation, the last line says, “Sir, this is to forward the draft contract arising out of the negotiations for your clearance”. This means that the Attorney-General had a right to reject the draft because a draft is not a final document. So, I reiterate my eelier request that actually – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is 6.15 p.m.; we need to draw this to a close. There was this recommendation on which we have not taken a decision - The Executive should desist from erroneously encouraging technical officers to sidestep well laid procedures such as in this case the waiver from the PPDA. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation (b), agreed to.

Page 37
Recommendation (a): Government should undertake to have insurance cover for the NSIS equipment. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation (a), agreed to.

Recommendation (b): The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide Shs 127 billion (Shs 40 billion for repayment and Shs 87 billion for operations) required in the financial year 2012/2013 to retire the contractual obligation and to operationalise the project. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, we have made a serious recommendation regarding this matter; it has budgetary issues and we are moving to the budget. May I request that we stay this recommendation so that the committees of budget and internal affairs reconcile and we can make considerations during the appropriation?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Still, we will not have finished with this report. So, give a recommendation that this particular recommendation be referred to this appropriate committee so that we finish with this report. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much for your guidance. I beg to move an amendment that the recommendation be referred to the committees responsible for appropriation and be handled at that time. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, the Shs 127 billion, (Shs 40 billion for repayment and Shs 87 billion for operations) required in the financial year 2012/2013 to retire the contractual obligation and operationalise the process should be referred to the appropriate committee to handle and come back to Parliament in the course of the budget process. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation (c): The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in conjunction with the Ministry of Internal Affairs should provide, in the reviewed budget, for losses accruing from fluctuating foreign exchange.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would that not have fallen in the same category? This is also budgetary. So it should be referred to the appropriate committee to handle in budget process.

Recommendation (d): The Electoral Commission should make good the loss of missing/damaged equipment.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I want to beg the indulgence of the chairperson so that I move an amendment. When you say Electoral Commission, you are charging yourself - the institution. The Constitution is very clear that the individual who causes loss should bear personal financial responsibility and make good. So we are seeking for your indulgence to amend your recommendation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Epetait, why don’t you allow them finish with this?

MR MULONGO: Mr Speaker, we would concede to any amendment that will ensure that the loss is made good. So if charging the individuals who occasioned the loss is more effective, we are most obliged. The amendment then should be that the individuals - I would be happy to have a formal proposal from hon. Ekanya, but we concede to the changes.

MR WADRI: I think we need to guide the chair of this committee. Repeatedly, we have made reference to Article 164(2) of the Constitution which talks about responsibility in matters of accountability. At the same time, Article 167(1) is specific, talking about the permanent secretary or head of department or accounting officer. 

In this case, therefore, if the chairperson is not aware of the names of the individual officers in that commission, the person that can be mentioned is the name of the accounting officer. The accounting officer, in a spiral action, will then go out to know who of his officers were responsible for the loss. In this particular case, the accounting officer of the Electoral Commission is Mr Sam Rwakoojo.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t you propose it now?

MR WADRI: I beg to recommend that the accounting officer for the Electoral Commission, Mr Sam Rwakoojo, be held personally liable for equipment given to the custody of his Commission, which was misappropriated, and makes good the loss occasioned to the resources.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, our records show that the memorandum of understanding signed between the Electoral Commission and the Ministry of Internal Affairs was signed by the two bodies for the use of this equipment. I would like to support the proposal as it stands in the report.

MR TINKASIMIRE: I would want to get clarification from the honourable minister. He has referred to a memorandum; it would be good practice on his side to reveal the individuals who were involved in the signing. If he was also involved, he can tell us. On the side of the Electoral Commission, he should be able to say who signed and appears in this memorandum as he is reading.

MR MULONGO: Mr Speaker, I would just like to provide information that the Appendix 2, which refers to the MOU between the Electoral Commission and Ministry of Internal Affairs, is not about the use of the equipment but rather the transfer of money meant for equipment in elections to support the procurement of Muhlbauer supplied equipment. It was not to do with the usage of the equipment. 

However, the people suspected to have occasioned the loss and damaged the equipment are officials in the field who did the administration of voters. I just wanted to be clear with the amendment. If we say the Permanent Secretary is personally held liable and yet on record we have the officials who were in the field registering voters, is that correct?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: The information I want to give the chairman is that the Permanent Secretary in the ministry is responsible for all his officers. In this case, Sam Rwakoojo is responsible for all officers in the Electoral Commission. So he is the one who should be held responsible for all the lost machines. It is he who is going to find out who gave out that machine.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, if you want the equipment, the cameras and computers replaced, then the body with the money is the Electoral Commission. If you want to hang somebody, then go for the individuals, the accounting officers.  For us at the Ministry of Internal Affairs, we want the equipment replaced and money is with the Electoral Commission. So I am comfortable with the Electoral Commission. I stand by what is on the paper.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I seem to understand is that equipment belonging to Ministry of Internal Affairs under use by the Electoral Commission got damaged and some of it went missing. So, as far as the Ministry of Internal Affairs is concerned, the Electoral Commission should make good this loss because it was handed over to them. The person with the money is not the individual; is it? 

If you say “personally liable”, then it changes the text. Personal liability will not now be applicable based on demands of the office.  It would cease being that because now you are responsible for your personal conduct. I want you to make a distinction on that. You can make the distinction by assigning the accounting officer, by virtue of the office, to take responsibility for that. But the minute you are going to personal responsibility, then it is no longer the Electoral Commission but the person. I do not know whether I am clear on this.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, we agree with the first line of argument that the Minister of Internal Affairs wants equipment replaced. There is no disagreement there. However, the point where we move to the leadership of the Electoral Commission is during the recruitment. 

It is the cardinal responsibility of the Parliamentary Commission to ensure that the staff who drive the Speaker are competent and cannot cause accidents to the Speaker. So if the staff causes accidents to the Speaker - God forbid; it will never happen - the person who recruited the transport officer or a fake person takes liability and that is our point of argument here. The people –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, is the accounting officer personally responsible for theft by an officer? We are talking about personal responsibility and not the official responsibility of the office.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I want to withdraw the other example. However, the argument is that if you say the accounting officer or the Electoral Commission replaces equipment, then what the accounting officer does is to ask for money in the budget, which we shall appropriate, and it will be you and me paying for the equipment.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What is the issue? The issue is that equipment was given to Electoral Commission by Ministry of Internal Affairs. I happen to have been a candidate in Jinja during the by-elections. I informed the Permanent Secretary, Electoral Commission, that the machines were being used in Iganga to photograph people to stuff the register and he said, “No, I have all the machines.” This happened through the general elections.

What we are saying is that actually, the Permanent Secretary assured us that our machines are intact and in the store. Now we are saying, where are they? Since he gave us an assurance before that the machines were intact, we want him to account for these machines. That is how he comes in personally to take responsibility as the person who was in charge of this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But that assurance is not part of the record of this House. That assurance was to you in some field somewhere and not on the Floor of this Parliament. Why don’t we focus on the issue before us? You are now beginning to give evidence on what happened in the field.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we agree that the Ministry of Internal Affairs should get its equipment. If we need to, we shall appropriate money and they get it; that is not a problem. But here there was loss occasioned by staff. So now what we want to know is, who are these staff? 

The day we allow that when something gets lost, we shall appropriate money and give them - As it reads now, it is Parliament going to appropriate money, give it to the Electoral Commission to buy the equipment and pass it on to Ministry of Internal Affairs. What about those who made the equipment go missing? I want to propose that as much as we are going to make good to the Electoral Commission, the persons in the Commission who made the equipment go missing or who damaged it - of course there are cases of accidents but those that deliberately damaged or lost equipment - should be held liable and make good the lost or damaged equipment.

MR ABDU KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think the whole point here is about accountability. Ministry of Internal Affairs passed on machines to the Electoral Commission and the Electoral Commission cannot account for the machines. What we should be looking at is, under the law, who is accountable to Parliament for all the property of the Electoral Commission? It is as simple as that. 

The accounting officer of the Electoral Commission, Mr Sam Rwakoojo, should account for all the properties given to him by Ministry of Internal Affairs. Whether he is going to his officers to retrieve them, whether he will find a way of buying and replacing them, that is his business. 

All the properties of the Electoral Commission are under the lawful custody of the accounting officer, so we cannot go to some assistant district registrar of Kapchorwa. We even did not know how the machine reached him, but the accounting officer should know who took it, under what condition and when he was supposed to return it. Mr Speaker, I guess that is the way forward.

MR MULONGO: Mr Speaker, I think the essence here is to hold some officer responsible to make good the loss other than just asking the same to just account, like what hon. Katuntu was suggesting. They should not just account but also make good. So I propose that we amend it to read, “The Electoral Commission’s accounting officer, Mr Sam Rwakoojo, undertakes to make good the loss of missing and damaged equipment.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the purpose of the “undertakes”?

MR MULONGO: Because the people who occasioned the damage and loss are his staff, he takes the responsibility to make sure-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So you are recommending that he undertakes or he replaces?

MR MULONGO: No, that he undertakes to replace and make good.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the amendment on recommendation (d) as proposed by the chair of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation (d), as amended, agreed to.

Recommendation (e): The Electoral Commission together with the Ministry of Internal Affairs should pursue vigorously to a logical conclusion the reported cases at Police.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I want to know - the reported cases on what? I want it to be clear because if it is in connection with (d), which we have just pronounced ourselves on, then it means the accounting officer has taken the steps to recover the equipment by taking those people to court to be prosecuted. So I need to be clarified on that.

MR MULONGO: Mr Speaker, taking them to Police and being prosecuted is not enough in terms of recovering the lost or damaged equipment. So, prosecution is for mismanagement and abuse of the resources.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that recommendation on part (e).

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation (e), agreed to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the report of the committee as a whole as amended. Is there a further amendment?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. I just want to suggest an additional recommendation. As a Parliamentary Commission, we have been carrying out visits to other Parliaments to study how they carry out oversight roles. In the Parliament of Zambia, for instance, in their rules they specifically indicate that when Parliament adopts a report, the Executive must report back within 60 days on the status of implementation of the recommendations. I think it is a lacuna in our rules because time and again, we have passed and adopted reports but we do not get to know what has happened. 

In that regard, I want to move an additional recommendation to the effect that Government should report and provide an update to Parliament within 60 days with respect to the status of implementation of these recommendations. I beg to move.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, 60 days is a very short period.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you can come back and say, “We will be reporting in the next three weeks.” 

MR JAMES BABA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, it has come to our notice that the President misleads our civil servants every minute -(Interjections)- Yes, the President. Listen! In a letter dated February 2010 -(Interjections)- Relax! The President even conceded - “Consult PPDA to get a no objection to single sourcing. I think the law allows that.” He is the one who was talking of single sourcing. The Germans went and visited him – (Interruption)

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have taken a number of days debating issues regarding this report and we have come to its end. Is it in order for the honourable member to take us back by opening another debate?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have done a good job on this report. I put the question that the report of the committee as amended be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we still have business on the Order Paper but it is now coming to 7 O’clock. This House stands adjourned to tomorrow, 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.40 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 18 July 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
