Thursday, 19 July 2012

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good afternoon, members and welcome to this special sitting. The sitting has been convened in honour of the late hon. Andrew Benedicto Adimola. Yesterday, in my communication from the Chair, I gave a brief biography of the late together with the programme for this function. I will therefore not repeat what I said yesterday about this eminent Ugandan.

On behalf of the Parliament of Uganda and on my own behalf, I wish to convey our dear and sincere condolences to the widow, the children, relatives and friends of the late hon. Andrew Adimola. The immediate family members of the late are seated at the Treasury Bench at the back of my seat. I wish to recognise their presence in our midst. May the soul of hon. Andrew Adimola rest in eternal peace. I also pray that the Almighty God gives the widow and the children the courage and the fortitude to bear this bereavement.

Honourable members, let me also take this opportunity to inform the House that the Appointments Committee of Parliament will be meeting on Monday, 23 July 2012 at 10.00 a.m. in the South Committee Room to handle nominees by His Excellency the President to the National Citizenship and Immigration Board. The nominees to be considered are: 

1.	Ms Byenkya Beatrice Nyakaisiki
2.	Mr Ambako Patrick Kibrai
3.	Ms Elizabeth Nabakka Musazi
4.	Ms Agatha Arembe Namirembe
5.	Mr John Elyanu Eresu 
6.	Ms Akwero Jane Odwong

Members of the Appointments Committee of Parliament are requested to attend this meeting without fail and to keep time. 

Once again, I would like to ask members to empty their pigeonholes because there is no space to place any more mail. Please respond so that the Office of the Clerk to Parliament can be able to help you.

Honourable members, I would also like to ask you to join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Rwensingo Primary School, represented by hon. Stephen Tashobya, the MP for Kajara County, Ntungamo District. (Applause) They have come to observe the proceedings of the House today. Thank you.

Before we go to the next item, allow me to also announce that in the Speaker’s Gallery we have the hon. Robert Kitariko, hon. Anthony Butele, hon. Henry Kyemba and hon. Paul Etyang, Ambassador. They have come to join us in this special sitting. You are welcome. (Applause)

(Entrance of the late Andrew Benedicto Adimola)

National Anthem (One Verse)

Laying of wreaths
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we also welcome in the public gallery this afternoon pupils and teachers of Zirobwe St Augustine Primary School represented by hon. Dr J.C. Muyingo, Member of Parliament for Bamunanika Constituency, Luwero District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ANDREW ADIMOLA

2.56
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, this is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Andrew Benedicto Adimola, and I am doing this on behalf of the Prime Minister who is not available. 

“WHEREAS the late Andrew Benedicto Adimola was born and raised in Gulu, educated at Makerere University College and later Bristol University and was in 1961 posted to London as the first black foreign service officer in the Office of the High Commissioner to oversee Uganda’s colonial interests in London, and later coordinated all programmes and the organisation of the delegates’ conference for Uganda Independence Constitution in London in 1962;

NOTING that the late Andrew Benedicto Adimola was the Ugandan who was called to the House of Lords to witness the approval of the 1962 Constitution from where he received the instruments of independence, wherefrom he earned the title of Lord Andrew Adimola;

FURTHER NOTING that the late Adimola was a seasoned diplomat, an outstanding politician, an articulate debater who in his life served as a permanent secretary in various government ministries, was involved in the formation of the National Consultative Council (NCC), a body formed at the Moshi Conference to lead Uganda after the overthrow of Idi Amin in 1979, and was later in 1980 Vice-President of the Democratic Party and also Minister of Rehabilitation and Reconstruction in the Yusuf Lule Government and a Constituent Assembly Delegate representing Gulu Municipality in the Constituent Assembly;

FURTHER RECOGNISING that owing to his outstanding contribution in the area of education, the late Andrew Benedicto Adimola was in May 2008 awarded a medal of Pioneer Achiever and Trailblazer in education and sports by the Pincer Group International and later in 2011, was awarded the medal of Independence Veteran by the Government of Uganda; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by the Parliament of Uganda duly convened and sitting in Kampala on this 19th day of July 2012 as follows:

1.	 That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, the Government of Uganda and to all Ugandans upon the demise of a distinguished son of Uganda.

2. 	That it takes cognisance of the distinguished service the late Andrew Benedicto Adimola rendered and the contributions he made to the nation in different capacities.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I want say something briefly about the motion. The late Adimola was born on 27 May 1924 at Gulu Cathedral Diocese to the late Federiko Wana and the late Santina Akumu. In 1935, he started his education career with Pere Pere vernacular class for one year. From 1936 to 1939, he attended elementary vernacular education for four years. He joined Sacred Heart Seminary Lacor but when World War II broke out, they were transferred to West Nile, to St Aloysius College Nyapea. 

From 1939 to 1941, he finished junior secondary school and went to study primary teacher training at St Joseph’s Gulu. On completion, he was posted to Ngetta Fatima College, Lango from 1946 to 1948. From 1949 to 1950, he taught at Nyapea and it was from there that he sat for national examinations with his students and passed highly. He was admitted to Makerere College for a Bachelor’s Degree in Education specialising in geography/history from 1951 to 1953.

In 1954, he taught at St Joseph’s Junior Secondary School and he was the patron of the scouts. In 1956, he got a scholarship to Bristol University where he studied a postgraduate diploma in education for two years. He returned to Uganda and taught for only two months and then he was called to the colonial office by Governor C. V. R. Bell who posted him to work as an education officer, West Nile and Madi, in 1958 and later to Lango respectively.

He was posted to Britain in 1961 under DP’s Benedicto Kiwanuka Government as Uganda’s representative in the Office of the High Commissioner. This was after having a brief stint in Acholi Legislative Council where he is remembered for moving a motion on education and farming for the development of Acholi land.

He was also involved in the making of the Independence Constitution. He represented Uganda in the House of Commons. After discussing Uganda’s Independence Constitution, Adimola was called in the House of Lords to witness the approval of this Constitution. It was from there that he received the instruments of Independence and earned the title of Lord Adimola. On the eve of Uganda’s Independence, he was assigned a special plane to bring the instruments of Independence to Uganda, handed them over to colonial Governor, Sir Andrew Cohen, and returned to organise the Independence celebrations in the UK, which took place at the Royal Queen’s Palace.

He served in the UK until 1964. In 1965, he served as undersecretary in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. But before, several attempts had been made to force him to New York and South Africa but he turned them down on the basis that he was a civil servant not a politician.

In 1966-67, he served as a permanent secretary in the Ministry of Animal Industry, Game and Fisheries with hon. John Babiha as minister. It was during that time that he opened up ranches in different parts of the country such as Aswa in Acholi, Ankole and Masaka ranching schemes, and Maruzi in Lango.

In 1968 to 1970, he served as a permanent secretary in the Ministry of Culture and Community Development with hon. Katiti as minister. He also served as the Director for Refugee Services. In 1971-1973, he served as permanent secretary in the Ministry of Education with Brig. Barnabas Kili as minister. He then retired and started his personal business and farms.

When the secret plot to have him killed by Amin’s men got exposed, he fled into exile in Kenya where he found his old boy at Makerere, Mwai Kibaki, who was a minister in Kenya. He asked him to head refugees in Kenya, and they were coming from Somalia, Sudan and Uganda. He was spied on by the Government and this forced him to join the liberation forces in Tanzania. He was involved in the formation of the National Consultative Council, a body formed at the Moshi Conference to lead Uganda after the overthrow of Amin. 

In 1979, after the overthrow of Amin, he served as the Minister for Rehabilitation and Construction in the short Government of Yusuf Lule. In the same year, he served as the general manager of Cement Industry in the Government of Godfrey Binaisa. In 1980, he served as the vice-president of the Democratic Party under Paul Kawanga Ssemwogerere. In 1985, during the Tito Okello Lutwa’s Government, he was appointed in several offices, among them that of foreign affairs minister; he turned it down and retired home concentrating on his farm at Lamoki.

He engaged in a lot of community work. He served as chairman, board of governors of Bishop Negri Primary School, Bishop Angelo Negri College and St Joseph’s College Layibi.

In February 1991, he was arrested and charged with treason together with five others but they were acquitted later that year. In 1994, he represented Gulu Municipality in the Constituent Assembly, which made the 1995 Uganda Constitution. He then retired home and led a private life but was open to consultations from the state, civil society organisations, students, media houses, the community and several other stakeholders. 

On 21 May 2008, he received an award from the Pincer Group International as a Pioneer Achiever and Trailblazer in education and sports. On 9 October 2011, he was awarded a medal for Independence veterans by the Government of Uganda.

He was a very active and dedicated member of the Catholic Church where he was baptised. He became an altar boy, choir member and later was consulted in administration. He received the sacrament of holy matrimony in 1949 at Nyapea with Tereza Adimola Angom.

On 11 July 1980, in conviction of his faith, he paid a pilgrimage to Rome, that is, to the Vatican. He again paid a pilgrimage to the River Jordan, the Red Sea and Dead Sea among others. His individual contribution to the Church earned him and his family Papal recognition.

Mzee Adimola was a family man, a disciplinarian who put education as a priority in life. He was a determined, principled and focused man who always set objectives and worked hard towards achieving them. The last quarter of Mzee Adimola’s life saw him battle with several health complications. He suffered from TB of the bones in 1987 from which he was treated and recovered. 

In 2004, he was diagnosed with heart complications and he committed himself to treatment and regular check-ups at St Mary’s Hospital, Lacor. In between, he was admitted twice and recovered on both occasions. 

On the evening of Saturday, 7 July 2012 Mzee Adimola was rushed to Lacor Hospital when he was experiencing severe cough, general weakness and lack of appetite with swollen limbs. He was immediately retained at the emergency unit where a heart failure was diagnosed. He was then rushed to the intensive care unit where he was put on life support and medics worked on him tirelessly to save his life. He showed some signs of improvement during his three weeks’ stay in the hospital and even praised God in Latin and Acholi hymns. He cried in pain saying, “Do you still need to see me alive?” and breathed his last at 1.50 a.m. 

Mzee Lord Andrew Benedicto Adimola is survived by eight children and 20 grandchildren. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Amen. Thank you. 

3.24
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I am the seconder of the motion, but before I do it, I have two statements to make. At 12.00 noon today, I lost my uncle called Mzee Wabuna who was aged 93 and about to make 94. I was named Nandala after his father but because I wanted to pay tribute to Mzee Adimola, I could not go immediately. 

The second statement I would like to make is on a happy note. I would like to wish the freedom fighter, Mzee Nelson Mandela, a happy birthday and for having reached 94 years as a person who is committed to principles of democracy and reconciliation.  

Mr Speaker and colleagues, this is to second the motion moved by Gen.(Rtd) Moses Ali, Third Deputy Prime Minister, for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Andrew Benedicto Adimola. I first heard of Lord Adimola when I was still a young boy at Busoga College Mwiri. Of course I admired him for his astuteness and he quickly became one of the few people that inspired me to become a civil servant and later a politician with a difference. 

It is very worrying to most of us that we have again lost another national Independence pillar, Mzee Adimola, after many and soon after Prof. George Kakoma. The last time I stood here seconding a similar motion to pay tribute to the late Cuthbert Obwangor, I remember reminding and urging Government to streamline our sick health sector. In a special way, I asked Government to look out for our distinguished men and women who have contributed immensely to the building of the present Uganda and devise ways and means of looking into their needs during their later years. 

We judge ourselves by what we feel capable of doing while others judge us by what we have already done. This would have served as the last opportunity to say “thank you” for all they have done and not for themselves but for this country as Lord Adimola has done. Now we as Ugandans are preparing to celebrate 50 years of Independence and one of our pioneer diplomats falls after confinement by rheumatoid arthritis for a long time. In fact, he had been disabled by the disease. This makes us again question why it appears a tall order for Government to streamline the health sector. Could Government go an extra mile to care for our senior citizens? Most of these senior citizens who have served Uganda with one heart die even before they can get their pension.  

Lord Adimola had the qualities of great men and women; these are vision, integrity, courage, understanding the power of articulation and personality of character. We must appreciate and thank God for such distinguished, selfless and resilient men and women who never wavered from the truth despite the waves. They give us a reason to fight on.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, I strongly say so because these days most of us are swayed from the truth just because we want to survive politically, and some are compromised by brown envelopes to move from their party ideologies. Lord Adimola is one person who has been strong and has died supporting the ideologies in which his party, DP, believes in. He never crossed in the 1960s, in the 1980s during the UPC Government or even during the present ruling party, NRM, government.

As a strong Catholic, Lord Adimola has died still attached to his faith, as you have heard from the Prime Minister. His courage and strength should energise all those that have resisted the temptation by the ruling party to cross and those who see the ruling party going wrong and abandon it leaving the soft life and goodies.

Lord Adimola was a faithful civil servant. Of course, you have heard from the Prime Minister’s speech. The trend today with our civil servants is to get rich quick. You find a young civil servant today driving a posh car of over Shs 100 million, living in a house of over Shs 300 million, and you wonder how such a young person accumulates such money in the short time of his or her service. Well, I am told that is modernisation.

As the first black diplomat in London, Lord Adimola had a difficult task of overseeing Ugandan and British colonial office interests. It was not easy at that time, but given his hard work and truthfulness, he accomplished his task diligently. He never put Uganda to shame in any way as we have seen with our current diplomats in London.

Lord Adimola was one of the framers of the 1995 Constitution, which we all swear to protect as Members of Parliament. It spells out all Adimola’s wishes, and those are to have a free Uganda and see a better country for all of us to live in.

Mr Speaker, honourable members and fellow Ugandans, we in the Opposition will always remind Government that we want a better Uganda for everybody. We want our children to go to school and find teachers who are motivated. We want our loved ones who are sick to go to the hospitals and find drugs, find and see motivated nurses and doctors. We want a vibrant youth who are able to find work. We want an economy that will sustain all of us and not a few. This should be a country where we respect freedoms and not use state resources to silence or bribe opponents. 

Lord Andrew Adimola, although the sparkle in your eye is gone and your smile is faded, rest assured that many of us will work hard to achieve your wish and to see a better country to live in. Lord Andrew Benedicto Adimola, you have fought a good fight and now you await your crown. Rest in peace and may the good God that you have served all your life show you the right place in heaven. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable seconder of the motion. In the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have the hon. Samwiri Mugwisa, former Minister for Agriculture. He is here to pay tribute to the late Adimola.

Honourable members, we also have pupils and teachers of J. Cleveland High School represented by hon. Lubogo Kenneth, Member of Parliament Bulamogi Constituency, Kaliro District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. We also have pupils and teachers of Samson Children’s Centre Day and Boarding Nursery and Primary School represented by hon. Medard Lubega Ssegona, Busiro East, Wakiso District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Join me in welcoming them too.

Honourable members, the motion is that this Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, the Government of Uganda and to all Ugandans upon the demise of a distinguished son of Uganda, and that it takes cognisance of the distinguished service the late Andrew Benedicto Adimola rendered and the contributions he made to the nation in different capacities. I propose the question for debate and we will make our contributions. I will see by the number and decide on how much time we need for each member. Four minutes each would be a good time, I think, going by the number.

3.30
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (DP, Kyadondo County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the mover of the motion and I was asking my colleague here that: do we still have men like Adimola, someone who you appoint as foreign affairs minister and he says, “No, I cannot serve, I am tired”? Words like, “I am tired” have run out of many of us. I think it is important that we learn a lesson from our statesman, Adimola. I have declared that I am not going to run again. I wonder how many of us- I am not asking anybody but this is the spirit.

As I was talking to someone, he was telling me that Mzee Adimola was one person who would write every instruction. You write to him a letter and he would write back and give specific instructions on what you should do. What happens these days is you write a letter, somebody notes on that very letter “take action”; which action? To make matters worse, some people even put yellow stickers such that he can even pull it off when the going gets tough and there is no evidence. As a country, we must get back to where we lost the turn, otherwise if we keep losing people like these and nothing is being done to put the situation right, it is going to be a big problem. 

Institutions in this country are no more; everyone does things their own way. For how long is this going to continue? The late Adimola, as he has been described, was a great teacher and many people have gone through his hands. Much as he was a politician, he could ably sustain himself and nobody could play around with his brain because he was a farmer. This is very important and critical.  As politicians, we should ensure that whatever we do or say must be freely said. Somebody is saying “side income” but this is what it should be. 

Adimola was vice-president of DP at a time when things were very rough and it was a taboo to talk about parties. This should be a lesson to those who are in government. You can be in government today but tomorrow, you will be on the other side. What will happen to the people you mistreated while still in government? (Member timed out) 

3.37
MR RICHARD TODWONG (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Mr Speaker, I stand to support the motion. Today is another day we are paying homage to one of our pillars. It will not be the last day; many might still be coming. 

I learnt three things, namely, the honourable gentleman lying before us, Lord Andrew Adimola, who I am proud to call my maternal uncle, helped me through my elementary level when he was one of the board members of Bishop Angelo Negri School. I remember that whenever there was a board meeting at the school, Lord Andrew Adimola would instruct the school gateman to lock out whichever board members came late. During their board meetings, he would call the teachers, pupils and support staff before the board. I remember one particular incident where Mr Adimola ordered that pupils of P.5, P.6 and P.7 who were becoming undisciplined should be caned before the school assembly. His instructions were, “You spare the rod, you spoil the child”. That helped very many pupils. For that, we thank him.

The other thing I learn from the death of Lord Andrew Adimola – just like my other colleagues could have said – is: when do senior citizens retire in honour? How many of us could have served or who are serving in different positions will one time have this kind of dignified environment with good things being spoken about them? We have lost many and those we keep losing are the pillars that should have guided this country at the time it needs serious mentors. 

We are not ashamed to say that being an Acholi, Adimola made us proud. As a senior civil servant, he served this country and retired without blame. We thank him for that. To many of us who admired his footsteps, we pray that God should guide us towards his direction and we should not be tempted to abuse this country.

Thirdly, through Adimola’s death, we learn one simple and yet very critical lesson – the lesson of forgiveness, national reconciliation and unity. (Member timed out) 

3.41
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I bring condolences from the people of Igara West in Bushenyi, my family and myself to the family of the late Mzee Adimola, the people of Gulu and to Ugandans. I would also like to convey our condolences to the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, upon the loss of his uncle. It is sad and we are with you in this difficult moment.

Before us lies a great Ugandan, who played his role to secure our independence. We are what we are because of what our fathers and grandfathers did in fighting to remove the bottlenecks of our independence. They had a dream, cherished our liberty, fought hard for our freedom and liberated us from oppression by the colonialists. I am sure that they believed that the destiny of Uganda lay in the hands of Ugandans. He played a key role in the Constituent Assembly and I believe his vision was a country under the rule of law and full of truth and justice, true to the ideals of his party. 

As we bid him farewell, I think we are challenged to fight the inhibitions of our true independence. While we are proud as Ugandans and Members of Parliament to bid farewell to those who contributed to our independence, one wonders what has happened such that in 2012, we have built a society of immorality, corruption, intrigue, lies  and greed. 

To me, a colonialist is not necessarily a man in a white skin; it is anybody who subjects Ugandans to oppression, divisionism, patronage, poverty. (Applause) If by your actions you increase the vulnerability of Ugandans, especially the underprivileged and the poor, you remain a colonialist much as you may be black and a Ugandan. (Applause) So, our real tribute to the late Adimola lies in the challenge to march on and continue fighting for our true liberation and freedom. May the Lord rest his soul in eternal peace. 

3.45
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to join my colleagues in seconding the motion to pay tribute to our great nationalist who is lying before us. I am one of the beneficiaries of the good counsel of the late Andrew Adimola through my grandmother with whom they were in the Democratic Party. 

One day, the late came to our home and I asked my grandmother, “Why is this person always coming here?” She told me, “If you want a bright career in your life, get hold of Andrew Adimola and you will never regret.” I let him go that day. Another time when he came, I approached him and he told me so many things among which was that once you assume an office, that very day you should be preparing for retirement. How many of us here are prepared for retirement? - (Interjections)- What I always see are our elders always struggling for political positions with their grandchildren- (Interjections) - of which Adimola prepared me when he said that the day you assume office is the very day you should begin preparing for your retirement.

It is very unfortunate, Mr Speaker, that at this point in time when we are preparing to celebrate our 50 years of Independence, we are seeing people or persons like the late Andrew Adimola leaving us. We would have loved to have them on Independence Day as physical testimonies for the existence of Uganda through 50 years and to give counsel to more nationalists. 

I consider Andrew Adimola a great national because he participated indirectly in two liberation struggles to see Uganda to where it is now, that is 1979 and in 1985. He was a civilian but his contribution towards the liberation struggles was great. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.48 
MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (DP, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion and also pay tribute to a fallen comrade. I got to know about Adimola a few years ago. I went to Gulu with a group of young people from the Democratic Party and I had heard a lot about him. He was a role model to us. He did not speak much but he said, “truth and justice”; those were values that he believed in and those were his guiding principles. 

Today I want to say that we are losing our forefathers who prepared this county for Independence and he is one of them. As we celebrate the 50 years of Independence, I want to pose a question: are we moving this country to where our forefathers wanted it to go? There is so much to be done. I have heard so many great words here today and I want to say to my colleagues today that if we do not follow the steps of those who prepared this country, we will lead our country where we do not want it to go. 

I want to thank comrade Adimola’s family for allowing us to share his life because he contributed a lot and this has modelled so many Ugandans. I also want to say that he stood for reconciliation even when the tides were high in this country. He was once battered and he bled but he stood firm and he stayed where he was. This is a challenge to all politicians and to me too. I know he has done his work and brought it to a conclusion. Fare thee well, comrade. May God rest his soul in eternal peace.

3.50
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and to thank God for the 88 years of a long and illustrious life of the late Mzee Adimola. I want to extend my sincere condolences to the family and to all Ugandans upon the demise of this gallant son.

When death occurs to those of us who are still living, I think it provides an opportunity for us to take stock of what happened in somebody’s lifetime. I said it here when we lost Prof. Kakoma and I want to repeat it - in fact in agreement with some of the colleagues who alluded also to the same fact- that the demise of a man like Mzee Adimola should really remind us of the demise of our forefathers and our founder members, the members who founded the state, Uganda, politically. It is sad. We should also think, is it prophetic that they are dying before we celebrate our Golden Jubilee? Is it prophetic? Can we think about Dr Milton Obote, Prof. Kakoma and Mzee Adimola to mention but a few? Is it prophetic? I think we need to ask ourselves some of these questions, Mr Speaker. 

I want to salute Mzee Adimola for achieving the title “Lord”. I do not know how many Lords are in this Uganda. Some are Lord Mayors - (Laughter) - but I think the title “Lord”, which has been conferred upon him on merit, is a very great and honourable thing for which I would like to salute him and thank him. I want to say that I am proud of him for the title that he achieved.

Mr Speaker, I saw the honourable Minister of Information and National Guidance here and I wanted to address this matter to her. How much have we tapped, as a country, from this encyclopaedia of the 88-year-old Mzee with his illustrious history? How much of his wisdom have we tapped and kept in the archives for Ugandans to partake of? The western people do that. The western people tap the wisdom of the elderly statesmen and women and keep that wisdom in the archives so that it does not diminish with such people. Can we think about something like that? 

Mr Speaker, when a man who among others sat in the Chamber of this House and drafted the Constitution dies, what do we think about it as Members of Parliament? How can we pay back for such a great thing that they did in this House? I think that invitation is for all Members of Parliament to preserve and protect the Constitution. I think that is the only way we can pay tribute to such a gallant son.

When a man who is one of the brains behind the multiparty politics that we have dies, can we take stock of the multiparty politics which we adopted and see how far we have gone with it? (Member timed out.)

3.55
REV. FR JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Mr Speaker, I personally owe Lord Andrew Benedicto Adimola deep appreciation for the encouragement he gave me when I was carrying out my research, while studying in Rome, and when I came back to Uganda to carry out a number of interviews. He encouraged me very much to work hard and complete my PHD dissertation in time. I carried out lengthy oral interviews with him five times and I recorded him. He was a man who possessed a wealth of knowledge and had a very good memory of the historical events of the colonial and post-independent Uganda. Unfortunately, today, because of the problems of the wars we have in Uganda, all this wealth of knowledge which he gave, which was recorded - and I could have bequeathed to the archives of the State of Uganda - was looted from my mother’s house during the insurgency. 

We, from Northern Uganda will remember him not only as an outstanding personality who exercised a far-reaching influence on all of us in the diplomatic, civil and ministerial service, but also in the advance of the cause of Christianity in Northern Uganda. For several years, he assisted church leaders in financing and sponsoring many church projects from which the poorest of the poor of Northern Uganda very much benefitted. 

I think this is a lesson for those of us who have the privilege of having some resources to draw our attention to stand and help the poorest of the poor of this nation. He was a very generous man. I think he teaches that we should be generous. 

Lord Adimola Benedicto Andrew was a classmate of my father for several years. He was a personal friend to my father. He grew up with my father at a time when there was a dichotomy between the believers and non-believers. It was by then in the 1950s and 1960s fashionable for the educated and the intellectuals to be agnostics. For instance, his peers like Okot p’Bitek actually claimed that they were not believers, but for him he stood firm and remained a believer. He has left an indelible mark as a man of this deep faith, great zeal, devotion and for this, we surely admire him. (Member timed out.)

4.00
MRS OKETAYOT LOWILA   (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As we pay tribute to the late Andrew Benedicto Adimola, I would like to take this opportunity to thank Government for according him a state burial. Indeed, he was a statesman. Personally, I had the opportunity of knowing him and very closely from his home. For some of you who will have the opportunity of travelling to Gulu, along Gulu-Juba road about three kilometres from Gulu town, there is a popular school called Sacred Heart Girls School and directly opposite, is the home of the late Andrew Benedicto Adimola. I was in that school for about six years and I used to spend some of my holidays within the school with my aunt. 

Therefore, during the holidays, we would have time to go across the road and visit the home of the late Adimola. He was an all round person as you have been hearing. He was a great farmer, a teacher, a politician and of course, a diplomat. But one thing that I want us to learn from the life of the late Adimola is something related to a tendency that many of us have. The late Adimola had a great love for his country home. There is a tendency among many of us when we get the opportunity of coming to the city to do some work or like some of us who have come to represent our people, there is this tendency of people putting up structures and deciding to stay around almost permanently. This was not the case with our statesman. After serving and retiring, he went back to his country home.

When I reflect on his life, it reminds me of what I read in papers recently - a statement by His Grace Henry Luke Orombi, who said there are a number of people who have been bothering him about getting land in Kampala to construct. I recall he put it very clearly that he came to Kampala to work and not to stay. So, after work, he would go back to his home in Nebbi.
 
There is something that I want us to also learn from the life of the late Adimola, and one thing that is also striking is how he advocated for environmental protection. Some of you who will have the opportunity of visiting that place will see how he planted trees in his home. This is a great thing and as we pay tribute to him, I want to pray that the Almighty God gives guidance to all those who are involved in making burial arrangements so that tomorrow, we give our departed statesman a decent burial. I also want to pray that the Almighty God who alone has the power to give life and the power to take life, rests the soul of the late Andrew Benedicto Adimola in eternal peace. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have hon. Mukasa Mbidde, Member of the East African Legislative Assembly and hon. Mathias Nsubuga MP-elect for Bukoto South, Lwengo District and Secretary-General for the Democratic Party. They have come to observe the proceedings. Join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

4.05
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. Before I can do that, allow me convey heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family of the late Andrew Adimola, Uganda as a whole and Democratic Party for the loss of such a gallant son of Uganda. It is five years since I got to know the late Andrew Adimola. We travelled to Northern Uganda under AMANI Forum in 2007 to preach peace and encourage people who are living in IDPs to get back home to their villages. The late Adimola was one of the senior leaders then, the elders whom we first met. He was forthcoming and very positive in encouraging our people to get back to their villages, yet some of our colleagues here had reservations as far as this programme was concerned. We shall miss his back-up, we shall miss his services. He, however, played his part. 

The late Adimola having tested the coolers or the gallows in 1991 on charges of treason at the time when the LRA were disturbing this country, if he was not a diplomat, he should have thought otherwise. We should salute him for being a true citizen, a true statesman, who loved peace because he was tested; he was detained on treason charges at the time when the LRA were disturbing this country. If he had not thought twice, he should have decided that maybe I join the other side, but having thought positively, he decided to preach peace and harmony in society. I feel this is credit that we should give to the late Adimola.

The late Adimola having participated in making the Constitution, and Article 1 of the Constitution says, power belongs to the people. I want to appeal to colleagues to always remember and reflect on the intention and purpose of the people who made this Constitution, because they wanted peace in Uganda. That is why they transferred most of the powers to the people. He always used to say, if the people have decided, who am I to differ from them? That is why I need to appeal to colleagues here who have the gospel of “For God and My Country”, A4C, to always look at defending and protecting the Constitution. 

Mr Speaker, I want to pray to the Almighty God to give the late Adimola and the entire family - let me first wish the entire family courage and strength during this trying moment. Then I say, may his soul rest in eternal peace. 

4.09
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the Democratic Party, I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Andrew Benedicto Adimola. 

Like my predecessors have said, these are the icons we are missing as Uganda is preparing to celebrate 50 years of existence after getting Independence from the colonialists. The late Adimola served prior to our attaining Independence, the time we got Independence, and through all the tribulations which have bedevilled this country. 

Sometimes, I wonder why, when we put up portraits there - and I am still wondering, because he served under Ben - he served under the subsequent governments. Even the portrait of the late Benedicto Kiwanuka is not there. I keep on wondering why it is missing from the historical archive up there. I request Parliament to make sure the portrait of the late leader of the Democratic Party, under which some of the people like the late Andrew Adimola served, is included in the archives of Parliament.

We have lost most of the people. Who is going to chronicle most of the works done by these people we have lost? He has been an educationist. He has been a politician. He has been a farmer and a diplomat. Some people are already arguing that he was not an ambassador. I do not know what it is he was, but I know they call it agents. I know to us -  like they keep on debating what the late Benedicto Kiwanuka was - he was not only an agent to us, but also a diplomat, and he was one of the pioneers who paved way for the subsequent generations to come in.    

What really interests me is that he was a teacher. Imagine the kind of stuff these fallen colleagues of ours were made of. Today, the teachers of Uganda are suffering. Today, the teachers of Uganda are crying foul. Why don’t we borrow from some of these on how they managed the education system? Why couldn’t we borrow a leaf from them before their demise? We continue saying the good things they have done, but after the cortege has left, we forget most of the things. I remember my colleague here, Hon. Latif Ssebagala, said when they brought the late Kajubi that, “Why don’t we name the roads we have after some of these fallen heroes, because some of the roads have got names of people who have not even benefitted this country?” What about monuments? What about putting foundation scholarships for some of these people? 

I think the best we can do – let us – like my colleague already said, the Ministry of Information should take the initiative and start chronicling the deeds of these people because these are the pillars on which this nation has stood. Maybe like in India, we and the subsequent leaders can borrow a leaf by going into the archives to see how these people stood their ground not to be attracted to corruption, to nepotism, to racism and whatever other mis-happenings are bedevilling this country today. Maybe if we read and internalised how they used to conduct themselves in public, maybe that would be a cure, than the many laws we are making - so many acts,  yet thuggery, corruption are increasing -(Member timed out.)

4.13
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here on behalf of the people of Terego County and on behalf of the people of West Nile to pay tribute to Lord Andrew Adimola. 

The first time I got to know about the late Adimola was in 1975, when I was in Lacor Seminary. We used to walk down every Saturday from Lacor to Gulu Town, and we would always pass by the home and residence of Adimola. That time he had already retired from Civil Service, and what used to impress us was the outlay of his compound, full of orchards and the manner in which he would come out and talk to us as young seminarians. That is what I vividly recall about the Lord Adimola. 

The Lord Adimola is further respected for his reconciliatory approach. As you have been told earlier on, Lord Adimola and four others, including Zachary Olumu and hon. Omara Atubo and hon. Okullo who is now in exile in America, were arrested during the Operation North, which was commanded by the then Gen. David Tinyefuza, a Member of this House. Moreso, if Lord Adimola had no love for this country, certainly at his age, having been incarcerated, frog-matched and badly treated, he would have been one of those to say, “I would rather take leave of this House and this country and go into exile.” 

Because of the love he had for this country, he decided to remain around and forgive those who tortured him. Thereafter, on a number of occasions, he met and shook hands with Gen. David Tinyefuza. How many of us will be able to do this? How many of us here will be able to stand up and shake hands with a person who has molested you, who has humiliated you in front of your children? 

I respected the late Adimola the more, in his reconciliatory attributes, especially during the days when I was a member of the Democratic Party Youth Wing. We had the last delegates’ conference in 1984 in Lugogo Indoor Stadium and a while ago, I saw Robert Kitariko, who was a senior member of the party there. 

During that delegates’ conference, we were meant to have a recap of what had gone wrong to the extent that DP lost the 1980 elections. At that time, Tiberio Atwoma Okeny was the vice-president. I vividly remember how he challenged Ssemwogerere to account for the loss and during that delegates’ conference, there was a brink at which DP actually broke into two.

I vividly remember the late Sekwema who stood up and challenged, “Omussajja ono ayagala okutwala ekibinna kyaffe, akitwala wa?” -(Laughter)- he said challenging Mzee Atoma. He said this man here wants to take our party. Where is he taking it? And that time, Tiberio Atwoma threatened to form his own party and it was the late Adimola as a statesman, who stood in between Ssemwogerere and Atwoma to say it was not the way we are going to tear this party. It will be a shame for this long-founded party to die in your hands. How many of us can reconcile to that extent? To which we can even be able to say, “my own brother, you are in the wrong, sit down and for the interest of this country and the party, we move together.” That was the late Adimola, who lies before us here.

Today, we are here paying tribute to this hero and remembering him for the great works he has done and for how he positively sold the image of this country during the time of his foreign service. Today, we are here talking about how astute he was when he was an accounting officer and permanent secretary in the Civil Service of Uganda. Ask yourself today, how many people join Civil Service and within one, two, three weeks or a month, they cannot even account for the wealth they have so far amassed? They cannot even account for the fleet of houses and vehicles that they have. 

How many of us are in this House and are not even contented with what we have? We have seen many, but here is a situation where the late Adimola who lies in front us certainly must be at peace with his creator for having left behind a good record.

It is important, honourable colleagues, that we respect and keep the image of such great men alive. I challenge in one way or the other - we are human beings and may have weaknesses, may make mistakes, but weaknesses and mistakes that we make should not erase the good image and contributions that we have made. 

A while ago, hon. Sebuliba Mutumba was talking about keeping alive the images of these people. We know for a fact – remember when I was young, we used to have the portrait of His Excellency Dr Milton Obote hanging at the entrance of Parliament. Are we going to rewrite history that we cannot recognise him? (Member timed out.) (Laughter)

4.19
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was brought up in the home of Mzee Andrew Adimola. I went to St Joseph’s Primary School where Mzee Adimola went for his primary school.

We have read the biography of Mzee Andrew Adimola. He served as a minister, permanent secretary, ambassador and a well-qualified teacher and he was not implicated in any corruption scandal. He served to his best.

I am now very sure that the family is happy because he has left a very good legacy. The family, although is mourning that that their great father has departed, internally, they must be celebrating because he left them with a clean heart and name. If we ask ourselves now, assuming you died today and you are one year in the august House, what will the generation say about you? Will you and your family be proud when they are saying that this is a man who stole the money meant for buying identity cards for Uganda? How will you feel? Will you be proud when they are saying that this is man who stole the money for buying bicycles for LC1s? How will you feel? Will you sincerely be proud when they are saying that this is the man who took Shs 142 billion as compensation money? 

We need to leave a very good legacy, especially for our younger generations and for our children. Let your children never regret because of you. Do what your children will be proud of in the future. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to propose that following the background and the good services rendered by Mzee Andrew Adimola to this country, let his photograph be put in this Parliament of Uganda. Let it be hanged so that the future generation will come and see that this is the man who opened the first Uganda office in London. This is the man who organised for the celebration of Uganda’s Independence in 1962 in London and some other countries. 

Today, we are saying farewell to our great father. He was a real statesman who was thinking for the country. He was not thinking for himself as we witness today. Therefore, I would like to say that may his soul rest in eternal peace. (Applause)

4.22
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I rise to support the motion to pay glowing tribute to a distinguished son of Uganda, Andrew Benedicto Adimola, who was a distinguished civil servant, highly respected politician and a seasoned diplomat. 

I pass on my condolences to the family, especially to my classmate Christine and to our mama. I studied in Bweranyangi and Gayaza and as a young civil servant, I visited the home of the late Adimola when I was working in the Ministry of Local Government. I visited him as a respected civil servant who had retired and was living a decent and self-sustaining life unlike some of the civil servants and other public officers who these days, retire but want to continue to depend on the state.

The late Andrew Adimola served this nation with distinction, but after he retired, he became a self-sufficient, self-sustaining and respectable elder in the community. He was a point of reference as all my colleagues have said. You would go to look at his garden and to learn so much about preserving the environment. For us, as civil servants, he was the pride, he was exemplary and we always went there to say, “thank you” to him for being a role model and also to continue to seek counsel from him.

I would like to say to the family; you should not mourn, but celebrate the life of a distinguished Ugandan that God gave him to you as a gift and he lived a full life, and used it to the service of Uganda. And so, as we pay tribute to him, we are highly proud of him and we would like you to join us in celebrating his life rather than you mourning him. The God, who gave life; the God who has taken the life; God will sustain you. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.26
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (NRM, PWD): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I join the rest of my Colleagues in celebrating the life of the late hon. Adimola. 

I first knew Adimola by name when I was in P.3 because of the good things he was doing in our area. As I grew up, I saw him as a man of vision. I continued interacting with him and learnt quite a lot from him. He was a kind man; very generous and very religious. Even by the time he was very sick, the late Adimola would still struggle to go to the cathedral. He could not climb the stairs, but he would pray from outside. This was a very good example to us. 

He was a politician with a decent vision; a man of alternatives. Mr Speaker, I want to inform you that one time when I was campaigning, he told voters that if they cannot vote me, they should vote Nobert Mao. Who among us can do this? Who among us in the last campaigns had an alternative person to talk about? I think this is a rare case; it is very unique. 

I learnt a lesson from that. It taught me that taking political position is not for personal interest. We represent our people for a purpose. So, if I cannot be elected, someone else can be elected.

This fallen man was a lover of education. He supported very many people to go to school. I know he is dead, but what he has done is not dead. There are very many people including me who are living in him because of the good things he has done. 

May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.29
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a professional teacher, I see it as a right to talk about the late and I am in support of the motion. 

According to what we have heard now, it is easy to tell whether the late is on the right hand of the Father or on the left. But I can assure you that he is on the right hand of the Father. 

The late was a professional teacher and an evolved Catholic. If you follow most of us, you will find that one is either Ssewungu Joseph Gonzaga, Benedict Adimola and the third one -(Laughter)

Today, I was preaching to one of my uncles who worked with the late Adimola in DP. Some of us were born in DP and we do not know any other party. He told me that the late would foretell the truth; he would tell you something today and it would happen the next day. So, he was a prophet. 

Furthermore, as a politician – those from Northern Uganda know very well that there was a gentleman in DP who was called “Bulldozer”. He would tell the late that let us go to the bush and fight. And he would say, “No, good politicians do not fight, they use their brain”. That is why we always call ourselves brainpower. 

He set a precedent. Some people say there is nobody with a vision. If this man had not given up power, he would still be the Vice-President of DP. But he showed that other people could also lead. And that is why the Democratic Party, to this date, is the only party I know which has changed power; and we expect to continue changing. 

It is high time that the government set up a council of elders in Uganda. These elders would be giving knowledge. When you go to South Africa, Nelson Mandela, Desmond Tutu, form what you call a council of elders. They give knowledge. 

I also want to emphasise the issue of retirement. Retirement is very important. Teachers are known for that; we do not fear retiring; and we actually demand for retirement. It is only Government who frustrates us by failing to retire us at the right time and not giving us our benefits. 

Let us learn from the late that when you retire, there is nothing to lose; you become a senior citizen. When you go to Tanzania, people who fought, the senior soldiers, are retired. Government gave them a package; they give the Army, Police and other institutions advice. In Uganda, it is the reverse. You fought; you brought victory to Uganda; we should thank you and come to learn from you as a retired senior servant. 

As I conclude, this was a great man. He taught people. When you listen to people from Northern Uganda speak, you enjoy it when they are talking because he was a teacher there. The knowledge you have from Northern Uganda; the language you speak; the English you speak; the way you articulate issues; this is your father. 

I would also like to extend my condolences to the people of Northern Uganda. But I think God is also working hard to see to it that those people who fought for Uganda’s Independence do not see it at its 50th anniversary, because they are not seeing what they fought for. God says, “Why do you want to suffer? Please, do not see this celebration of 50 years, when what you fought for has not been realised.”

This casket you see here, the one who makes it and the one who buys it for the dead person, and the one who is put in it, none of them likes it. If you called Adimola here and he looked at this casket, he would ask who bought it for him. If you asked –(Member timed out.) (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we should be preparing to close. 

Please, join me in welcoming the former Member of Parliament and now Member of the East African Legislative Assembly, hon. Nusura Tiperu, who is in the VIP gallery. She has come to observe the proceedings. (Applause)

4.34
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. First and foremost, on behalf of the Acholi Parliamentary Group, which I chair, I want to acknowledge and thank Government and Parliament of Uganda for honouring the late Lord Andrew Adimola. (Applause)

My appeal is for respect and support of senior citizens in this country. We should not only honour them when they are dead. They need support at their old age. The challenge comes back to Parliament because whether you want it or not - if you are lucky, you will remain a senior citizen in some village and if you are not recognised, you will feel bad. But here, you have the opportunity to pressurise Government to put something in place for our senior citizens of this country. This remains not only a challenge to us, but a challenge to Government because even those in Government will want to be recognised at a time when they are not able to do what they used to do. 

I last met the late when I was coming from the Bishop’s House. I met him near his home and gave him a lift to town. After recognising him, I stopped and reversed before asking him where he was going. Once he said he was going to town, I offered him a lift.

Let me share with you two things: First of all, the late Andrew Adimola was a very confident gentleman. He had confidence in himself. But it is also important to note that with that confidence he carried authority to the extent that when I dropped him in town, he said, “Just drive me around and return me home.” (Laughter) And I complied. I had to drive through town, wait for him to do what he was doing before taking him back home. One can only have such authority when they are confident of themselves; when they know that they have done much for the country and that people do appreciate what you have done.

The late was a principled man, as you may have heard - I do not want to go into details - to the extent that he stood firm against the many temptations. Many people have shifted goal posts, but he remained firm. He would not ask for material wealth, otherwise, even at that age in 1985, he would have scooped the ministerial post of foreign affairs, which is a very powerful position. But he did not go for that.

During the CA – and I want to share this with some colleagues – the late never suffered with the kind of campaigns most politicians go through in their constituencies, begging for votes and all that king of thing. He was always straight. He would not even talk for long. He used to tell people two things he was coming to do here; he was not just coming to Parliament; he was coming to enact laws and there were only two things he capitalised on: Multiparty democracy and the protection of land.
 
Yes, we are under a multiparty system, but it is important to note that he contributed to its coming back. (Applause) As people from the Acholi Sub-region, we are happy because the customary land has for the first time been recognised as other forms of land ownership. It cannot be said to be either below or above. The contributors to that success, among others, was the late.

Without saying much, I would like to conclude by saying that the late Andrew Adimola focused his life on education and agriculture. However, as we mourn him today as legislators, we should reflect on the government policies on education and agriculture. If we do not focus on those two, this country is doomed. The kind of people who were educated in the 60s and 70s are much better than the people who go to school today. For example, from my constituency, a person will go to Buchoro Primary School, they go to Awach Senior Secondary School, in the same sub-county or Sir Samuel Baker still in the same county and they will end up in Gulu University, but still in the same county. Such a person is not exposed and they can be very dangerous to this nation. (Member timed out.)

4.40
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I also would like to thank the government for accepting to accord the late hon. Andrew Adimola a State recognition and burial. My heartfelt condolences go to the bereaved family. The late was my voter. You can see that I now miss one voter.

I got to know the late while I was a member of the School Management Committee and PTA of Negri Primary School. He was really a very authoritative and assertive person. He was a leader, not soft, and he would give directives. That is why this primary school performed better during the time he was very active.

Later, I also got to know him as a youth leader in the Gulu Youth Development Association. That was in the early 1980s. During that time, we used to crack some joke that he was a youth beyond 50 years. But I can tell you that he worked well; he worked with the youth very well.

The late was a principled man. When he was contesting in the CA, he always told people that he would not stand for Member of Parliament elections. So, he asked people to vote him to come and make laws and/or write the Constitution for Uganda. Indeed, he was voted with others like hon. Nobert Mao. And when time for the campaigns for Members of Parliament came, he kept to his principles; he did not stand, but rather let the others stand.
 
He was a patriotic man. It is true, we usually talk about patriotism, but little do we get to know that there is need for us to emulate leaders such as this one. Ours is that one has to first go to Kyankwanzi in order to be a patriotic person. That is not right. Patriotism is not taught to people. We get it from experience.

What I can tell you is that he led the country very well. He was very honest. He donated a lot to the education sector. For example, I once learnt that he donated land to Sacred Heart Secondary School. This man worked tirelessly for this country. I have never known of his property in Kampala. People who were ambassadors –(Member timed.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just received information that the body of the late has got to be flown to Gulu and the time for the flight is running out. So, the time for the next contributors is reduced to two minutes because we have already had a lot of discussions.

4.44
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I only have a few words at this time when we are paying tribute to a popular man who has contributed very much to this country. 

What I want to say about the late hon. Andrew Adimola is about his nationalistic image. I have just been thinking and analysing that by the time we got Independence with the political parties in this country – that time, we were much more inclined to our tribes. This is a man who came from the North, a Luo, where we had a party called UPC. If it were not because of his nationalistic image, I don’t think he would have been a DP member when we had the UPC and all the Luos almost belonging to the UPC at that time. That shows how nationalistic he was. He was looking at the whole country. He was not only looking for a prize. Therefore, that shows how important he was and that shows that we must learn that when joining these parties, we should look for the value of the party and not where the party comes from. Let us not join parties because of the tribe but because of what the party plans to do for the nation and –(Member timed out.)

4.47
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join this House in paying tribute to the late Lord Andrew Adimola. Allow me also give my condolences to the family and particularly to mama and Beatrice Adimola, who is my friend. Mzee Andrew Adimola was a great statesman who needs to be emulated. There is a time for everything. There is a time to be born and a time to die; a time to serve and a time to leave. 

Mzee Andrew Adimola served this country and he left a legacy for us to copy, and I remember very well that Andrew Adimola was an environmentalist. He was our neighbour. I remember when we were young, if they sent us to the market, we would hide at his home and eat mangoes, which means he was an environmentalist and members, when you go to his home, you will find he has planted pasparamum and you would never even get a footpath at his home and I admired that so much. He influenced his daughter to work as a director in the national environment authority and likewise the daughter also influenced my life and that is how I came to know about Adimola –(Member timed out.) 

4.48
COL. PHINEHAS KATIRIMA (UPDF): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to make some remarks about our fallen elder and statesman. I extend my most sincere condolences to the bereaved family, to the Democratic Party, and to the people of Uganda as a whole for the loss of this great man. I personally did not know the late Andrew Adimola. I have sat here this whole afternoon and I have listened very carefully and learnt a lot. I feel greatly humbled. 

The information given by the honourable Third Deputy Prime Minister and all the Members who have spoken before me, have shown us what a great man the late Adimola was. We would all want to be like him. This is a man who worked helplessly in diplomatic service as a teacher, as a service to the people of Uganda, as a freedom fighter, as a lawmaker in the making of our Constitution, and he has made a great contribution. We feel greatly humbled and I want to take this opportunity to request my colleagues and the people of Uganda and particularly the young children you see there in the gallery to pick a leaf from this great man –(Member timed out.)

4.51
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Due to time, I want to join my colleagues to support this motion and I send my message of condolence to the family and to all the people of Uganda.

How should the young people of this country remember the contribution of people like the late Andrew Adimola? I want to propose to the government that if you go to the UK and to the US or China, there are sites and cemeteries which are called memorials, for people who have made tremendous contributions, and if you look at the number of tourists who visit the memorials, it is huge. In fact, I would not support the body of the late to be laid in Gulu; if we had time, we would find land here in Kampala where henceforth we shall lay the remains of all great Ugandans including all MPs, so that we have a permanent memorial for tourists. 

This country would raise US$1 million every year out of tourists visiting memorials. Mr Speaker, I want to request you, as the Parliamentary Commission, to have a stone tablet here within Parliament where you write all the names of the former MPs who have died since Uganda got Independence and tourists will be coming and we shall be collecting money. For that matter, may I request Government to build a monument in the Pan African Freedom Square at Clock Tower in memory of the late? That will contribute to remembering his contribution. There is no way we can appreciate the contribution of a great man than putting it there at the Pan African Freedom Square so that tourists or Ugandans can know that this was the first man who negotiated with the British. Uganda was not a colonial country; it was a protectorate declared in 1894. So, can we correct the record, because of this man?

Mr Speaker, if I had time, I would speak a lot about great men like him –(Member timed out.)

4.55
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to pay tribute to one of the founding fathers of our nation, and to send my condolences to the family and pray that they will find comfort in the Goodness of our God and Father. 

Mr Speaker, I would have spoken about the politicians and a teacher like myself and education, but today, my mind is drawn to the fact that this was the first diplomat, probably the second, that Uganda sent out and specifically to the High Commission in London. The state of our foreign service missions is deplorable. I hope that today, Government will be reminded that our High Commission, the Uganda building in London, is in a worrying state. There was a scandal about that building. The state of diplomacy in this country is now that you have to be a political failure to become a diplomat representing Uganda. We are killing diplomacy. We are killing a career and I hope that we will learn, we will draw from those old service diplomats what it meant to be a real diplomat representing this country, and also, that we shall repair and refurbish the missions outside there.

Finally, these people made the Constitution. Everybody is worried about dying and living in perpetuity until the Lord calls you back. May I implore the House in honour of the late Andrew Adimola that we will support the restoration of Presidential term limits for this country?  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, Benedictus, Benedictus, Benedictus, blessing, blessing, blessing and that is the name of Andrew Benedicto Adimola, and he is a big blessing to this nation. So, I say hats off to the Government and people of Uganda for giving him a state burial.

Benedicto was a blessing to this country by getting the instruments which led to our Independence in 1962. Benedicto is a blessing to this Government and the people through being one of the most hilarious educationist in this country. He is an epitome of integrity and prudence. Benedicto is an epitome of marriage as an institution and devotion.

I am happy that he got married in a school where I went and where he was a teacher, that is St Aloysius Nyapea, in 1949. He got married to Theresa and they have raised a very capable and able family. I am happy that family is here with us today.

Benedicto was the first black DEO in West Nile, a duty which he performed very effectively and on behalf of the people of West Nile, we say hats off to Benedicto Adimola.

He did serve in the Ministry of Education as a permanent secretary, a ministry where I worked in 1977 to 1979 as a personnel officer, and the legacy which he left in that ministry is second to none. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the contributions are all in support of the motion. The time is drawing to a close and we need to give them a moment for them to reach where the helicopter is and move before the time slotted for flying is out. The body needs to stay in the house overnight in preparation for burial tomorrow.

I put the question to the motion that this Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, the Government of Uganda and all Ugandans upon the demise of a distinguished son of Uganda. That it takes cognisance of the distinguished service the late Andrew Benedicto Adimola rendered and the contributions he made to the nation in different capacities. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion carried.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, very soon, our colleagues in the Moslem community will be going into the season where they will be fasting. It is my honour now on behalf of this Parliament to wish them a very peaceful fasting season when that time comes, and the Lord will be with them.

Honourable members, there is an arrangement for transport tomorrow. A bus will leave from Parliament at 6.00 o’clock and you are required to be there just before 6.00 so that we can be in time in Gulu for the burial.

National Anthem (One verse)

(Exit of the late Andrew Benedicto Adimola.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The House is adjourned to Tuesday, 2.00 o’clock.

(The House rose at 5.05 p.m. and was adjourned to Tuesday, 24 July 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
