Wednesday, 01 July 2015

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Today, by our rules we are supposed to have the Prime Minister’s question time, but we received notification from the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister that he will not be here. He is attending some meeting somewhere else and we will use the Prime Minister’s question time for other business. Those of you who had prepared to raise issues through the Prime Minister; that will be next Wednesday.

Honourable members, this is my first time sitting since the beginning of the final session; the last lap for the Ninth Parliament. I should take this opportunity to wish all of you well and to ask you again to spare some time. I know there are a lot of competing demands for our time at the moment. However, let us use the time to deliver for the purpose of which the people who sent us here sent us. There are many things that we should do and let us try our best to do that even if the pressures are many.

We have always done it under more difficult circumstances; this should not be any more different than what we have gone through in the past. I wish all of you well and let us use the time to deliver for the people of Uganda. Thank you very much.  

2.09
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. This morning on Kampala-Masaka high way at a place called Katende, a fatal accident occurred involving six cars and claimed about 56 lives of Ugandans including young children and several others that were critically injured.

Mr Speaker, this very spot is commonly known for accidents and so many people have died there. Unfortunately, the Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA have kept a deaf ear; they have not put any warning nor have they put humps or alerted drivers about this spot. There are no police patrol vehicles around the place, no mobile ambulances and when such incidences happen, the nearby health centres and most specifically Mpigi Health Centre IV is always inconvenienced.

As I speak, Mpigi Health Centre IV has about six bodies lying in the mortuary. There are so many victims languishing on their beds and the people in-charge told me that they have failed to even provide gloves to handle these victims. 

Mr Speaker, this health centre does not only have challenges of high way accidents but it has a very big number of OPD attendance and they have over 3,000 outpatients that they receive every day. Every month, this health centre delivers 200 mothers, they admit over 5,000 patients and this health centre needs to be upgraded because it services Ugandans too much. 

I recall when His Excellency the President commissioned a maternity ward for this health centre, he pledged - and that was way back in 2013 - that Government would upgrade this health centre to a hospital status. To date nothing has been done. The budget is very minimal, the manpower is low and this health centre cannot handle these critical incidences. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I raise this issue to request Government to upgrade this health centre to a hospital status and to provide mobile ambulance services on Masaka High Way and also to increase police patrol as it is done when they are patrolling Amama Mbabazi supporters. I would like Government to act on this. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.12
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is unfortunate that we have continued losing lives through road accidents and the statistics show that accidents are claiming more lives than HIV/AIDS. We set up the Parliamentary Committee for Road Safety; we have been advocating for additional funding that should cater for road safety issues across the country including establishing the National Road Safety Authority which has not taken course.

I know we have allocated a lot of money to UNRA and the road sector and railway in general, but this has not gone with the safety measures that need to be taken into consideration. As we get the oil on the roads, the production in the coming years, 2017, the traffic on the roads will multiply. We need the Ministry of Works to take these matters very seriously because a lot of traffic is coming to our roads but the knowhow and behaviour of Ugandan drivers is wanting.

I fear that we are going to continue losing many more lives at a higher rate if we do not take the road safety matters seriously as a country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKRER: Thank you.

2.15
MR ODO TAYEBWA: (FDC, Ishaka-Bushenyi Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the same issue of the accidents, today we were at Najjanankumbi nominating the presidential flag bearer of FDC, Dr Kizza Besigye and police was highly deployed at Najjanankumbi headquarters and a policeman shot one of the people there and we have identified the policeman as Asiimwe. The injured person was taken to hospital but it was very absurd. It is very important that police, before shooting should first take –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, are you aware of the law of relevance in debates? The matter before the House is the accident on Masaka Road.

2.15
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Mr Speaker, I am concerned about the recruitment of health workers in Uganda. This morning –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the matter that we are discussing is the accident on Masaka Road. Is that another matter?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: It is a different matter but -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Hon. Member, you should know the procedure.

2.16
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): I thank you very much. Mine is also related to the loss of lives of workers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, the next item. Do you want guidance or procedure?

MR BIGIRWA: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure and as well seeking guidance on this because quite often, Members raise matters of national importance and sometimes – today it is understandable - but we have ministers who quite often respond to issues and in a way make pledges on how to correct the issues that have been raised.

Mr Speaker, you were in the chair that time in December and I raised an issue of national importance in regard to eviction of people in Kyangwali, my constituency. You ruled that the committee should even go and check on these matters in Kyangwali. 

It is now a year but no committee has visited the place and it is even worse that the disaster preparedness minister was inquiring whether to provide relief to those people who were displaced. 

The minister stood here and agreed with the entire House that there will be some measure put into place to provide some relief, for example food, tarpaulins among others just like they do in other areas. I have followed up on that matter with the Government Chief Whip but nothing seems to be coming up.

On a point of procedure, I am asking that in such circumstances, what should a Member do because I have done all that is required and the Speaker too, has guided but nothing is taking place? So in such a situation, what can a member like hon. Julius Bigirwa do to rest the case of his people?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member should come back and raise those same issues. What is going to happen is that the Clerk will extract and minute the issues and communicate to the minister responsible that some undertakings were made in this House and also a letter to the committee to find out how far they have gone with this matter of their visit to Kyangwali as had been agreed and directed by the Speaker so that we can follow up from that.

PROF. KASIRIVU: I thank you. Yesterday when I came, I placed my finger and it said “out of memory”. I have done the same today and it is again saying “out of memory” and the screen shows that 16 members are present and yet we are more than 16. What do we do with the system that is failing to respond? Is the technology failing or do we need to improve on it so that we can be captured very well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you sure that you came back with the same finger? (Laughter) Please let the technical people rectify this situation because I think that the computers are not working to record attendance and something should be done about that. Are you on this same thing of registration? Let the technical people handle this.

MS ANYWAR: I thank you. As I look at the screen, I get embarrassed as a Member of Parliament. Members of this House are aware that when you are chairing the session, by 2.00 p.m. you are in and so members will endeavour to rush to be here. While the Speaker is chairing, Members can come in around 3.00 p.m. 

Now in the event that the honourable members are not aware of who is chairing, would it be procedurally right that we get a way of informing us in time on who is going to preside so that we catch up with your different time schedules.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Order Paper is always clear and it says 2 O’clock and so you do not need any further guidance on that.  

MR MAWANDA: I thank you. In the same vein, like hon. Bigirwa, a member representing workers did rise on the Floor of Parliament and raised an issue of national importance in respect to the fires in one of the factories in Kampala. 

You did direct that the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development comes up with a statement in respect to those fires and gives an opportunity to Parliament to discuss that matter in respect to the occupational safety and health of workers. Up to now, nothing has ever been done. 

As hon. Julius Bigirwa has said, what can Members of Parliament do to be able to discuss this serious matter that affects workers of this country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the Clerk also extract that and communicate to the minister. 

I do not know if the minister is also doubling as the Government Chief Whip. There was the issue of the accident that involved about six cars and 56 people are affected and some are dead. Issues have been raised about the condition of the road signs, the condition of the health centre which needs upgrading. All these issues were raised before you got here and you may want to look at the Hansard and come back with some responses tomorrow. Yes, honourable, on what matter do you rise.

MR BESISIRA: I rise on something related to Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No.  

MR BESISIRA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Is it procedural or something else? 

MR BESISIRA: Mr Speaker, some time last week when the President of this country was meeting a group from Kibaale and the people asked him as to why their road was not being tarmacked, he said it was Parliament that has been with a loan request for 15 months and it had not passed it. Up today, he says that Government has not received the go-ahead to get this money from the World Bank to begin working on the road. If my memory is good, this loan request has been in this Parliament for quite some time.

When the President speaks to the population like that, definitely when they talk about Parliament and you are in Buyaga County East, they look at me, hon. Besisira. When you are in Hoima, you are looking at another MP – that we as MPs, are the people who have failed the road. 

I would like to implore this Parliament and especially the Committee on National Economy, that every effort should be made – because he said that he was with people from the World Bank who told him that this loan was almost running out of time and they were about to cancel it. It had been with us for over 15 months. Mr Speaker, I hope you use your good office to see how best we proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the chair or any member of the Committee on National Economy here because we wanted to know how many loan requests are still with the committee. If there is one that is 15 months old, let’s consult on this and see what the exact situation is.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The information on the screen is very misleading. I would request that people who are working on that information delete it. We are more than 16 people in the House. Some of us are shadow ministers and when we step out to hold official meetings and roll call is taken in the House, we are counted as if we are outside. While ministers on the other side are also carrying out official Government business, they are captured as absent.

Yesterday, I stepped out to have an official meeting, when I came back the roll call had been taken, how can that issue be handled? For the one of today, we are more than 16, the screen is showing different information, this is misleading and when the journalists capture that information, it gives a wrong impression to the public outside.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had already directed technical people to handle this matter so that things can be handled. Hon. Members, I have been advised that there is a technical problem with the system so you are advised to go and register in the book because there is some technical issue with the machines.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE ANTI-CORRUPTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have information that debate had commenced and there was a reference made for consultations by the mover of the Bill to consult with other people and report what the status is.

2.29
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are ready to proceed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was an issue that you were supposed to consult on; has it been resolved?

MR SSIMBWA: We have consulted with the chair and the mover of the minority report and we are in agreement. There are only a few issues that can be resolved on the Floor between the minority report and the chair.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we say we have no issue on the second reading so we can take that vote? I will put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013” be read the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ANTI-CORRUPTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

Clause 1

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you. 

MS AKELLO: Mr Chairman, I am sorry I have to raise this matter because we are considering a very important Bill. I imagine that it is better to consider this Bill when this House is properly constituted.

I can hardly count 60 Members of Parliament in this House and I do not think that it is procedurally right for us to proceed with this number in the House. I really think we do not have enough people to form quorum.  

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

2.36
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye East Division, Kampala): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House resumes and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the committee of the House to report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

2.36
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye East Division, Kampala): I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013”, but has not made any decisions.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

2.37
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye East Division, Kampala): I beg to report that the committee considered the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013”, and we did not move because of quorum. I therefor beg to report and I beg to move that the House accepts that report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk what was the motion?

MR SSIMBWA: I beg to move that the House adopts the report of the Committee of the whole House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had already communicated that the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister will not be in the House. So we will be using that time for other business. Honourable members, the clerk will ring the bell after 15 minutes. House suspended for 15 minutes.

(The House was suspended at 2.36 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.55 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have a short communication. Parliament will be hosting an Iftar dinner for the Muslim community tomorrow Thursday, 2 July 2015 at the South Wing parking lot at 6.00 p.m. The Parking lot will, therefore, be reserved for this function tomorrow. You are, therefore, kindly requested to use the underground parking tomorrow for your vehicles.

If there are any inconveniences caused, we apologise. Please, heed to that call so that the place designated for the dinner can be utilised for that purpose, Clerk.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES AND IMPLEMENTATION ON THE STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES IN THE DISTRICTS OF ARUA, ADJUMANI AND YUMBE

THE SPEAKER: Chair, you have 10 minutes.

3.00
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Mr Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation on the status of implementation of government assurances in the districts of Arua, Adjumani and Yumbe.

Mr Speaker, the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation is mandated under Rule 167(b) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, 2012, to monitor the fulfilment of Government assurances and report its findings to Parliament.  Under the same rule, the committee is obliged to comment on the status to which those assurances, promises and undertakings have been implemented.

Accordingly, in respect of the above mandate, the committee visited the districts of Arua, Adjumani and Yumbe to assess the progress on the implementation of the said assurances.

In Arua District, they included:
    1. Tarmacking of a 1 kilometre access road to Emmanuel Cathedral pledged by H.E the President in November 2010.
    2. Tarmacking of a 3 kilometre road to Ediofe Cathedral pledged by H.E the President in 2008.
    3. Construction of Vvura-Arua-Koboko-Olaba Road pledged by the Prime Minister in November 2013.
    4. Provision of Rhino Camp-Amuru Ferry pledged by H.E the President in November 2010.
    5. Construction of Kia-Kia Bridge linking Madi-Okollo with Obongi pledged by H.E the President in 2009.
    6. Construction of Inzikuru Stadium pledged by the President in 2005.
    7. Setting up of the technical institute pledged by the President in 2009 in Inde.
    8. Construction of a big mosque for Muslims in Arua Municipality pledged by the President in 2011.
    9. Maintenance and fueling of District Khadi’s vehicle for Arua District pledged by the President in 2011.

In Adjumani District, they included:
    1. Tarmacking of Adjumani-Gulu Road pledged by the President on 6 November 2010.
    2. Supply of electricity from the national main grid pledged by the President on 16 November 2010.
    3. Compensation of the sub-counties of Arinyapi and Dzaipi whose cattle were robbed by the Sudanese in 2010 pledged by the President on 6 November 2010.

In Yumbe, they included:
    1. Provision of three tractors to improve agricultural mechanisation pledged by the President on 2 April 2013.
    2. Provision of 100 pairs of oxen and ox ploughs for animal traction pledged by H.E the President on 2 April 2013.
    3. Provision of motorcycles for LC III chairpersons pledged by the President on 2 April 2013.
    4. Support to youth, women and men groups for different activities, for instance, crafts pledged by the President in 2011.

Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence so I go to the observations and findings as well as the committee’s recommendations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Go ahead.

MR SSASAGA: In Arua District, the tarmacking of a 3 kilometre road to Ediofe Cathedral and 1 kilometre road to Emmanuel Cathedral: At the time of the committee oversight visit, no significant progress had been made towards the tarmacking of these roads due to non-availability of funds reflecting a delay of more than four years before the implementation. However, we saw designs being taken and the implementation of the design. The contractor was in the process of mobilising more equipment to speed up the construction of the road.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Works and Transport should ensure that construction works on these roads are executed within a specified time framework and standards.

The construction of Vvura-Arua-Koboko Road: The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development expedites the process of securing TINs for all the affected persons to enable them access their benefits. What we got as a challenge was that the ministry had not yet received TINs for audited beneficiaries to be compensated so that the construction work begins.

On provision of a ferry on Rhino-camp and Amuru, the committee recommended that the Ministry of Works and Transport should ensure that UNRA is availed with all the required equipment to guarantee completion of the project by June 2016. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should also ensure timely release of funds to facilitate the smooth implementation of all the activities. The Ministry of Works and Transport should procure a new ferry for this road by June 2016.

On the constructions of Kia-Kia Bridge linking Madi-Okollo with Obongi pledged by the President, the committee learnt that the bridge was estimated to cost Shs 11.7 billion and it was expected to be funded under the Arab Bank for Reconstruction and Development (BADEA). 

Due to lack of funds, no significant progress had been made towards the implementation of this pledge since 2009. The development of engineering designs was completed and actual implementation of work was planned for 2015/2016 financial year. 

Therefore, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure that adequate funds are availed in a phased manner over three financial years of 2015/2016, 2017/2018. For example, Shs 4,000,000,000 per financial year to ensure that this construction work takes place.

On the construction of Inzikuru Stadium, the committee learnt that the above stadium lies in Barifa Central Forest Reserve in Arua Municipality. It was named after Dorcus Inzikuru following her triumph in the Women 3000 metres race event held in Finland in 2005.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development ensures that adequate funds are available to the Ministry of Education and Sports within the 2015/2016 financial year to facilitate the upgrade of this stadium as a way of promoting sports and development of talents in the region.

On stepping up the Inde Technical Institute, the committee observed that Inde is a Government owned institute which was started in 1984. It is situated in Ogoko Sub-county in Madi-Okollo and the President pledged to rehabilitate and upgrade this institute in honour of the late Dr Aniku. However, to date, no appropriate action has been taken by Government and the institute was in a dilapidated state and lacked key requirements including classrooms. The workshop was dilapidated, the vehicles are not in place, the staff houses were shattered and dormitories are lacking. All the photographs are in this report, Mr Speaker.

Therefore, the committee recommends the following:
    1. That Ministry of Education and Sports should prioritise the upgrading and facilitation of the technical institutes during 2015/2016 financial year. 
    2. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should avail all the necessary funds to facilitate and upgrade the institute in 2015/2016 financial year.

On the construction of a big mosque for the Muslims in Arua Municipality pledged by the President when he met the Muslim community, the committee during the time of the visit found that there was no appropriate actions which had been taken to fulfil these pledges, despite the numerous correspondences which have been made between the office of the district Qadi, the district leadership and the Office of the President.

Therefore, the committee recommends that Minister for the Presidency should take up the matter and report to Parliament accordingly. Assurances of this nature should be discouraged because they are not financially sustainable in the long run by the President.

Religious institutions should be encouraged to raise their own funds to sustain themselves rather than relying on some of the unfulfilled promises made.

On other issues raised by the district, we discovered during the time of our visit, that apart from the known pledges, there were numerous pledges which had been made by the ministers and the President in Arua and Zombo districts. 

For example, the establishment of a fruit processing plant as pledged by the President; support for the cage fish farming in Rhino camp basin pledged by the President in 2008; support for the development of Arua Municipality into a city status as pledged by the president; tarmacking of Vvura – Zombo – Paidha – Goli - Nebbi Road pledged by the President; tarmacking of Okoko - Pakwach Road pledged by the President; construction of Arua Municipal Council Main Market pledged by the President; compensation of the Lord Resistants’ Army victims pledged by the president; compensation for the loss of buses owned by Nile Coach Bus Services during the LRA war pledged by the President; compensating the families of Muni Girls Secondary School who died while traveling to Kampala for netball competition pledged by the President; de-gazetting of Barifa Forest which is the source of the insecurity in Arua Municipality pledged by the President and the provision of a lorry and public address system for the boda-boda association pledged by the President.

Mr Speaker, the committee asked the office of the Minister of the Presidency to take up all these pledges and respond to the House accordingly.

In Adjumani: on the tarmacking of Adjumani - Gulu Road, the committee observed that by the time of the committee’s visit, the pledge had not been fulfilled. However, it had been put under a three year routine maintenance. Maintenance works were on just like ordinary roads, but as per the pledge, it was not fulfilled.

Some bridges had been constructed, for example there is a pictorial here showing some of the bridges as pledged by the President. The road designs had been completed by the Minister of Works and Transport.  

Recommendations

The committee recommends that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure that adequate funds are availed to the Ministry of Works and Transport during 2015/2016 financial year to facilitate the construction of this road.

With supply of electricity from the national main grid pledged by the President on 16th of November, the committee observed that the first phase of extending power lines to the district was done as illustrated in the picture below.
However, the second phase which included the distribution of power to rural areas had not been done. In addition, power supply was highly unreliable due to unplanned shutdown caused by obstacles like the big trees along the power line which were not cleared at the time of construction due to non-compensation. There was a problem of compensation, so the land had not been leaving the big trees on the way. 

There was lack of a sub-station between Gulu, Moyo and Adjumani for a distance of over 200 kilometres. The only available sub-station was in Gulu. This was further compounded by lack of reliable means of transport to enable engineers to constantly monitor the state of the power lines. There was only one station in Gulu and it could not reach other lines. 

In addition, the involvement of many players in the alleged industry including ERA, Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited and UMEME required numerous procedures to solve technical problems that are leading to delays.

Mr Speaker, by the time we went, there were misunderstandings between the three companies because one had been contracted to supply and distribute. One company is to go and do the metering; another company is to do the maintenance. Therefore, whenever there was a problem on this power line, each company would say it was the mandate of the other. So, the Ministry of Works and Transport and that of Energy need to sit and streamline this as this had been a big obstacle in power supply in the region of West Nile. 

Recommendation

The Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources should ensure that power lines to connect to rural communities within the district are done through the Rural Electrification Programme. 
The Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources should also ensure that a power station is put between Gulu and Moyo. 

On the compensation of the sub-counties of Arinyapi and Dzaipi whose cattle were robbed by the Sudanese, the committee observed that this assurance had not been fulfilled. 

The committee recommends, therefore, that the Minister for Presidency should follow up this matter and report to Parliament accordingly. 

On other issues raised by Adjumani District leadership as unfulfilled pledges made by the President – (Interruption)

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have tried to search for that report on my iPad and failed to find it. I believe that is what is pertaining to all members. Therefore, we cannot follow, as required by procedure; we should be having the copy of the report but we do not have it. Is it procedurally right for us to continue listening to the chairperson of the committee when we cannot follow the report on our iPads? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The chairperson of the committee is making a summary of the report; he is almost finishing. What we are going to do is to let him finish and then defer debate on the subject so that you are able to look through what he will have presented.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What I realise is that the information was uploaded on the system, but not the iPad -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, chairperson.
 
MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On other pledges made in Adjuman, the committee is cognisant of that Rule 168 (2) which states, an assurance shall mean any undertaking or promise, made by a minister, prime minister, vice president or President on the Floor of the House.

During our interaction with the received leadership, the committee noted that the following additional unfulfilled pledges, which were unknown to the committee, were with the district leadership. They had correspondences between the Office of the President and them. For example, in Adjumani, there were the following unfulfilled pledges:
    i) The opening of the boundary between Adjumani and Amuru, pledged by the President. 
    ii) Provision of a truck for Adjumani Women Do Wonders Group as pledged by the President.
    iii) The construction of a big warehouse in Alego to enable farmers access the Sudanese market, pledged by His Excellency the President. 

In Yumbe District, this is the status of the implementation. On the provision of the three tractors to improve agriculture, the committee noted that although the President had made a directive, through NAADS, to procure the three pledged tractors, no action had been taken.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Minister for Presidency should follow up the matter and report to Parliament within a month.
 
On the provision of 100 pairs of oxen and ox-ploughs for animal traction, the committee learnt that the assurance of provision of 100 oxen and ox-ploughs for sustainable household, food production and security in Yumbe District was fulfilled and distributed to the targeted beneficiaries.
 
The oxen and ox-ploughs had been distributed, but they were not utilised by the beneficiaries. This is because they had not been castrated and trained to carry out the ploughing. The animals were there. They had been distributed. The beneficiaries had them, but they were not using them because there was a promise that even money for castration was to come from State House. They were still waiting for the money to reach them before they could castrate the bulls. 

On this the committee, therefore, recommends that the district leadership and the beneficiary communities should endeavour to castrate and train the availed oxen in order to utilise them for household, food production and security. 

On the provision of motorcycles for LC III chairpersons, the committee noted that the provision of motorcycles is taken care of by the Ministry of Local Government. Most LC III chairpersons were provided with motorcycles, but are poorly maintained.

The committee therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Local Government should prioritise the maintenance of all motorcycles provided to LC III chairpersons during 2015/16 financial year.

The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should avail adequate funds for maintenance of LC III chairpersons’ motorcycles across the whole country. 

On the support for youth and women groups for different activities, the committee learnt that this assurance had not been fulfilled. We, therefore, recommend that the Minister for Presidency follows up this matter.

The other issues raised by Yumbe District included:
    1. Dividing the district into three constituencies as pledged by the President.
    2. The rehabilitation of Yumbe Hospital also as pledged by the President.
    3. Tarmacking of Koboko-Yumbe-Moyo Road pledged by His Excellency the President.
    4. The construction of Ambenika Mini-Hydro Power Station pledged by His Excellency the President.
    5. Offer of gainful employment to Aringa children for state appointments also as pledged by His Excellency the President. 
    6. The construction of Police-Lobe-Kaya Road that leads to Juba through Lanya.
    7. The procurement of three tractors for farmers of Yumbe.
    8. Offer of state scholarships for professional courses to the children of Yumbe.
    9.  The construction of a stadium.
    10. The construction of an airstrip.
    11. The rehabilitation of hon. Amin Onji’s residential houses in Yumbe and Entebbe.
    12.  The operationalisation of Col. Nasuru Ezaruku’s Technical Memorial Institute. 

All these were pledged by the President.

The committee, therefore, recommends that whereas the committee is bound by Rule 168(2), as already stated above, the Minister in charge of Presidency should update Parliament on the status of the implementation of the above pledges within two weeks. 

However, the committee also wishes to highlight that the implementation of some of the pledges indicated above is a constitutional mandate of specific institutions. Mr Speaker, I beg to report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. 

MR SSASAGA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Report of the Committee of Government Assurances and Implementation on the Status of Government assurances in the districts of Arua, Adjumani and Yumbe. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, I had already said earlier that we might need to look at this report and debate later. But there is an issue I need to raise about what I have listened to in the report.
  
Honourable members, under Rule 167, one of the functions of the Committee of Government Assurances and Implementation is to scrutinise the assurances, promises and undertakings given by a minister, prime minister, president, vice president or the President in the House, from time to time and report to the extent to which those assurances, promises and undertakings have been implemented. 

Similarly, the rule that has been cited by the Chairperson, Rule 168 (2) provides thus: “For purposes of this rule, an assurance shall mean any undertaking or promise, made by a minister, Prime Minister, President or Vice President on the Floor of the House.”

Now I listened carefully and I was hearing of a meeting with the boda-boda groups, the Moslem community and people in various places in Uganda. By making a promise in the House – the ”House” means the House as constituted and Chaired by the Speaker. That is where the undertaking is made; that is where the pledges are made and the Hansard captures it. That is what becomes an assurance. Otherwise, it can be by any stretch of interpretation to be any assurance or pledge made in a public meeting somewhere in some village. That can never be an assurance for the purposes of Parliament.

What I said earlier when we were debating on the amendment of these rules was to find ways - if the President makes a statement somewhere - of bringing that statement in the House and have a confirmation from a minister so that it becomes an assurance to the House. That is what it means to have the assurance to the House not to some group in the communities there. It should be an assurance to the House. We, therefore, need to rectify this if we are to move in accordance with our rules and general practice in the Commonwealth. 

Be that as it may, the report has been presented. With that caution, the debate on this particular matter is deferred to an appropriate date, probably next week on Tuesday.

MR SSASAGA: Mr Speaker, I beg for your indulgence. That is why on page 13 of our report, we clearly noted that cognisant of Rule 168(2) on the assurances which are supposed to be made on the Floor of the House; we just noted them for the protection of the House.

Much as we went to the field, we got some other assurances of whose correspondences have been attached onto this report, between the communities and the Office of the President. However, we have recommended that some of those assurances be tracked by the relevant ministries and the communities themselves.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, your base is guided by the rule. Your operations are supposed to be guided by the rules. If you are going to start looking for assurances from some communities in villages, then you have exceeded the mandate that has been given to you by the rules. I am just pointing out this so that we can focus our actions on what is actually for the House.

MR OBOTH: I seek guidance, Mr Speaker. Following your very wise guidance on this matter and to the fact that the sources of these assurances are clearly being confirmed by the chairperson that they got them from the field not from the House, I am seeking further procedural guidance on whether the same report is worth the paper and the ink, to be left in the record of this House. 

That we are now quite very busy, should we still continue to fish out thoughts and imaginations and more so it could be requests made to the President, during either functions or memorandum, that we call them assurances? I am seeking for your guidance whether this is not a proper and fit document to be expunged from the record. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you know how to proceed with those matters. It certainly cannot be for the Speaker to proceed on that.

MR KAKOOZA: I also would like to seek further procedure according to what you have guided in this House. I do not know what is going to happen because there are already financial implications. It seems the irrelevance has some financial implications. (Laughter) What is going to happen? 

This one was out of “fishing out”; these are rumours and “Wolokoso.” What are we going to do? What is going to happen?

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been very clear when presenting the committee report. I have been very categorical in noting the assurances, which have been made on the Floor of the House. I clearly noted and said that while in the field, we also came across some of these additional assurances. I have used the words, “some of.”
 
So, is the hon. James Kakooza in order to confuse the House by saying there has been no value for money for work done yet the committee has been very diligent in carrying out its mandate and also showing the status in regard to assurances? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the committee has done its work. All that we are pointing out is that under the rules, to some extent they exceeded what they should have done. That is all this House is saying because your source of assurances should be the Hansard and nothing else; just the Hansard.

You would have guided the House very well if you said, “On this particular date, on the Hansard of this House of this date, of this sitting of Parliament, this assurance was made. We followed it up and found that it has not been implemented.” That would help the House.

Where the sources are other than the Hansard of the House is where the issue becomes a bit contentious. This is just for the future. Work has already been done. We will see how to handle it but for the future let us stick to this particular principle that has been captured in our Rules of Procedure.

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, at an appropriate time, I would like it to give notice to the chairperson of the committee, that I will appropriately move this House to expunge the same from the record.

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have clearly guided and explained that according to the chairman’s report, some of the information was just discovered on the ground but part of it, was got by the Committee of Government Assurance before they left here. 

Is it procedurally right for hon. Jacob Oboth to debate in anticipation that when time comes, he will move that the report be expunged? Is it procedurally right especially when he is a learned fellow? Thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable member was giving notice and it is within the right of a member to give a notice of what they intend to do in the future. That is properly in order.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. One of the privileges this House has is: we have an opportunity to go through a learning process, from the time we enter to the time we exit. Our Rules of Procedure require that we occasionally change the leadership of various committees and because of that, the chairpersons and members of the various committees go through an induction process on working and when they do, they meet some challenges like we have just observed about what our friend said. 

Just like you have guided, Mr Speaker, you are very courteous in insisting that next time when they are making a report, they make it much better to fall within the boundaries of the report. But you have also absolutely observed that there were definitely some issues, which they should have done better. I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, to have guided and to seek the indulgence of our members that let us learn on the job so that next time we can do better. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

MR RUHUNDA: From your wise guidance and from the wise words of the hon. Emmanuel Dombo, I would also like to add that it would do no harm if the committee went back to correct what they have put before us such that next time we are able to debate a report based on the rules of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, the report is already here. We will discuss it. There are issues that are within the rules and are things to be discussed here. Let us find time and debate it.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank you for clarifying on what Government assurance is and what it is not. These rules were made by us, Members of Parliament, and I think it is important that we amend to include promises made outside this House because I have seen it with the President and some ministers outside there making a lot of promises, which are not fulfilled yet in the end we Members of Parliament are the ones to be asked about such promises. You know, people asking you, “The President said this, where is it? The minister said this, where is it?”
 
So, I would like to urge this House that we amend these Rules of Procedure to include promises made outside this House because many are made outside which are not fulfilled. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I always have high respect for my brother, the hon. Jacob Oboth, because he grew up in Mbale. We worked in Mbale together and he was one of the respected lawyers we had in Mbale.  When he copied Mbale manners, he was able to win votes in his constituency to become a Member of Parliament.
 
I remember when the hon. Issa Kikungwe was the Chairperson of the Committee of Government Assurance, they proposed a law here and they brought it. The reason they wanted that law was to cut off the appetite of people in Government who go to the field and make wild promises which they know cannot be fulfilled. That law, however, has never seen light.
 
The likes of hon. Jacob Oboth, who must have made efforts that that law does not come –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you referring to the hon. Jacob Oboth?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The hon. Jacob Oboth - it is very unfortunate if a whole Member of Parliament, who knows that if a Government official –(Interjection)– of course a minister is a Government official or the President who is our servant, goes to the field and makes a promise yet that promise will not be fulfilled and we cannot follow it up as the representatives of the people, I feel bad; I feel that we are wasting time.

The Government Assurances Committee was put in place to follow assurances of Government. The rules may be having an error but we have to look on that. It is very wrong for us to allow our committees go to the field to collect information and we turn round to say, “We do not want to hear what they have gathered from the field.” It is very bad and I am sure hon. Jacob Oboth would feel bad that money has been –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: With high respect for the new Secretary General of Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) and with pain in my heart, I want to raise a procedural question on how my honourable colleague is proceeding. My name, Jacob Oboth, is now being mentioned more than three times. I do not know whether my colleague knows that I am also the Chairman of Rules and Privileges Committee and that I know that a particular rule has been breached already. I thought as a fair-minded lawyer, he is aware of, it is not a duty upon me to give notice to expunge all the irrelevant parts of the report. I did not say we would expunge all and if I said it I would like to correct that. 

So, is my honourable colleague in order? (Laughter) Is he proceeding well to keep rotating around my name; making my name an issue in a matter that has already collapsed at his own motion?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, laws are applied as they are not and as they ought to be. The law is not a matter of wish; it is a matter of an actual provision. The one we are looking at says what we have just said that Government assurances are those statements, commitments and promises that have been made on the Floor of Parliament. That is what the law is saying. It does not matter what we wish but as we stand now, that is what the law and what the rules say. 

A committee of the House can only follow those rules if we are to follow our rules to the latter. That is all it is saying. Therefore, as of now, honourable member for Budadiri West, we cannot go and ask for pledges that ministers have made in the fields using these rules. We would have to amend them. However, before they are amended, they are the rules that we follow as of now.  Please conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. I am sorry but even good lawyers lose cases. (Laughter) I am sure that the hon. Jacob Oboth, despite being the Chairman of the Rules and Privileges Committee, knows that has ever lost cases in court when he was a Resident State Attorney in Mbale. That means he is capable of making mistakes and that is what I am trying to say. (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, probably this is the second time in four years I am rising on order. The hon. Nandala-Mafabi knows very well that I was the Regional Head of Ministry of Justice in charge of about 26 districts in the East, doing litigation and advisory work. I cannot deny that I could have not lost a case but I have a record of about 95 percent winning cases.
 
I don’t know how my competency comes into issue especially that this particular case I am winning. (Laughter) Is the hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to portray me as a loser in a matter that is very clear that the rule is strictly applied as it is and that this time - I am a former Member of Government Assurances Committee. The guidance of the Speaker is that, take the assurances from the villages, bring them here and get the confirmation here and they become assurances; they are extracted from here. So, is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to continue dragging my name into a matter, which is not worth having my name mentioned in there?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was more like information to hon. Nandala-Mafabi, that please, heed to the call.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The problem I have is that I did mathematics; and it is the one I apply most of the time. One 10 times and 10 once is equal to one 10 times. Ninety-five per cent is very good. It could be small cases but the five per cent could be about big cases. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, if our committee has erred by bringing some assurances here -

MR BYARUGABA: With a lot of pain, Mr Speaker, I do not know whether this is the right rule. But we have had this over and over again. Honestly, you have made a very wise ruling. You are only trying to counsel the situation so that we move on. We have very little time on our side.

Mr Speaker, is it procedurally correct for us to continuously entertain this kind of inter-change and dialogue between the two honourable colleagues as if we have a lot of time on our side? Or should I invoke the provisions of Rule 70?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this matter is clear. Let us leave it at that. We will debate this report when the time comes and we will deal with the issues that have been raised. 

MR SSASAGA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I beg for your indulgence that what comprises the Government Assurances must be tracked from the records of our Hansard. But how does that assurance reach the Hansard of Parliament? This is how it happens: It is brought by a Member of Parliament during the Prime Minister’s Question Time and if not by that, then it is brought by a Member of Parliament during the period for matters of national importance. 

As a committee, the challenge we get is that when we reach the ground these assurances are very touching. And you discover that for some of them, Government has already committed itself and have been partially implemented.

However, when you come to our records here, no Member of Parliament from that area has ever brought them to the House in form of either a question to the Prime Minister or as a matter of national importance.

Mr Speaker, it is a stage you need to guide us on as a committee because we get constrained while in the field. What do we do? Honourable colleagues, this information is for your own good, if you didn’t know. I rest my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson and honourable members, if you come to this House and say that the President made an assurance to the Muslim community in Arua, it is not an assurance. Even if it were brought to the House, it would not be a presidential assurance still. It would be raised and may be confirmed by the Prime Minister or somebody else for it to become a ministerial assurance to the House.

The President addresses the House only a few times and if he makes statements that amount to assurances that is what we capture as assurances. So, whether he comes under Article 101 or under the normal State-of-the Nation Address, if assurances are made, those are the ones we capture as presidential assurances to the House. But not something said at some campaign rally in Omoro County or some place and you call it an assurance - for the purposes of our Rules of Procedure that is not the case. That is very clear when you read Rule 167 (1)(a) and 168 (2). Let us just stick to the rules; they will help us. If that is not proper, amend them. Otherwise, as of now, that is what they have.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, you are the person who will recall this matter very well. When I was appointed COW –(Laughter)– which represents Chief Opposition Whip –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, please protect me from people who are thinking otherwise?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will not be able to know what they are thinking. (Laughter)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, since Government Assurances fall under our jurisdiction of Leader of Opposition - there was a Bill which was proposed and was to be read the second time. But it so happened that both the chairperson and the vice chairperson were not in the House at the time. 

While the process of handover was still taking place, you tasked me to move a motion that that Bill be read the second time.  But indeed to confess my own sin, I had not read that Bill and not even seen it though you tasked me to move that motion. Anyway, I accordingly moved that the Bill entitled, “The Government Assurances” be read the second time. It was debated and defeated. 

Mr Speaker, I am bringing this because with my little knowledge and using my instinct, I was able to argue that that Bill would help us capture all statements and promises, which are made by Government officers, not only in Parliament, but in any other place(s) where they make a commitment to the community but do not fulfil it. We thought that Bill would help Parliament.

Mr Speaker, in this very House, whose term has not yet expired, the Bill was defeated. I am very surprised but at the same time also happy that now the bone is stuck in our own throat. We refused this Bill yet it would have helped us deal with all these matters. 

Mr Speaker, I have been following the debate and definitely, we cannot say that only the assurances brought to the Floor of Parliament can be followed. That is not possible. There are some ministers who have gone with their big weights to the communities and have said, “By this year a school will be built in Omoro.” So, people will be bothering the MP of Omoro why the school is not built because the minister said so. They might think MP of Omoro is just not being effective in following it up with the minister. Or the President has made a statement like the one time made in Dokolo that there would be a girl’s school called Kazibwe Secondary School. You see now people think that I, as the woman representative, cannot follow up this matter with the President. 

Therefore, those are the issues which we need to deal with as Members of Parliament because eventually, whether you like it or not, those promises will fall on our heads. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not have to say anything on that because I think I have spoken enough on that. Honourable members, as I said, we would defer debate on this particular report and come back to it when the time is right.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP BILL, 2014

3.56
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Public Private Partnership Bill, 2014” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED THE PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP BILL, 2014.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister!



BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ANTI-CORRUPTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

MRS OGWAL: Mr Chairman, before the motion is moved, is it procedurally right for us to proceed before we check the quorum?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Quorum was checked.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I have the highest regards for my dear sister, the hon. Cecilia Ogwal. I love her – (Interjections) – yes, and I respect her. Is she in order, when Parliament has already pronounced itself on this matter, to take us back? I thought this closed business, as far as I am concerned.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us stop moving that way. We have quorum. We are properly constituted and we have taken decision and we are about to take more decisions. If the House should fall in situations where it cannot take decisions, we will advise ourselves accordingly but as of now, we are properly constituted to take decisions. (Applause)

MR SSASAGA: Mr Chairperson, I would like to know if it is procedurally right for us to just assume there is quorum without ascertaining.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I do not assume. I have mechanisms for ascertaining quorum. The Speaker does not assume. There are mechanisms for ascertaining quorum. You count yourselves and see if there is no quorum. We do not have to go like headmasters counting people. No, please. (Laughter)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, it is true that you may have established how many members are in the House –(Laughter)– and, therefore, you are satisfied that the House is fully constituted. But we would like to know how many members are in the House on record.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: At the time we took the decision, 127 Members of Parliament were seated. 

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: How many are they right now?

MR DOMBO: Mr Chairman, I would like to seek your procedural guidance because you put a question and this House expressed itself by voting on a matter. And according to our Rules of Procedure, once a matter has been voted upon, that matter becomes a closed one. You even proceeded to call the next item on the agenda and you have moved to a committee stage. That quorum question that is being raised, is it for the previous matter, which was concluded properly? Or is it for the current one? 

I would like to seek your guidance on what procedure we are moving and what issue are they raising the issue of quorum on because so far, we are properly constituted and some members after voting on the previous motion moved away because they came here specifically to make sure that they vote on that matter. What exactly has happened?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the House was properly constituted when we took the decision; the House is still properly constituted.  (Applause)

Clause 1 agreed to.

Clause 2 agreed to.

Clause 3

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Clause 3 is talking about an employee of Government, a bank or insurance and whatever. But, Mr Chairman, a person may not be an employee of a bank but gets involved in fraud. I will give an example; you remember there was a time at Garden City where one person called Frank somebody was involved in a bank transaction, which led to money loss.

There were bank officials but also there was that person - you remember when they said that the hon. Maj. Gen. Muhwezi’s car was the one which they used to do the robbery. Now here you are only talking about, “A person employed by Government, a bank or insurance company, or a public body or a political leader.” What about that person who is not in any of those but is involved in such?

Therefore, Mr Chairman, we need an amendment here to say, “Any person” - we can mention all those and add the phrase: “Or any other person, knowingly or having reason to cause a loss…” should also be held liable under the Anti-Corruption Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ssimbwa, this is your Bill and that is the amendment being proposed.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. As the mover of the Bill, I have no problem with what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is proposing, if -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the amendment to be captured? 

MR SSIMBWA: He can phrase it and then we can consider it.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, I would like to seek clarification from the mover whether he has considered the proposed amendment well in the spirit of the parent legislation, that if you changed any person, having reason to believe that the act or omission will cause financial loss to the government, bank and credit institution, you have to change the whole thing. Have you considered that? That any person here - you are not going to just fish out anybody; you have to get those that you can get with the use of the law.

If it was the case, then there would be no need for law and we would not need this law; we should just say it is criminal and corrupt conduct to do a, b, c and d in this country. However, here there is a specific provision that you are amending in section 20. Have you harmonised section 20 with the spirit and letter of that law before you concede to the proposed amendment?

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. What hon. Oboth is saying is exactly what I want hon. Nandala-Mafabi to do. If the phrasing could not capture what is appearing in section 20 - that is why I would like hon. Nandala-Mafabi to phrase so that we do not go into the problem of what hon. Oboth is talking about.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, even under paragraph (b), they say, “company” means a company incorporated under the Companies Act, 2012. The Companies Act under -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, would you like to propose the amendment? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, it is because he had asked me a question and I was trying to refer to it, that a person - the moment you bring in a company under the Companies Act, 2012, it means that even a private company will be held liable and if a private company can be held liable, even an individual should be held liable, if he is involved in a transaction which has caused a loss to Government.

Therefore, I would like to propose that a public body or a political leader or any person. What I mean by “any person” is for example we are talking about, in Government, the issue of Finance - I want to insert immediately after “Public body or political leader” the words “any person”. 

The justification for this is that anybody who will be involved in a transaction which will lead  to a loss to Government, whether private or not, should be treated as a corruption issue and should be held under the Anti-Corruption Act.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I would like to give information to my colleague that this proposal is very comprehensive. A person employed by Government, a bank or a company and this includes those in Bugisu Cooperative Union or those dealers in Kikuubo - this is more inclusive. In fact an attempt to add “any other person”, you have to find another line for it. 

This is covering nearly everyone who would be either in business with Government or Government would be in business with them. Therefore, I believe that the fear - a person employed by Government, a bank, credit institution or an insurance company - an insurance company and a credit institution are not necessarily government institutions. This is Government and the private sector. “A public body or a political leader” - when you add “any person”, you are defeating the purpose of this legislation.

I would like to implore my brother and good friend that many of you do not know, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, to concede to this; that a person here covers both individual and company and is very inclusive of you and me, it would catch us.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to thank my brother, hon.  Oboth, for the information. However, here it is talking about a person employed. Supposing I am self-employed, or I am an individual doing even a partnership, a partnership is not taken care of here. Therefore, when you talk about only a company, you are leaving out individuals and partnerships.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I thank you, Mr Chairperson and I apologise for coming in a little late. The committee proposes to amend clause 3 in the following terms. The first amendment, a) to insert the words “in section 20” between the words “amended” and “by” appearing in the first line of the provision. The justification is for better drafting.

Mr Chairperson, we also propose to redraft clause 3(a) as follows: a) Substitute for subsection 1 the following: 1)“A political leader holding a political office or a person employed by the Government, bank, credit institution, a company or a public body who in the performance of his or her duties does or fails to do any act knowing or having reasons to believe that the acts or omission will cause financial loss to the political office, Government, bank, credit institution or a company or a public body commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 336 currency points and or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding 14 years or both”. 

The justification is to correct the grammar and include a political leader holding a political office responsible for causing financial loss.

a)	Amend clause 3(b) by deleting “2012” at the end of the provision. The justification is for better drafting.

Mr Chairperson, the concerns of hon. Nandala-Mafabi have been taken care of. The only reason we are introducing this is to make sure we cover every person who has access to funds of a bank, public institution or Government and who has therefore the capacity to cause financial loss. You cannot exclude all sundry; you cannot include people who have no access whatsoever to public resources and you cannot include people who have no means to cause a financial loss.  If hon. Nandala-Mafabi is not offended by this amendment, I request that he drops his. I thank you.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: On what matter do you rise? 

MR MAGYEZI: On that very clause. There are two things that the committee should note: One, the proposal to start with the political leader holding a political office. I think this excludes a political leader who is no longer holding the political office and yet in the earlier version of the law, I thought liability would extend to you even if you left the political office.

Secondly, what hon. Nandala-Mafabi raised remains relevant. At the time the Committee on Public Service investigated the issue of the bicycles, one of the people that we found responsible, Patrick Bagarukayo, was not an employee of any company or a political leader and yet he was at the heart of the loss of public funds. I think he has a point – we can cover the political leader, include those people employed by banks and Government but we should also have any other person. I think it is relevant. I thank you.

MR SSEGGONA: I thank you, Mr Chairperson and honourable colleagues. First, I am persuaded by the reasoning of hon. Raphael Magyezi but my fear is that when you are drafting a criminal legislation, you need to be very careful, specific and particular. 

My view is that a person who simply meddles in the process is assisted, aided and abetted by those who are already covered. You cannot make an anti-corruption law and bring any outsider and cover him. 

I would, however, be much more comfortable if we removed the word “political” and replace it with “leader” because this leader maybe a board member. We have had instances where one is neither a political leader nor an employee.

In the case of Bagarukayo, there must be some other act that constitutes a crime in some other law, not necessary the anti-corruption law because corruption relates to accessing an office and using it for personal gain. Therefore, this Bagarukayo that hon. Magyezi is talking about is actually a thief and he is governed and well catered for by the law governing theft. 

May I suggest to colleagues, through you, Mr Chairperson, that we drop the word “political” and replace it with “leader” because it is more inclusive. I thank you.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: The problem is that the parent Act actually covers every other person except the persons that we intend to include – the political leader. The argument has always been that a political leader cannot be charged for these offences under the anti-corruption law and that is why we have to specifically bring them within the operation of the law.

If we drop the words “political leader”, we are not adding any value. If we go back to the starting point of hon. Sseggona’s argument that legislation must be specific and we have to include “political leader” –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, in that case, we would say “political or other leader” because we have had issues with boards. I will concede and improve his language.

MR ODOI -OYWELOWO: I am grateful.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we take a decision on this now? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is unfortunate that the chairperson of the committee could not understand things at the beginning because if you look at your report, we have passed clauses 1 and 2. Clause 1 was for interpretation – I wanted to say it then but you left it and so, I do not know whether you are going to recommit clauses 1 and 2 because they are very important in the sense that that is all that we wanted to add on some definition. 

In that context, if you are going to recommit at that stage, that is when we shall bring in an individual. Why am I insisting on an individual?  A thief is a thief. Even the ones in these offices who take money are thieves but they are saying that they will go to the Anti-Corruption Court. Why don’t they take them under the normal channel for thieves because corruption is theft?

In that regard, the individual who was involved in the bicycle deal was defrauding Government. Why should we be part of the people involved in the Anti- Corruption Court and then another go through steps? That is my worry. We should say that any person who is involved in defrauding Government is corrupt because they would be aided by somebody in Government or used other methods. 

First and foremost, I would like to thank hon. Sseggona for those amendments that he has added. However, I would like to insist that we put there an individual who is involved in Government transactions which lead to a loss. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Just to assure hon. Nandala-Mafabi that the committee has amended clauses 1 and 2 that were passed and at an appropriate time, we shall move for recommital so that we take care of his concerns. 

We still insist that the drafting, as proposed by hon. Sseggona, is acceptable to us and I thought they would take care of his concern.

GEN. TUMWINE: I would like to take it a bit further and include a private body where it says: “A company or public body” it should include; “A private or public body” because a corrupt person can be corrupt with a public or private body. It does not have to be a company but it could be a private body which is not a company.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Somebody raised the issue of partnerships that are not necessarily companies but other forms of business associations and that is the point that the General is making.  

MR OBOTH: There is awareness of the crime of corruption and I think there is an attempt to broaden and widen the scope – if that is the case, then we might just open the arms of this section a little wider to cover everybody and then go with hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s proposal that also covers him and it will say, “Anybody or any person who in the performance of his or her duties does or fails……” and then we maintain that so that we do not go into who is left out so that any person, whether in Government or a political leader, is covered.

My brother, hon. Sseggona, was spot on and the spirit here is that people are aware that there are thieving individuals – I think the right word is “Thieving” - some of them are not even stealing but thieving; so that everybody is covered because we cannot continue to ignore the evidence being availed that there are actually individuals who are not companies but they find themselves working with Government.

The example by hon. Raphael Magyezi- I do not know how an individual would interact with Government that would cause financial loss but the evidence is there. Therefore, let us broaden and widen by removing “political leader” and have “any person.”

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairperson, I am persuaded by the arguments of hon. Gen. Tumwine that probably we may need to cover partnerships, business associations other than companies. However, I request that he states in very specific terms what his amendment to our position is.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: He said public or private.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We concede to that amendment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, Article 164(2) of the Constitution talks about holding accountable any person who holds office and causes a financial loss whether through direction or whatever.

When we raised the issue of partnerships or individuals, somebody like a contractor is holding an office and he uses the government contract to defraud Government. He is a thief and he can be held criminally liable but why can’t he be taken to the Anti-Corruption Court because this is serious corruption.

This is why I am in support of hon. Oboth that to avoid restricting ourselves, let us say, “Any person” because there are people who are using public money. This is why we are losing some cases because people claim that they are not Government officials but if we put it that any person who knowingly or unknowingly, while performing any function for Government, causes a loss should be held liable. He should be charged 360 currency points or 14 years imprisonment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, we need to take a decision on this matter now. 

MS NYAKECHO: Mr Chairperson, I would like to add to what hon. Nandala-Mafabi said and support that point because you may find for instance that I am a minister and we have a deal with my fellow minister and we have a commission agent who is transacting between the two of us. However, that person may not be captured anywhere and I think that is the problem that hon. Nandala-Mafabi is trying to cure; that that individual who is not captured anywhere is not a political leader, he is not in a public office but he is a commission agent transacting between us. We are using him and he is directly involved in the acts of corruption.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, does it still make sense if we fail to follow what the member for West Budama South has proposed so that instead of trying to list we just make the broad statement capturing every situation?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairperson, I will concede that we open up so that we deal with all and sundry. We therefore redraft our amendment to read as follows and I beg your indulgence because drafting at the microphone is a very difficult thing but I will try, all the same.

Any person, who in the performance of his or her duties, does or fails to do any act knowing or having reason to believe that that act or omission will cause financial loss to a political office, Government, bank, credit institution, a company, a public or private body commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 336 currency points or a term of imprisonment not exceeding 14 years or both.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay, honourable members? The only improvement will be, instead of saying “any person” will be “a person.”

MR SSEGGONA: I agree with hon. Odoi-Oywelowo but only to an extent. I am comfortable with “any person” but my fear is when you bring in the issue of the performance of his or her duties and you are dealing with a private person who is coming into this transaction simply to steal and walk away - the middleman - who ordinarily has no function to perform and is therefore not performing his duty. Performance of duties connotes that a person is in a position and he is made to perform those activities.

Would it not be safer therefore to say, “any person who does any act knowing or having reason to believe that the act or omission…” and you remove “performance of duties.” The reason the drafting was based on the performance of duties was  on the fact that we are dealing with officers but now we have opened up to anyone who does anything.

MR OBOTH: In that regard, Mr Chairperson, then we would delete from the proposed amendment of hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo, “who in the performance of his or her duties…” and maintain “does or fail”, the rest will still hold water. You either do or fail to do an act; it is an offence. Then when prosecuting this matter, you don’t have to prove that a person was actually in the course of performance of his or her duty because you will be defrauding without any duty but they do an act or fail to do an act.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairperson, I think the two honourable members have added value.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we now state, for the record, what the final text is.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairperson, can we take off a minute or two and we redraft this. Would you want to state, hon. Oboth?

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, if it may please the House, any person who does or fails to do any act knowing or having reason - and I think the rest would remain as in the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: For the record.

MR OBOTH: Apparently, what I have here is -

MR SSEGGONA: The member has accepted that I help him like I have always done and I am happy to continue doing so, Mr Chairperson. A person who does or fails do to any act knowing or having reason to believe that the act or omission will cause financial loss to the government, bank, credit institution, insurance company, a company, a public or private body commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 360 currency points or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding 14 years or both.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I appreciate the assistance of my colleague. He only omitted political office. We need to insert “political office”.

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Chairperson, I have no problem with that part but the last part of that clause includes an offence and penalty and I do not know whether that could be the best place to put the penalty. However, again if the objective is to make corruption very risky, a prescription of not exceeding 360 currency points where a currency point is only Shs 20,000 - we are saying a fine would not be more than Shs 6.7 million. 

Honourable colleagues, I want us to look at this; really, are we moving the anti-corruption crusade a step further? Can’t we lift this?

The other aspect of the penalty is at least 14 years or not exceeding 14 years. 14 years sounds okay but I think this 336 currency points is really not prescriptive and adequate enough. Therefore, I would like to propose that we amend to say, “…an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 5,000 currency points.” I beg to move.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. First of all, I would like to apologise for being away but also to state that I was around at the time the Parliament commenced. At one point I thought that Parliament was not sitting so I rushed to the pharmacy to collect my drugs. I do apologise for coming late and I thank my learned friend, hon. Fox Odoi, for standing in for me.

I would like to respond to the proposal brought by hon. Magyezi. You see, we are amending a law that is already in place. Therefore, when talking about the sentences and so forth, they must be taken in the context of the sentences provided within the parent Act. I think it would not be proper to look at a single act or offence and prescribe sentence for it without looking at the general context of the law. I would like to request hon. Magyezi that we drop this one for now.

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Chairperson, the object of this law is to provide for mandatory confiscation of property of a person convicted of an offence under this Act and to widen the scope of offences of embezzlement. 
I thought we are here to do that. I actually thought the chairperson of the committee was going to say, instead of limiting us to 5,000 currency points, could we make this as a minimum because the loss could be so high?

MR SSEGONA: Actually to inform the honourable colleagues, when we talk about widening the scope, we are looking at more penalties but not enhancing and that is the difference. Therefore, the object is looking at, for example, we have been having fines, imprisonment and now we are introducing confiscation. That is the widening of the scope of penalties that we are talking about. It is not about increasing but you still have the power anyway to increase the severity of the penalty.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, please, I need your final word on this and we take a decision. 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. In that regard, taking into account the explanation I gave and that of hon. Sseggona, we insist that we should hold the provision as in the report.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Has it been improved? Can I put the question to this amendment which has been proposed? Please we need to make progress, hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, under the tax laws, if you committee a crime, the penalty is that they make you pay double the crime. 

Now here, even if you bring hon. Raphael Magyezi’s proposal, it is not too much. It is only Shs 100 million. Supposing a contractor of say Shs 100 billion – for example Byandala’s  Katosi Road - I think to avoid the issue of currency points, we would say a fine not less than double the loss because we want to make it punitive. If you have to steal Shs 10 million, you know very well that when we get you, you will pay Shs 20 million or you are imprisoned for two years. These currency points are so deceptive that we shall not make it. 

Therefore, I would like to move an amendment to what hon. Raphael Magyezi raised that the offence will be liable to a fine equal to twice the loss or 14 years or both so that when they get you, you are held liable.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. As members will find out as we go on later, there are also other remedies including confiscation and  civil remedies.I think we are looking at the money but remember the second leg which talks about 14 years imprisonment or both, which I think are really sufficient.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson., I just would like to inform hon. Tashobya that the Article 164 (2) of the Constitution says that you make good the loss. It is categorical. If one billion gets lost, you make good the loss. Therefore, what we are doing is just to widen the scope. Currency points make the loss. Somebody can steal a billion shillings and because of currency points, somebody pays 100 million.

MR RUHUNDA: Mr Chairperson, we have seen really huge amounts of money being stolen. I do not know what is done between the lawyers and the judges. Sometimes these criminals are given less penalties because the law is weak and they walk away with it. We even saw after Kazinda was convicted - the four years compared to the volume of money that was stolen was really small, from our judgement. Why can’t we, at this point in time when we are amending the law, take advantage of this and have really heavy penalties inserted into this clause?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Propose.

MR RUHUNDA: I propose that hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s suggestion of not committing us to the currency points but to say twice the amount of the loss you have committed be upheld.

MR TASHOBYA: First of all, I would like to comment on what hon. Ekanya talked about - the provision of the Constitution on making good the loss that you have caused; that is already provided for. However, that provision is not a criminal sanction and these criminal sanctions we are providing are without prejudice to the provisions of Article 164. Therefore, my position is that the criminal sanctions provided and the confiscations we are providing for in - (Interjections) – yes, that is my position.

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I do not think we are trying to do anything special here. In traditional justice, it is simple; if you steal my cow and I get you, you will pay not less than two cows. Therefore, I think we should not waste time on this. 

As you have heard from the tax law, it should be related to the loss – section 158 of the Customs Management Act uses the same method. The whole point of amending this Act was to ensure that if you steal much, you pay much. (Applause) It does not have to go with the niceties of the law. It is simple; twice as much as the loss.

MR SABILA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. The clarification I am seeking is that a person may have stolen the money and he chooses not to invest, meaning that there is nothing you can confiscate, even if you convict him. In that case, having a heavy penalty like the one proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi could be better to save the situation because there could be nothing to confiscate. I think it is relevant to have it double the amount stolen. Thank you.

MR ONYANGO KAKOBA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to concur with hon. Gen. Tumwine and the others who have contributed. This is because if the intention here is actually to deter corruption, then we need deterrent sentences and therefore, doubling would be adequate.

However, the second portion which talks about the custodial sentence not exceeding 14 years I think is still weak because 14 years is the maximum. Suppose someone decides to sentence you  to two or three years? I believe if we are adding on to make the other one double, even in the custodial sentence the 14 years should actually be the minimum. I thank you.

MS ADONG: Mr Chairman, we need to make the law deterrent enough. When you read laws of other countries, we have areas where it even involves firing squads which are deterrent enough. However, I believe making it twice the loss will at least take care of it. This is because if someone steals Shs 2 billion and he is only paying the kind of fines we are putting in the law, no one will fear. Therefore, I really support that we should make it twice the loss or imprisonment or both. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is a penal legislation. We are trying to create a crime and create a punishment for it. This House has adopted a framework on sentencing guidelines before and we should not be seen to be getting out of what we passed to guide how we impose sentences and sanctions on some of these acts. 

Therefore, if we can be guided on what the provisions are on these issues, it would help us. We cannot pick one piece of legislation and make it jump out of the broad framework and guideline we have passed in one law on how we carry out sentencing. Can we be helped on this? What is the framework in the sentencing guidelines that we have passed?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I do not have the law with me. However, as you have rightly mentioned, there is a law relating to the sentences given for offences. It is not that you can come out and impose a sentence of so many millions and so many years. This is a technical matter governed by the law and the provisions of our proposals are informed by the law.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairperson, as the chairperson of the committee said, there is an Act of Parliament that guides in sentencing where the fines must correspond with the years. What the House can do is to move the fine higher and the years of imprisonment higher so that they correspond. Therefore, we can move but we cannot say we have a double because that double must correspond with the time of imprisonment. We can balance within.

MR OTADA: I would like to thank you, Mr Chairman, for guiding the House. I believe there is a general principle of proportionality that when you are sentencing, the sentence should be proportional to the offence. That is why I am persuaded by what the Deputy Chairperson said that we could take some time and look at the sentencing guidelines that are available and also compare probably with other legislations here or outside so that we are not overzealous in our fight against corruption – which of course will be understood – so that we do not get out of the purview of sentencing which should really be not against the principle of proportionality. This is a matter which is technical.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, one of the reasons I am here this evening is specifically to see whether I could get a remedy for government officials who sit down and siphon all the money knowingly. The man just gives himself about Shs 11 billion and they share it among themselves within their own means. The man knows that even if I am put in prison, I will spend there 14 years while the money is doing business. My children will be going to school and everything else will be done. 

Mr Chairperson, is there a possibility for us here to put somebody to refund what has been lost? If you have taken the money and you are given only 14 years – if somebody has taken Shs 145 billion and the currency points you are talking about  is only Shs 7 million. Surely?

I believe that we should change it here and say, somebody should refund exactly what he has taken and you are put in prison at least for a minimum period of 14 years. There are some people who are addicts in stealing Government money. It is like a positive feedback. When they steal, they want to steal even more because they cannot get satisfied.
Let people pay. Don’t talk about these convictions of not exceeding 136 currency points. Let people bring back what they have taken and they are imprisoned for at least 14 years. Thank you very much.

MR AYOO: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. We thought we are getting a solution to this problem of punishing the corrupt but I am getting disturbed. If we are not supposed to go above certain limits of sentencing people, it means we are more or less not changing anything. I wish the House to go by the proposal by hon. Nandala-Mafabi and we also raise the number of years of imprisonment. This is because if somebody is sentenced for 14 years and they count day and night, that is seven years only - (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairperson, my colleague needs to be informed that the system of remission is not that you count day and night and call them four days. It has never even happened in the life of the independent Uganda. What is true is that for a particular year, remission is carried out and some days are deducted but a day, under the Prison’s Act, remains 24 hours. 

The other information I would like to give is that it is true there is this vice called corruption but we should not stampede ourselves into - I do not want to use the word “unreasonable” but to be balanced. To understand my brother, hon. Sam Otada, used the word proportionality and reason. For those who have never been to prison, I would like to tell you that 14 years is actually a very long time - (Laughter).
I was incarcerated for eight days. Of course not convicted and not pre-tried but those eight days seemed like five years in prison.

As my chairperson said, we are looking at these fines in addition to other penalties. The prosecutor will stand up and inform court that this offence is rampant. Secondly, that this is an attack on the public coffer that this person was entrusted in this office. Therefore, the court would weigh all those factors. This is not to take away that some judicial officers may make mistakes here and there. 

However, I would like you to remember the decision of the Supreme Court in Constitution Appeal No. 1 of 2007: Susan Kigula and others; that the courts in this country has interpreted the law so as to jealously guard their discretion because the discretion including the discretion in sentencing is derived from the Constitution and what we are doing here is amending or re-enacting an ordinary Act of Parliament.

Therefore, I would like to implore my colleagues that when looking for heavier sentences, let us balance and avoid stampeding ourselves because of the magnitude of the vice.

MR AYOO: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I would like to take the information from hon. Sseggona but also say that in other places, they have not only stampeded themselves but passed death sentences to the corrupt. Therefore, which one is fair in this situation for the case of Uganda where it is becoming too much. Corrupt people are distributing Shs 15 billion, Shs 25 billion or Shs 100 billion. 

However, on information that entails the number of days I was talking about, it is true that most of these days are reduced to almost a half. Therefore, once it is reduced to almost a half, it is almost counts to that. I take the information anyway but you should also know the fact which is on the ground that they will never take one year; probably five to six months and then they will be back.

Therefore, Mr Chairman –(Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you. We had a similar serious issue when we were working on the Petroleum Bills at that time. When it came to the penalties, especially for the polluters, when we looked at what the existing laws say; it was very meagre. They were charging very little money as a penalty, which these companies would just smile at because that is their pocket change.
We had to review the penalty, given the magnitude of the business and you know of course the oil transactions, worldwide. Therefore, we had to begin adjusting to see how much - if we are going to punish these companies for pollution, then they must feel the pinch. 

However, we have now realised that the corrupt officials and individuals in Uganda are almost stealing at the same rate. You could be earning from petroleum dollars if you look at the trillions -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the proposal?

MR RUHUNDA: That is why I still insist that we insert to pay twice as much for the loss we have incurred. If it needs further amendments, we should really go for that other than tying ourselves as a country, given that the existing laws are giving room for a lot of graft and yet as Parliament, we are looking vulnerable. Why can’t we at this time make this proposal and amend? If you steal Shs 100 billion you should pay Shs 200 billion.

MR AYOO: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Our laws give a lot of burden to the State to prove beyond reasonable doubt in order for somebody to be convicted especially on offences like corruption. I think if we get one or two and go by this proposal to double the amount and number of years and try that one - it is because we would have gone for the highest, which would be death or life imprisonment. However, I think this is fair enough. Therefore, this is the proposal I would urge the House to adopt. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we do not seem to be making much progress on this clause and therefore, I am going to propose that the chairperson and the mover should look at the sentencing law that we passed here so that we come with a harmonised position on how to proceed with this matter. 

If we go back to the House and it is reported and adopted that clauses 1 and 2 have been approved as well, it would require a recommital of clause 1. However, if we handle it at this stage, it will not require recommital. 

Therefore, if we can handle that now, it will not require us to go to the re-committal process but if we go back, report and adopt the report; that will mean that we will have to re-commit after. Therefore, this will be the time; if it is necessary that there are improvements to be made in clause 1; it should be made now.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, in clause 1, the chairman of the committee has -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But he is here.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman in clause 2 when hon. Sseggona brought the amendment, clause 2 does not need a re-committal because “political leader” was added; so we are recommitting it to -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, we are not recommitting; it is clause 1.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Clause 1, first of all we have an amendment with a wrong title. Mr Chairman, the wrong title is “the Anti-corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013,” we propose that it be amended by substituting for the wrong title the following: -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, we will come back to the title when we are finishing.

MR TASHOBYA: Clause 1: the Principle Act is amended in section 1 by inserting immediately after the definition of inspectorate officers, the following:
    a. “Minister” means minister responsible for justice.”
The justification is to define who the minister is.
    b. Substitute for the definition of a political office with the following: political office includes the office of the Vice-President, the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, a minister, a Member of Parliament or a member of any commission, authority, council or committee established by the Constitution or by an Act of Parliament. 

The justification is to cure the ambiguity in the definition of the word, “political office”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members?

MR TASHOBYA: Can I conclude? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let the chairman conclude. Is there another amendment?  

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much. Insert the definition of “prosecuting authority” immediately after “political office” as follows: “Prosecuting authority” means the Directorate of Public Prosecution or the Inspectorate of Government. 

The justification is: for clarity. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I know that when the President is in office, he cannot be prosecuted. What about the staff in the office of the President? If they are covered, why can’t we say, “…means the office of the President, the Vice-President, the Speaker…”? Why can’t we include the office of the President, Vice–President and so on?

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, take a look at what has not been amended in the principal Act. When we talk about the public body under the interpretation clause, you will find that everybody in Government, apart from those who are protected by the Constitution, is catered for. This is because a public body includes the government and the people working in the departments of government. 

Therefore, I think that the office of the President is part of the government. This part of the principal law has not been amended, so I believe everybody that hon. Nandala-Mafabi is referring to is covered when we talk about a public body. This is because a public body is defined. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it clear? Can I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the -

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, I think it is not clear. If we are to name the Vice-President, definitely we should also name the President even when we know that during the time that he is serving, nothing will happen to him. After he has vacated office, the law should catch up with him if the President is involved in misusing his office. 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, there is something we need to be clear about. The President is insulated against prosecution while holding office only. He may commit the offence while still holding office but you will not prosecute him.  

For purposes of committing a crime, the President must be included. We do not prosecute him but we wait until he leaves office. This is because the insulator in the Constitution is only against prosecution but not committing a crime. What happens if the President, while holding office, commits this offence and in future you want to prosecute him after leaving office but you did not include him as one of those capable of committing that offence? He would not have committed the offence because the office he is holding is not an office referred to for purposes of this law.

I would like to allay the fears of those colleagues who might be thinking that we are targeting the President today. No, we are only saying that anyone can make mistakes and offend the law and these people include the President.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from my son, hon. Sseggona. Do you mean that these Members are worried that the President has committed a crime? We are making this for posterity, so do not worry. 

MR SSEGGONA: I think you have answered the clarification. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Sseggona, for giving way. Political office includes the office of the Vice-President and the rest that are indicated. I wanted to seek clarification from you. Other than what you have said, why do you think that somebody who is clothed with immunity at the time we are making this law should have his office put there? What would be the purpose, other than what you have stated - for the future? If the law cannot get me now, why should you target me in future or target that office in future? 

As regards the political office of the President, you will never be able to prosecute that person. Moreover, legal legislation cannot be made in a vacuum. I thought it should be supported and these are the areas supported by facts. Facts build up the law so that it can be applied.

The clarification is –(Interjection)– I know you are fairly intelligent, but you cannot read my mind. If the President, at the time that we are making this law, is clothed with immunity legally, why would you go beyond that immunity and provide for legislation to include the office of the President well knowing that - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Would it not violate the Constitution? 

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, let us read the Constitution because it is very clear and it solves this issue. Article 98(5) states, “Civil or criminal proceedings may be instituted against a person after ceasing to be President, in respect of anything done or omitted to be done in his or her personal capacity before or during the term of office of that person; and any period of limitation in respect of any such proceedings shall not be taken to run during the period while that person was President.”

In my view, the issue is cured. We do not need a provision because the Constitution is very clear.

MR SSEGGONA: I am happy to clarify for those who sought clarification from me. The first one is to my honourable colleague, the hon. Ssimbwa. Actually, you have not sought clarification but you have answered my question partly. The insulation is provided to the President for as long as he is a sitting President. What they are saying is that if he commits an offence while holding the office of President, you wait and only prosecute him after ceasing to hold that office. 

Let me also read Article 28(7) of the Constitution. “No person shall be charged with or convicted of a criminal offence which is founded on an act or omission that did not at the time it took place constitute a criminal offence.” (Interjection) Wait a minute; before you say it is different, I would implore you to understand it first, at least from my perspective. 

The implication of the clause that my honourable colleague has just read is that a sitting President can commit an offence - that is one – and two, that he will be prosecuted but only after leaving office. That is why the period of limitation will not begin to run until he has ceased to hold office. That perfectly answers hon. Oboth’s question. 

Please, also understand that you will not prosecute him in future if, at the time of committing the offence, it was not an offence. That is Article 28(7). Therefore, you must make it an offence and make it a no-go area for the sitting president if, in future, you intend to prosecute him. I think it is wrong for somebody to think that you will never prosecute somebody. We would be legislating impunity and against the Constitution.

The makers of this Constitution knew that somebody can commit an offence while holding the office of President but for the efficient running of the state, you do not stampede the President with all manner of prosecutions and civil proceedings. Allow him to concentrate on his presidential duties. The moment he ceases to hold office, then he will be held accountable. 

If we were to take that proposal, colleagues, we would be one, legislating impunity; and two, we would be acting contrary to the Constitution. This is because under this Constitution, it is provided that anyone can commit an offence and anyone can be prosecuted. The difference is the time of prosecution. If I commit an offence today against this Anti-corruption law, I will be prosecuted. Even if we committed it jointly with President, he would not be prosecuted today; rather, he would find me there the moment he ceases to hold office.

MR OBOTH: I seek your indulgence, Mr Chairman. Once again, are you insinuating or actually saying that all other offences that the likely occupant of the office of the President is committing or is about to commit now are clearly created for the specific office of the President? Are you trying to say that all the other offences being referred to, as ably stated by hon. John Ssimbwa, are clearly stated that if the President commits this or that crime? Are the offences specifically created for the office of the President or you want to begin from this one?

MR SSEGGONA: You have actually answered the question. We have been battling since we started in defining who to include. It is largely the purpose of this amendment because there were specific categories that were not catered for in this Anti-corruption law. 

I have two examples. I represented a councillor charged with corruption. When I got to court, I sought the aid of the law and I said that this law is about an employee and the councillor is not an employee. Secondly, in the CHOGM cases, Prof. Bukenya was charged and one of his principle arguments, if you remember, which was dismissed by the Constitutional Court, was that, “I cannot be prosecuted because these are issues, which arose out of the performance of my duties as Vice-President sitting in for the President.” 

Therefore, the point we are making is simple; if the President stole today, he would not be prosecuted but the law against theft is against anybody. In this one, we have defined the offices and included all those starting with the Vice-President. No, it must start with – Actually, he is the head of politics in this country. We must start with the President, then the Vice-President and then the others. Are you saying that the President should have impunity for life? If he can be charged with rape - if he raped while in office, because the law forbade rape he must also face other consequences.

Let me tell you, colleagues, this is about accountability for the actions – (Interruption) I will answer the clarification.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Hon. Sseggona has stated that when hon. Gilbert Bukenya wanted to justify why he had committed the so-called offences while he was in office, court dismissed that defence. What fear do you have that tomorrow, if a sitting President commits the offence of corruption and later puts up the same excuse that he committed the offence because he was in office, he will not be treated the same way that hon. Bukenya was treated? What is the fear?

MR OTADA: Mr Chairman, I would like to thank my colleague for yielding the floor. My reading of Article 28(7) - I could read it because it is a short one: “No person shall be charged with or convicted of a criminal offence which is founded on an act or omission that did not at the time it took place constitute a criminal offence.” 

I would like to seek clarification because to me this seems to suggest that the act or the omission should be capable of constituting an offence. That is one part of the question.

The other one, which is the conundrum that we find ourselves in, is that we are dealing with someone or an office but in this case a person who is clothed with immunity. This means that this person, for now, cannot be prosecuted, civil or criminally. 

Therefore, Article 7 would simply look at the act or the omission. If it is capable of constituting an offence then once the veil is lifted under Article 98 and the person is no longer President, anybody can proceed against that person. Therefore, I do not see our worry in including the President in this matter.

MR SSEGGONA: Let me clarify something. The point I am making is that for it to constitute an offence, there are ingredients. Amongst the ingredients, going by the definition which we have just widened to include “political office”, if someone was holding a political office and he commits an act that is prejudicial within what we have just defined - If the office of President was not included or is not included now, he can walk away with it. Why? It is because his office was not capable of committing that offence at the time.

The moment you miss out on one ingredient, you have lost the entire charge – (Interruption)- Just a minute; I will take information from Gen. Tumwine.

GEN. TUMWINE: Mr Chairman, I must thank the honourable member on the Floor for giving me this opportunity. We have spent almost an hour on something that I think does not arise - making laws for individuals and individual offices. A law does not know any person. The law is for all citizens of Uganda. The specific law in the Constitution is for the sitting President. All the other laws apply to all the citizens of Uganda.

What is this that you are trying to ring-fence in this particular amendment? To me, it was not well thought out that it should even arise in the first place. I am saying that since all other laws apply to all citizens, there should not be a specific law, which is trying to ring-fence a particular office. I really do not see the grounds in which an office is being ring-fenced.

We should move forward like in all other laws, including the Constitution. Laws are made as deterrents for anybody and I think it is not right to say that this law does not affect the President’s office or that the President is not affected. Any law should affect any person.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I think it can be made simpler to avoid the protracted discussion on this. There are two options. The first could be to include everyone, as Gen. Tumwine said. We have already said “any person”. That is why at one point I came up and asked why we have to put “political” because by going on to define “political”, we sought to be more particular and to go into those that we thought were not covered. 

If we were to go by the argument that it includes any person who does that act, and that this would include the President, then why would we go ahead to define and include a definition of political office? This is because any person, whether political or not, who does any act that falls in the ambit of committing that crime would have committed the offence under 164(2) of the Constitution – (Interruption) I will take information from my young brother.

MR OBOTH: I will take that with humility; he knows that in all ways, I am above him. 

The political office came in earlier. Now with the hindsight that we made proposals for amendment, that it is wider and includes any person or a person, the President falls under that. Therefore, the political office, as you are rightly saying, was put in with the other earlier political leader, which we have since removed. 

Hon. Sseggona, if we can progress and improve it further, this political office is actually idle and we can remove it. However, I was giving you information, like I have always done.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, if all that can be done for purposes of avoiding acrimony, then I would suggest that we delete “political office” and do with “any person”. This is because whether you are a leader or whether you were led and you commit an act under this law which constitutes an offence, you will still be liable. Therefore, for purposes of harmony, I would indulge my chairperson that we abandon the definition; we shall actually achieve more.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, the proposal is that in clause 1, the definition of political office be deleted. What we had proposed for adoption in clause 3 is to just say “a person”, which now includes everybody without exception. Can I put the question to the deletion of the definition of “political office”? I put the question for that deletion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 1, as amended, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, before we resume, we had clause 2 and I heard the mover of the motion saying, “Given the definition, which hon. Sseggona brought, clause 2 falls aside.” Are you still maintaining it?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, you said clause 2 had been resolved.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, clause 2 was not for consideration. What was under consideration has been voted on.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, somebody has said something about clause 2 and that is why I was asking if it is okay the way it is. 

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, it is clause 3 where you told us to –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, I am talking about clause 2. I do not want to come back to it.

MR SSIMBWA: Clause 2 is okay.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, clause 2 is about political leaders. Since we have adopted “any person”, clause 2 should be deleted. I would like to move a motion that clause 2 be deleted. 

The committee was trying to make an amendment to clause 2 but given what we have discussed and according to the amendment itself, it is now different. Therefore, we are now saying that clause 2 be deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 2 is “political leader” not “political office”. What we have deleted is political office.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, clause 2 is about a political leader. The reason we are changing this is because when hon. Sseggona brought up “any person”, it meant that it took care of any body.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, we have adopted clause 1(a) which is the definition of a political leader.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, that is the stand because when hon. Sseggona brought an amendment, we added it. What we are deleting is the definition. The wording remains as it is but the definition is what we are deleting so that we can capture any person.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which definition?

MR SSIMBWA: The definition of political office.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, but not political leader.

MR SSIMBWA: Not political leader.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman and colleagues, for coherence and consistency, the adoption of my proposal here means that we may have to recommit the previous clause because it would be redundant to talk about a political leader after removing the definition of a political office. 

The language and spirit in which I moved was to the effect that you would therefore not even need any reference to “political”, whether to an office or even to a person because you have “any person”. This person may be political or apolitical, a leader or otherwise.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, we are deleting “political office” because of the deletion of the performance of duties. Here we are looking at performance. If we leave it as “any person” – We added “political leader” to “any person” in the amendment that hon. Sseggona brought and we adopted it. Going back to recommit –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, we have not yet adopted it. Honourable members, is it still necessary to maintain “political leader” in the definition or anywhere else? 

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, given the arguments made and the contributions by hon. Sseggona and hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I do not think we need to include “political office” in the definition.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Political office is not there, but political leader is.

MR TASHONYA: No, we do not need to include “political leader”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Can somebody move properly so that we deal with clause 1? We are still at a time when we can do that. 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman and colleagues, in light of the discussion, I would move that we delete the references to both “political leader” and “political office” in clause 1 of the Bill. 

Mr Chairman, when you look at (b), it has other definitions. I move therefore that we delete clause 1(a) of the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is the proposition. I now put the question that clause 1(a) be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would like to move that clause 2 be deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for deletion of clause 2. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.36
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House resumes and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.37
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “the Anti-Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013” and adopted clause 1(a) with amendments, deleted clause 2(a) and stood over clause 3. Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.39
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a sad event occurred yesterday and that was the killing of Sheikh Hassan Kirya. The Minister of Internal Affairs has requested to make a statement on this. I think it would be proper for me to allow him to do that.

MR SSEGONNA: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the House that related to that, two young men were shot at the FDC headquarters this afternoon by a police officer. We would like to send our condolences to the bereaved families of those two young men who were simply demonstrating their support for a candidate they had gone to nominate. I would also like to request that the minister, at an appropriate time, equally gives this House a report. 

Finally, I would like to condemn that kind of violence perpetrated by officers in uniform who are employed and paid by the state using their state cover and machinery. I also urge the Government to act in restraint of their officers but also to bring the perpetrators to book. I do not know about the party members apart from those that have been killed.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

5.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker and honourable members, my condolences go to those who were killed this afternoon. The report also reached me this afternoon while I was here in the House. As usual, we will institute investigations as to how that happened and report back to the House. However, it is a very sad event.

The statement that I am reading now is in respect to the tragic death of Sheikh Hassan Kirya, which happened last night. Mr Speaker and honourable members, it is with deep sorrow that I inform you and the nation of the tragic death of Sheikh Hassan Kirya. This happened yesterday, Monday 30 June 2015 at around 10.00 p.m. at Bweyogerere trading centre.

Honourable members, following the recent killings of a number of prominent leaders of the Muslim faith, a decision was taken to avail some of them with bodyguards. One of them had been deployed to guard Sheikh Kirya. On the fateful day, Sheikh Kirya was with the bodyguard all through the day. He opted to drop the bodyguard at Kireka Police Barracks where he lives. 

Sheikh Kirya then drove himself to Bweyogerere and packed near a local butchery. He proceeded on foot to purchase some fruits from a roadside vender. As he walked backed to the car, he was shot three times. In the process, four others were injured and all those who were injured were rushed to hospital. Unfortunately, Sheikh Kirya died on the way to Mulago Hospital.

One of the injured persons, a one Komakech, a boda boda rider, died this morning, Tuesday 1 July 2015 at around 10.00 a.m. The other three are in the hospital receiving treatment.

Police Action

Immediately the Police received the information, they went to the scene and commenced investigations and operations to hunt down the perpetrators. The investigations and hunt for the culprits are continuing.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, as happened in the case of Sheikh Muwaya of Mayuge and the chairperson of Namayingo, the Police is doing all it takes to hunt down the killers. The bodyguard, a one PC Kalimunda Muzamiru, has been arrested and charged for neglect of duty and continues to be interrogated. All police personnel attached to Bweyogerere station have been suspended pending investigations as to why they were not on patrol duty at the time of the incident.

In the meantime, the Police have called upon anyone with useful information that may lead to the arrest of the culprits to come forward and report. The Police are certain that all those involved will be arrested and brought to book. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, many of these killings have been done by people using boda bodas. This development prompted the Joint Operations Command to set up a committee to inquire into the operations of the boda boda industry with a view to coming up with measures for streamlining the management and operations of the industry. The team has completed its work and submitted the report. This is being studied and action will be taken on the recommendations made. 

With great humility, I pass my condolences to the family of Sheikh Kirya and to the entire nation for this tragic loss. I beg to submit.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for that report and I think you do not need to give us another one. We have heard the Inspector General of Police at Kibuli today stating that he has failed to get the perpetrators of this kind of death. If an Inspector General of Police, who is supposed to protect people and who is supposed to carry out immediate investigations, is saying in public that he has also failed, what do you expect Ugandans to do? He is just resigned. Lucky enough, I was following his speech and it has been captured in the news. What should we do in such an instance?

It is the Inspector General of Police who should come out and say, “I am still continuing” but he has affirmed to the gathering of Muslims and other mourners that he has failed. He literally said in Luganda, “Banange, nange muntwale nga omuntu, binemye.” 

You are naming a number of Muslims but you have not talked about Haji Dakituli from Mayuge and many others. I am also wondering how you arrested all these policemen at the police post and the guard who dropped him at home. I think you are not being fair to those people but as you are in your ministry and as you are the one in charge, do what you want but you are not fair to those people. This is because they were not aware and not informed. 

Moreover, what have you done to the boda bodas? You must have a decree against them and say, for example, that at exactly 9.00 pm there should be no more riding of boda bodas. Otherwise, these crimes will escalate day by day. 

The statement of the Inspector General is very pertinent and unfortunate and it is weakening Ugandans. He has had patrols along Entebbe Road waiting for hon. Amama Mbabazi since Wednesday; so help us on that. That is the clarification I am seeking.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what has happened is sad and I think it would be proper for us to rise and give it the due recognition.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 5.49 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 2 July 2015 at 2.00 p.m.) 

