
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 5 July 2022

Parliament met at 1.59 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I sincerely want to welcome you back from recess; and, I want to congratulate you upon the completion of the First Session of the 11th Parliament. Congratulations! You did an excellent job! (Applause)

As you may recall, on 14 June 2022, after the presentation of the Budget Speech, I adjourned the House to 5th July, which is today. This was specifically to engage you in your constituency work. Remember, we have to serve our people down there; and this was basically on the Parish Development Model (PDM). I hope you had very good engagements on PDM and fruitful ones. I have been following the media coverage on the activities that were taking place. I was impressed that my Members are doing a good job. I want to commend you for that. (Applause) The efficiency and effectiveness of that programme is going to depend on you. It will make your people change from the level where they are to a better level. So, put a lot of effort into that programme. 

As you are aware, as legislators, we are the voice of the voiceless. We are the only ones who can speak for so many thousands of people out there. We must be able to do our oversight role and ensure we come to this House and speak for them. I implore you to embrace consultative leadership, so that you may build a greater relationship, not only with your constituents, , also with colleagues. I have seen colleagues trying their best, to fundraise, and to do community activities. It is a good effort; continue doing that. As they say, “My net worth is equal to my network”. So, once you have a big network of colleagues, they will be able to help you come back to the House. It is not an easy thing to come back, but when you are here, it is the best thing to do -

Honourable members, today is the Third Sitting of the Second Session of the 11th Parliament of Uganda. As I said in the last sitting of the First Session, on 20 May 2022, we should strive to achieve even better than what we achieved in the previous Parliament. And, if we are to attain this, we have to be cognisant of the following pre-conditions:

    1. Adequate preparation for committee and plenary business;

    2. Dedication and commitment to all parliamentary activities in communities and in the House;

    3. Actual participation in committees and in the House. Some of you end in the committee and do not come to the House; you forget that we have a rule that if you miss 15 times, we can take you out of the House. So, you need to participate. 

I do not believe in the analysis that was done on the performance of Members of Parliament; it is not only about speaking in the House. Members of Parliament have four roles, and I do not even know where they got that information from. My Members of Parliament are working. I do not want to say they did not work simply because they did not speak. One may be speaking, but speaking nothing. Actual participation is at the committee level and in the House; that is what you were elected for. Come and participate in the House and in the committee. Do your oversight role; appropriation - I was surprised that during appropriation, we had a few people, yet that is your core role as Members of Parliament. You should know that it is going to your constituency, so, you should follow it up.

    4. Effective evaluation of evidence in committees and the House: Let us have evidence-based debates in the House. Let us not just come in and say, “In Nakaseke this and this is happening”. What analysis have you done? Do you have empirical evidence to that effect? We should have both quantitative and qualitative research done. Let us be legislators;

    5. Continuous engagement and responsiveness to the will of the populace: We have been having Members in the public demonstrating that kind of thing. We have to be involved;

    6. Ethical conduct and behaviour: When you are out there, you are honourable, whether in the morning or in the evening, whatever the time, you are honourable. You must maintain that conduct. 

In the same vein, I urge the Executive - in the last meeting we held with the President, we agreed that at any one time of a sitting, we should have at least 30 per cent of the Executive in the House. I do not know whether we still respect the decision. 

In the same vein, I urge the Executive to be responsive to the demands and requirements of the legislature. 

With regard to the input and the legislative process that has been laid today, we need a treasury memorandum; when the House agrees that we need feedback from the Executive, you should be able to present to the House when it is required, other than going to Cabinet and lamenting. Give us the treasury memorandum. Do not start lamenting that the House is bad or useless. We are here constitutionally as Members of Parliament, and we will do what we are supposed to do. If you choose to blackmail us in Cabinet, it is none of our business. We shall do what we are supposed to do. We shall ask you questions, and you will have to answer. We will ask you for the treasury memoranda on the actions you take, and you must take actions, within the law. If you think you will do something contrary, forget it. This is the legislature, and one of our roles is oversight. 

During the State-of-the-Nation Address, on 7th June, His Excellency outlined the Government legislative agenda and gave us 62 Bills to be introduced in the House. 

As Legislature, we are prepared and waiting for the Bills. In the first session of this term we want to process all the Bills. In the same vein, Members, it is also your constitutional right to bring Private Members’ Bills.

Honourable members, the Business Committee sat this morning and approved the Government Legislative Agenda, which we are going to follow. We will be waiting to hear from Government what they have. The legislative agenda is going to be circulated to all of you; the Clerk will do that. 

Over the last few days, there has been concern on the plight of teachers and learners in public institutions. This follows industrial action by teachers. Such industrial actions have become regular in our education sector. Therefore, I urge Government to carefully study the grievances of the teachers and devise a sustainable solution with realistic, immediate, medium-term and long-term interventions so that we can be able to resolve these issues. We should not be doing things in an ad hoc manner. 

I will require the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to present to the House a comprehensive statement on this matter; what we are dealing with and the intervention that Government is planning on this matter.

In the meantime - we know what it means. As the Legislature, we urge the teachers to return to classes and teach, as the Government devises a sustainable remedy to their grievances.

We will stand with the teachers to ensure we support them, but mindful of the conditions in the country. We request the teachers to go back and do their noble duty, as we see how support the young ones outside there. It is not an easy thing, but I believe Government is looking into it.

As Parliament, we will always hold Government accountable for their undertakings and the resolutions they come up with. If Government comes up and says they are going to do this, Parliament will come in and support the teachers in their plight.

Honourbale members, I wish you a productive and impactful Second Session of the 11th Parliament. Once again, I would like to welcome you. We started the First Session while walking; we must start this one while running. (Applause) 

We should be able to double our efforts to expeditiously handle the 62 Bills that we have been given, such that by the fourth year, we do not have much work and then we can go back and campaign. Thank you very much –(Ms Cecilia Ogwal rose_) Instead of first clapping for what the Speaker has said, you are just -(Laughter)
 
Hon. Cecilia, are you reacting to the Communication from the Chair? Okay. Can we start with Hon. Cecilia and then Hon. Solomon?

2.14
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We also welcome you back to this session, and appreciate the excellent job you have been doing for us outside there. 

On the issue of industrial action by the teachers, much as we appreciate the role that Government is playing, you will realise that as elected Members of Parliament, we had a very uncomfortable recess because of the situation on the ground. 

Madam Speaker, it is not about the arts teachers’ strike; it is about equality. And, that is one issue we need to address, in compliance with the law we have; the law on equal opportunity. We need to address it, also, in terms of equity. 

Whereas we have teachers teaching our children, we must come out with a clear definition of why we should have two schedules of salary payment, when paying teachers. So, it is very important that we start with a definition.

Madam Speaker, although you have given an assignment to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I think it is going to be difficult for the Prime Minister to start running around to find the best formula. First of all, we have to identify the factors which caused that change in the manner in which we pay teachers. We need to come up with that.

I am concerned about a situation, where a head teacher is an arts teacher, and we have some science teachers in that school. You will find a situation where a science teacher is getting double the salary of the head teacher. This creates disparity in the schools. So, we need to define it and guide the Office of the Prime Minister so that we deal with this matter once and for all. If we leave it to Government, it will eventually bounce back to us. 

I am requesting you, Madam Speaker, to maybe guide the House further. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, anything related to the industrial action will be discussed when they bring a comprehensive report. Let us not pre-empt it. We want to understand this inequality. Otherwise, not all of us are scientists, yet we are here. 

Let us wait for the report from the minister. Then, we will debate and we come up with the solutions and actions to be taken. We all feel for the teachers and we must take action on this. 

2.18
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to react to your communication, regarding the quality of debate in this House.  It is very important and paramount that we debate with information and facts. 

I would like to inform you that as a backbench Parliamentary Commissioner, we have clustered research assistants and senior research officers, where every Member of Parliament is entitled to go and pick information. 

Honourable members, in case you want to do research in a specific field, you do not need to go and do research privately. We have research assistants, and by the end of today, I am going to work with the Clerk so that we pin up the list and cluster different Members under different research assistants. That way, we can easily go and get information, work with the researchers, as we continue to increase the quality of debate in this House.

As you have ruled, Madam Speaker, in this session, we are going to run, and not walk. That was the information I wanted to add.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Commissioner, for that innovation.

2.19
MR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent, Kole County North, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to react to your communication, regarding the Parish Development Model. Whereas we have been on the ground to provide oversight and sensitisation, we have noticed some gaps, which I will request urgent intervention.

One of the areas is on the enterprise selection. It is true we have been given a guiding document, which is known as the “Agricultural Zoning Strategy” which talks about the profitability of the enterprises. However, when you look at this document, for example, dairy, it is talking of an investment of Shs 126 million. While for the beef industry, its an investment of Shs 56 million. Fish farming is slightly over Shs 20 million, yet the maximum amount to lend to a household is Shs 1 million.

So, my prayer is that the Ministry of Local Government reviews this document and aligns it with the amount of money that we are going to give out to these households. This will enable them to benefit from it. Otherwise, what is being given to us to guide them does not match what we expect out of them. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I want you to put in writing all your findings from the PDM. We will compile and give them to the secretariat or the persons responsible, to look at them and see how they can align them together before the money is disbursed. The good thing is that the money has not been disbursed; let us first see the loopholes that are available. Yes, Hon. Ssemujju? Leader of the Opposition, you will come in thereafter.

2.21
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much, but also to specifically thank you for keeping time. (Applause) There was a time when we were made to wait for two hours. (Laughter) Some of us whose training emphasised time keeping would sometimes give in and leave. I do not want to take that for granted. I want to thank you for not only encouraging MPs, but also, for being exemplary. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, you have urged the teachers to return to work. Even if I do not agree with it, I now fear to contradict you. If you had not said that, I would be urging Government to give teachers the same pay; but as you have guided, we will be waiting for the report.

I have two specific issues, Madam Speaker: The first, you have said we need to be running not walking and I am ready to begin the running. During the recess, many things happened. For those of us who feed off and keep reading the media, I was troubled by a report that one of the ministers, Gen. Severino Kahinda Otafiire, had blasted the Prime Minister and nearly slapped her –(Laughter)– yet under the Constitution, the Prime Minister is supposed to be coordinating these ministers – and I am speaking this with experience.

When we had Hon. Kintu Musoke as a Prime Minister, ministers were not attending – I was here as a journalist. The attendance improved when we had the late Prof. Apollo Nsibambi. If you have ministers quarrelling and one of them threatening to slap the Prime Minister during a Cabinet meeting, can we be told that these ministers and their supervisors are talking? I am saying this because as I said, I saw here, under Prime Minister Kintu Musoke, ministers not attending because of communication. 

But if we have communication and attendance improving, yet you have one of the ministers dismissing the supervisor as being “mechanical and unconventional” can Government assure us that maybe the media report was false; that the Prime Minister is not mechanical and not –otherwise, we are going to have a problem, Madam Speaker?

The second issue - we also read that the military had been put on standby Class One. In other countries, that announcement is made when there is an impending invasion. Did the military want to take over President Museveni’s Government? Do we have a country that threatened Uganda and so, that is why the military was put on standby Class One? 

Madam Speaker, as you ask the Prime Minister to come and explain about the teachers’ fate, can we be told if we need to begin preparing our luggage, because there is war that is about to happen in Uganda? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in my communication, I said whatever we say should have evidence; it should be evidence-based. Let us not legislate on hearsay. (Applause) Newspapers, the press will write anything; they love writing the negative part of it. As for me, I have not heard about it. I am not aware of it. If it is on social media there, it is for them to do their social media work.

As for me, I am not aware whether there was that instruction. If there was a fight, it could have been a friendly fight in the house. A man and woman may fight in their house. I do not think you have never quarreled with Hajjati. So, if there is any problem, that can be resolved in the house. (Members rose_) Is this all on Communication from the Chair? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, today, we only have one item. You are communicating when we do not have committees.

2.26
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, let me join colleagues to thank you for urging teachers to get back to the classrooms. I also thank you for directing the Leader of Government Business to come here with a report. However, Madam Speaker, this is a matter of urgency because the selective salary enhancement for the science teachers was discriminatory in nature and has opened a Pandora’s box. 

Actually, Government is even on notice by the Uganda Local Government Association (ULGA). That is a local governments’ association or a union for local government staff, but we are likely to have many more, including health workers.

So, it would be prudent, Madam Speaker, to include a timeframe in that directive. But also, this House should prevail over the powers that be, in the event that we do not have a salaries and remunerations review commission that can harmonise wages for public sector workers; we should avoid such scenarios that infringe on the rights, as per the Bill of Rights in our Constitution. I am saying this because equal pay for equal work done is a provision enshrined in our Constitution.
 
However, this is happening and we are giving selective attention to a category of workers who have been working in harmony. Even when an allowance of 30 per cent in itself had not caused any rifts - this was way back in 2012 – I wish we could have stuck on a special allowance increment, which would also have pension fund obligations in future.

So, Madam Speaker, my take is that the report should be comprehensive. It should seek to introduce a Bill in this House on the pension fund. It is not there for public sector workers, by the way. It would be our considered view, as the Opposition, to also push for a special allowance rather than ad hoc,  selective,  salary increments, which would even burden that pension fund. 

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We shall be waiting for your Bill at an appropriate time. Honourable members, in the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from the National Assembly of Zambia, under the Zambian Parliamentary Reforms and Modernisation Committee.

We have:

    1. Hon. Moses Moyo, the Second Deputy Speaker;
    2. Hon. Princess Kasune, the Deputy Government Chief Whip;
    3. Hon. Mulambo Haimbe, the Minister for Justice;
    4. Hon. Joel Chibuye;
    5. Hon. Saiti Michelo;
    6. Hon. Mutotwe;
    7. Hon. Elias Musonda;
    8. Hon. Marjorie Nakaponda;
    9. Mr Kasanga;
    10. Mr Katesi;
    11. Mr Chirwa;
    12. Mr Lombe Musonda. 

You are all welcome. (Applause)

They are here to benchmark on the budgeting process of our Parliament and see if they can borrow a leaf from us. Join me to welcome all of them. You are most welcome. (Applause) This is the Parliament of Uganda – the most friendly Parliament in Africa. 

2.32
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank God for keeping all of us healthy and alive during the recess period. You did mention the performance of this Parliament in the last session and you talked about Bills. 

However, I would like to raise the matter that other than the Bills, Members bring petitions, raise matters of national importance and ask questions for oral answers. Reports from committees are also presented on the Floor of this House. 

Madam Speaker, you do give directives to ministers to come – maybe, like the very last report we considered for the physical infrastructure committee, you did direct the Minister for Lands, Housing and Urban Development to come and explain to this House or give a report on what action had been taken regarding the issue of the certificate of title which is in dfcu Bank. 

Madam Speaker, some of these directives given by you can, sometimes, be lost if they are not followed up. Since you said we must run, it is important that these pending matters are brought so that the ministers can come and respond to them. 

I did present a petition in this House and you gave the Minister for Health two weeks. It was a petition regarding maternal mortality – the high number of mothers dying in our health facilities. We ended the session, but I am glad the minister is here. 

Yesterday – if some of you watched that report from Kitagwenda District, where the health workers were simply saying: “You can die as many as you can. For as long as Government does not construct houses for us, there will be no doctor to attend to you. We shall come and attend to the mothers as and when we can.” Mothers are dying in this health facility. 

Madam Speaker, it is a shame. All these are preventable deaths. This Parliament, honourable minister, would like to help you. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, the matter that I am raising is that as we run with the Bills, can we also run and handle the petitions expeditiously? I brought up the issue of school fees. I am glad the President has talked and even said that we could consider having completely free education. The Education (Pre-Primary, Primary and Post-Primary) Act provides that we can have an education fee so that people can contribute and our children are able to study for free without any encumbrances or challenges. 

Madam Speaker, this petition is before the committee – and other petitions that I brought. We had the issue of the car tracker – the Russian company that was supposed to put these car trackers in our vehicles. These petitions are before the committees. Can these petitions be handled expeditiously?

Madam Speaker, I beg that you use your authority to direct now that we are going to have the committees reconstituted. Can we prioritise the previous session’s work that has not been concluded before we start on new work? 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. Because of the urgency of the motions, petitions and the Bills that are in committees, we have suggested that we are not going to make any major changes at committee level until they finish. (Applause) We will invoke the rule on one year and make sure that you work for two years in that committee so that you get the feel of a committee – not for a Member to move  from one committee to the other each year. 

Clerk, we want you to extract all the pending work – the motions and all the petitions – and we have them discussed in the House. Have them on the Order Paper and we discuss and dispose of them.

Members, can we have a very important thing that you need today – you need committees. (Applause) Regarding matters of national importance – kindly, you will come tomorrow after you have known where your matter is headed. The issue that you are raising, you will bring it tomorrow. We have a whole session – one year. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

    I) THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you may recall, this matter of organ transplant and donation has been a topical issue in the country for a while. More recently, we had debates about this issue of organ harvesting. We need a legal document to that effect for it to be effective and to avoid other implications. Having a legal regime will help this country. This was brought in the House and now it is coming for the first reading. Honourable minister?

2.38
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Ruth Aceng): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to add my voice to welcome you and all the Members back from the recess. 

I beg to lay the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Human Organ Donation and Transplant Bill, 2021”, accompanied with its Certificate of Financial Implications, for the first reading. 

I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. The Bill, is accordingly referred to the Committee on Health pursuant to rule 129 and the 45 days prescribed under rule 129(2). However, if we can have it even in 10 days, that will be better.

    II) THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on 11 November 2021, the House granted leave to Hon. Karubanga Jacob Ateenyi, MP Kibanda South County, to introduce the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2022. The Member duly obtained the Certificate of Financial Implications pursuant to Section 79 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. I now invite the Member to table his Bill for the first reading.

2.40
Mr Jacob Karubanga (NRM, Kibanda South County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

Mr ssemujju: Madam Speaker, a number of colleagues have presented Bills for constitution amendment, including the one of Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba that we processed and was about to go for committee stage –

THE SPEAKER: Let him first lay then you come with your point of procedure.

Mr karubanga: Madam Speaker, I move that the Bill entitled, “The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2022” be read the first time. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Certificate of Financial Implication?

Mr Karubanga: Madam Speaker, accompanied with the Bill is the Certificate of Financial Implications. I beg to lay it too.

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister for Constitutional Affairs here? Honourable members, I notice that the object of the Bill is to amend the Third Schedule of the Constitution to include five additional ethnic groups as part of Uganda’s indigenous communities.

Whereas we are duty-bound, as Parliament, to ensure equal access to opportunities and resources for people who might otherwise be excluded or marginalised, such as the ethnic communities that the Bill seeks to include in the Constitution; it is imperative that this is done comprehensively to avoid piecemeal amendments of the Constitution. This will require Government to conduct a robust appraisal of indigenous communities that for one reason or the other have not been listed in the Constitution, and comes up with a holistic Bill for the inclusion of all of them. 

I will remind you that the issue of the inclusion of the Maragoli began in the last Parliament with Hon. Odur Jack, seeking leave to introduce the same Bill. The Bill we have before us today is introducing four additional communities. I know one of them is yours, honourable minister. This implies that if the 10th Parliament had proceeded with this Bill, then today we would be having the same kind of Bill, if we did not do it holistically.

Honourable members, whereas it has been argued that frequent amendment of the Constitution ensures adaptation and changes in realities, we ought to be alive to the changes, and to the fact that we should have a Constitutional Review Commission that should do this work. 

It is against this background, honourable minister, that we ask you to ensure that we have the commission in place to have a holistic amendment of the Constitution other than piecemeal amendments. This, therefore, makes me ask you to have that in place as soon as possible so that we have all these amendments. Hon. Ssemujju was about to talk about a constitutional amendment, but we cannot have it and then another later. 

Mr ssemujju: Madam Speaker, you had allowed me, if the minister responsible for Public Service can hold on –(Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: In that circumstance, therefore, I hereby stand over the introduction of the Bill until more conclusive and preferable amendments are brought to the House.

Mr ssemujju: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have addressed many of my concerns. In the budget that we processed, Government wanted funding for the Constitutional Review Commission. The background I was giving is that many Members have presented Bills to amend the Constitution, but in the past, only the one removing the age-limits by Hon. Magyezi was processed urgently.

The former Minister for Constitutional Affairs – now Minister for Public Service – even named eminent Ugandans including Hon. Dan Wandera Ogalo to go and serve on the committee. Can the minister tell us what happened? 

We had brought here amendments and we were told there was no time, but we would have dealt with them in the previous Parliament. All the subsequent Bills that have been tabled here - by Hon. Nsamba and Hon. Lyomoki - are all not processed. Can Government tell us why they reversed that decision? Even when they have included it in the budget for this year, it is not one of the issues that are going to be considered.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when do we expect the commission to be in place?

2.48
The ACTINg minister for justice and constitutional affairs (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Madam Speaker, the process of establishing the Constitutional Review Commission has actually started. The proposal has been forwarded to Cabinet. It is awaiting Cabinet discussion. I can say that in due course, this commission will be established and it will take care of these amendments, which are being proposed by the honourable members and also the public. 

Also, the urgency of this commission is felt by Cabinet that it should be given ample time to interact with all the interested parties and the stakeholders so that all the amendments that merit being covered, are captured and presented. I would like to say that, yes, the process has started and –(Interruption) 

MR SILWANY: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Madam Speaker, whenever the issue on the Constitutional Review Commission comes up - I remember candidly well, the former minister for Constitutional Affairs stated the same thing to this House. He said the process had started and that they are waiting for Cabinet to have a discussion. Could the minister give us more evidence that this has actually started? Otherwise, this has been the same statement year in, year out. 

Whenever Members raise an issue on the Constitutional Review Commission, a minister comes and says the process has started. Does this process start and die, then start and collapse? Where are we exactly? Today, we need a clear answer that is nearer to fact so that we go knowing that maybe in one year or two years or 20 years, we are going to have the Constitutional Review Commission. Thank you. That is the clarification I seek.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, your response is so ambiguous that we cannot even understand what you are saying. We need to understand the number of months. Even if you do not achieve it in that timeframe, you can come back to the House and tell us the position. Otherwise, we need that commission.

MR GAFABUSA: Additionally, Madam Speaker, when the previous Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs was presenting on the Floor, he went ahead to tell us that the proposals – 

THE SPEAKER: …were being vetted by the security. 

MR GAFABUSA: The proposals for the names to be included on the commission had already been presented to the President. Now you are telling us the matter is waiting for a Cabinet discussion; that is taking us backwards. What happened to the names that had been proposed and presented to the President for consideration?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what happened to the names that were proposed and presented to the President? If you do not have a response to that effect, can you come back on Tuesday and report to this House? Since you have a Cabinet meeting on Monday, you should be able to raise it and report to the House on the - we are helping you to do your work.

MR MURULI-MUKASA: I am much obliged, Madam Speaker. However, I seek your indulgence to make one correction. I am the acting Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs and I started acting quite recently. I was not the Minister for – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister – 

MR MURULI-MUKASA: I am just correcting what –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that is why I have given you one week because I know you are acting. 

MR MURULI-MUKASA: That is right. 

THE SPEAKER: I know you were not the minister then.

MR MURULI-MUKASA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I will be here on Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, meanwhile, we had elections in the Pan African Parliament, where we were able to get a number of positions as Uganda. Is Hon. Caroline Kamusiime here? I will be waiting for a report to be presented here on the positions we got from the Pan African Parliament. Let the commission come and report on Tuesday. 

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the rest of my colleagues to welcome you back. The feedback I have from Kasese is that you have their prayers and they enjoy the way you look at Uganda as a family.

Madam Speaker, I am rising on a procedural matter. About two months ago, you gave instructions to Government and directed them to ensure that our fellow citizens that are incarcerated in prisons and need urgent medical attention do so without further delay. In your Chair, you directed Government. We, as a House, and fellow citizens, were excited. 

However, the Government that you directed never paid attention at all. You are aware my fellow citizens that, so far, as Kasese Community, we have lost 10 people in prison just because when they needed medical attention, they never got that attention. 

Madam Speaker, prisons are not hospitals – prisons are prisons. As I speak, we have a body stuck with Government. We thought, as Members of Parliament, enough is enough. Where do we take this body? The Speaker directed Government to ensure that those that are in prison get the medical attention that they need, but Government as usual decided not to pay attention at all. 

The procedural issue I am raising – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. John, he rose on a procedural issue; so, you do not raise a procedural issue on procedure. 

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your illustrious leadership -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. John, I invested a lot of money on training Members here in the last two weeks, and I thought those are some of the small things we should have gotten to know. 

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, my procedural issue is just crystal clear. Is it procedurally correct for Government to continue disregarding your instructions when in actual sense, constitutionally, your word here becomes the last word. 

The people from Kasese are asking: How many dead bodies is Government waiting for, in order that those that are still in prisons get the medical attention they need? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I have already instructed the Clerk to extract all the pending issues that were in the last session. Is the Attorney-General here? We will want the Attorney-General to give us feedback. Please give us a comprehensive statement on the persons who are in prisons, what actions have been taken, and the way forward. 

Therefore, we will need a paper to that effect. All pending issues must be disposed of in these first two weeks. Hon. John Musila, you have something. What was your matter, raster?

MR MUSILA: Madam Speaker, thank you for this chance. Certainly, I did not have time to thank you directly for guiding us throughout the last session. I know so many jabs came at you; we had many bad things to speak about you. 

Anyhow, I rise according to rule 4 of our Rules of Procedure which talks about us debating in English. I know the accents of this country; the western spooner and the stammer, the northern haskayne language, that of the east, which is laissez-faire and the central counter. 

Now, our colleague – the accent – Madam Speaker, I am very sure that at times, you also simply estimate the theme. (Laughter) This is not the accent for Uganda. He has been doing this in the last session. Now, if we begin - especially now that you guided us that we should run and you are at the forefront of that running, we do not want to estimate what somebody is saying. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that was a commercial break. (Laughter) Hon. Atkins was speaking English. It is just because you studied in those schools in Manafwa District –(Laughter)– but he was speaking English. Next item.

LAYING OF PAPERS

    A) PETROLEUM FUND SEMI-ANNUAL REPORT ON INFLOWS, OUTFLOWS 
AND ASSETS FOR THE PERIOD ENDED 31ST DECEMBER 2021

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Petroleum Fund Semi-Annual Report on Inflows, Outflows and the assets of the fund for the period ended 31 December 2021. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The report is referred to the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources. Finance, please lay.

B) REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON VALUE-FOR-MONEY AUDIT AND ASSESSMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS IMPLEMENTED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENTS UNDER THE UGANDA INTER-GOVERNMENTAL FISCAL TRANSFERS PROGRAMME (UGIFT) IN THE EDUCATION AND HEALTH SECTORS FOR OCTOBER 2021 FOR THE FOLLOWING DISTRICTS:

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Silwany?

3.02
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, because of the bulky nature of the documents, I request that I lay the first page and ask my colleague to lay the rest because they are really many. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the value-for-money audit and assessment of infrastructure projects implemented by local governments under the Uganda Inter-governmental Fiscal Transfers (UGIFT) Programme in the education and health sectors for October 2021 for the following districts:

    1. Kapchorwa District Local Government;  
    2. Kamuli District Local Government;
    3. Lyantonde District Local Government;
    4. Agago District Local Government; and
    5. Kakumiro District Local Government.

Madam Speaker, I am being guided by one of my senior brothers that we lay one by one. I seek your indulgence.

THE SPEAKER: Can you read the document?

MR SILWANY: Okay.

    1. Kiruhura District Local Government;
    2. Apac District Local Government;
    3. Bukedea District Local Government;
    4. Bugiri Municipal Council;
    5. Buhweju District Local Government;
    6. Alebtong District Local Government;
    7. Bushenyi District Local Government;
    8. Butambala District Local Government;
    9. Serere District Local Government;
    10. Sheema Municipal Council Local Government;
    11. Sheema District Local Government;
    12. Kiboga District Local Government;
    13. Kibuuku District Local Government;
    14. Kapchorwa Municipal Council;
    15. Bugiri District Local Government;
    16. Amolatar District Local Government;
    17. Budaka District Local Government;
    18. Dokolo District Local Government;
    19. Mbarara Municipal Council;
    20. Masaka District Local Government;
    21. Kalungu District Local Government;
    22. Mbarara District Local Government; and
    23. Mitooma District Local Government.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR SILWANY: May I invite the honourable commissioner to come and support me to lay the rest? 

3.05
MS ESTHER AFOYOCHAN (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the value-for-money audit and assessment of infrastructure projects implemented by local governments under the Uganda Inter-governmental Fiscal Transfers (UGIFT) Programme in the education and health sectors for October 2021 for the following entities:

    1. Luweero District Local Government;
    2. Butebo District Local Government;
    3. Ibanda District Local Government;
    4. Namayingo District Local Government;
    5. Masindi District Local Government;
    6. Gomba District Local Government;
    7. Pader District Local Government;
    8. Sironko District Local Government;
    9. Mityana District Local Government;
    10. Otuke District Local Government;
    11. Kabarole District Local Government;
    12. Kagadi District Local Government;
    13. Masaka Municipal Council;
    14. Sembabule District Local Government;  
    15. Kabale District Local Government;
    16. Kyankwanzi District Local Government;
    17. Kole District Local Government;
    18. Mubende Municipal Council; 
    19. Mubende District Local Government;
    20. Kamwenge District Local Government; 
    21. Bulambuli District Local Government; 
    22. Bunyangabo District Local Government;
    23. Luuka District Local Government;
    24. Pallisa District Local Government;
    25. Bugweri District Local Government;
    26. Nakaseke District Local Government;
    27. Omoro District Local Government; 
    28. Kyegegwa District Local Government;
    29. Kamuli Municipal Council;
    30. Katakwi District Local Government; and
    31. Kassanda District Local Government.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Commissioner. The reports are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) under rule 182 (4) and you should process these reports as fast as possible. Remember we have an expiry of the reports within six months and then they are automatically adopted, especially for the accountability committees. We want these reports processed and presented to the House. Do not sit on the reports. If you cannot do it as one committee, divide your committee into four and move on the ground. I am not going to allow this explanation that there was no funding. Now the committees are going to have funding. (Applause) What we want is work from the committees. Next item.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO SECTORAL COMMITTEES 
IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 187(1) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE SPEAKER: When we started the first session, Members were designated to committees. We have sectoral and standing committees. Under rule 187 of the Rules of Procedure, the sectoral committee members serve for one year. The persons responsible for the assignment of this are the whips, as per our Rules of Procedure and the Administration of Parliament Act. 

However, I am cognisant of the rule that one party, as of now, does not have a whip. I want to make my ruling to that effect before we receive the names. Rule 187(1) of the Rules of Procedure states that, “There shall be sectoral committees of the House, whose members shall be designated by whips on the basis of party or organisation representation and interests of Independent Members in the House at the beginning of every session of Parliament.” 

Section 6H (1) of the Administration of Parliament Act and rule 15(1) of the Rules of Procedure provide for the Government Chief Whip appointed by Government from among Members of Parliament representing the ruling party.

Section 6H(2) is clear that the role and function of the Government Chief Whip is to ensure due attendance, participation in the proceedings and voting in Parliament of Members of the ruling party. The same is replicated in rule 15(2) of the Rules of Procedure. 

Section 6H(3) goes further to state that the Government Chief Whip shall also perform the functions as may be prescribed by the Rules of Procedure. The prescription of these other functions is done under rule 15(10) to include supplying lists of Members to serve on the standing committees and sectoral committees.

The above notwithstanding, Article 108A(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides for the appointment of the Prime Minister. Under Article 108A(2)(a), the Prime Minister is designated as the Leader of Government Business in Parliament, responsible for coordination and implementation of Government policies across the ministries, departments and public institutions. 

It is, therefore, clear that the Prime Minister leads and spearheads Government business in the House. The Cabinet and other ministers – the Government Chief Whip included – only lend a helping hand and are, indeed, under the charge of the Prime Minister in her capacity as Leader of Government Business.

While I am aware of the provision of Section 6H of The Administration of Parliament Act and rule 15 of Rules of Procedure, I am also bound by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which is the supreme law of the land, as per Article 2. The Constitution is clear on who spearheads Government business in the House. The Constitution has binding force on all authorities and persons throughout Uganda. 

Indeed, if any law – our Rules of Procedure included – or any custom is inconsistent with any of the provisions of the Constitution, the Constitution shall always prevail and that other law or custom shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be void.

It is, therefore, my ruling that in the absence of the Government Chief Whip, who as illustrated above helps the Prime Minister in coordinating Government business in Parliament, the supply of the list of Members to serve on the committees can legally be done – and I am saying “can legally be done” – by the Prime Minister in her capacity as the Leader of Government Business. We should not stifle the operation of this House because there is one person missing. 

I, therefore, ask the Prime Minister to give us the list – [MEMBER: “Procedure.”]- Procedure on my ruling?

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You see, the rules are very protective of the Speaker. Even when you disagree, the processing of that disagreement is very difficult. 

The procedural issue I am raising is, now that you have said that the Prime Minister can become the Government Chief Whip to supply the lists – I am asking you to help me and also give a ruling on Section 6H of the Administration of Parliament Act, which says, “there shall be – the word “shall” – in Parliament the Government Chief Whip…” The rest you have said, Madam Speaker. “Shall” is a command. 

Madam Speaker, I respect your ruling, but my fear is that it is going to be abused. For more than a year, this country has no Governor of the Central Bank, yet the President and his wife are on honeymoon in Ntungamo. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I fear that if you create room – when the Speaker of this Parliament died, we were told that in the first sitting, we must choose a Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, I do not think you should talk about people honeymooning. Leave people to enjoy their lives. If you want to go for honeymoon, kindly go for a honeymoon with your wife. I do not see how the name of the President can come in here. 

I have made a ruling and you know how to challenge the Speaker’s ruling. For now, if you want a ruling on section 6H, I will deliver it at an ample time.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, certainly I cannot challenge your ruling. I want to thank you because you have made a pledge that you will. 

THE SPEAKER: I am actually offering you a honeymoon with Hajjat; tell me when you are ready. (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I said this in good faith. At the beginning of this session, you said we are supposed to attend Parliament and there are a number of times when we are not here. You actually said that a Member of Parliament can be thrown out. 

I am not attacking anyone's honeymoon; I am only surprised that people who have no time to appoint the Governor of the Central Bank or to deal with the crisis of inflation have time to go on honeymoon. 

Once you have done your work - certainly I want to thank you for giving me an offer when we have attended a number of times and I am supposed to attend as an MP. I will come to you for that offer, but someone has a duty. 

So, I am only asking you to remind this person that has a duty under the Constitution to do it. After that, they can even go to Rome or Kigali.

THE SPEAKER: No problem, I will make the humble reminder, but the Bank of Uganda Act is not entrenched. It says that in the absence of the Governor, the Deputy Governor will always act. It is not like Parliament where you need to have an election first. However, it does not cause any harm for us to have the Governor.

I am aware that we have a Governor in place and the banking sector is operating. Honourable members, having these committees designated is a very important thing. As we are all aware, the committees are the engines of processing all the legislative business. 

We need to have this done as soon as now. I, therefore, call upon the whips and the Prime Minister to designate the Members. The Office of the Clerk will have the report compiled for the chairpersons to know their Members. We have NRM, NUP, DP, UPC, PPP, UPDF and the Independents. 

In the end, every committee membership list will be given out to all the members and you will know your members. As I had made a statement earlier, we are not going to make fundamental changes because we want Members to have the grasp of a committee before they move to another committee, rather than running around committees every year. At the end of the day, you do not know what you have done in that period. 

3.22
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Opposition Chief Whip): Madam Speaker, I am not challenging your ruling and I am not one that would attempt to do that. However, I am constrained to hold my peace on Article 108 (A), which expounds on the appointment of the Prime Minister who doubles as the Leader of Government Business. 

The appointment of the Chief Whip, as per rule 15 as you vividly put it, is by Government and the word here is “shall”. “There shall be -”

THE SPEAKER: What is the difference between what you are asking and what Hajji said? 

MR NAMBESHE: I am about to conclude. So, this “shall” would mean that if the Leader of Government Business is going to perform the role of the Whip, who is supposed to be appointed by Government - we should avoid future litigation - it would mean that, that person or office has constituted itself into Government. I am only doing this in good faith to avoid future litigation. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, when we adopted the multi-party system, it was agreed that the Office of the Prime Minister will deal with Executive matters; that it would coordinate them. However, in a multiparty dispensation, the Whips deal with political issues. 

Therefore, the office of the Government whip is to coordinate political issues of the ruling party and the same refers to other parties in Parliament. As such, matters to do with political parties and political choices to the committees will require the Whip. 

When it comes to the functionalisation of Government, coordinating with Parliament and so on, you now need the Office of the Prime Minister and many of us feel very comfortable dealing with the Prime Minister because she is executive and I can consult her at all times. 

However, when it comes to me accessing the office of the Whip of the NRM, you know that I have to maybe change my dressing and my mannerism. Many times when I need a favour from them, I try to put on yellow and they do not even recognise me.

As you can see, I am lobbying the National Unity Platform by putting on red, hoping that they will put me in the committee which I need to join. (Laughter)

So, I am seeking clarification. I have been observing and I know that definitely, the Whip must specifically handle issues to do with the political parties. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Members. I have heard your issues. I have heard your cries. I know what the law requires of us and we will have a Whip. We should not stagnate our work in the absence of a Whip. We are not going to wait for people to do what they are supposed to do. Let us move on. Can we have the designation done? Prime Minister, please remind the Executive that we need a Whip.

3.26
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take the opportunity to welcome you back from the recess and I thank those who joined us -

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. An opportunity has come that through your office, you can intervene so that in future, we do not experience the same scenario we are going through now. The NRM Party that I belong to has a deputy whip. 

In most circumstances, the vice-chairperson acts as the deputy whip and I believe it is the position we vote him in. Maybe in future, we shall clearly get informed of the role of the vice or deputy whip so that when such a scenario arises, we do not go back to what we have gone through.

THE SPEAKER: The issue of a deputy whip is an internal party arrangement. Can we have designation? 

MS NAKADAMA: Thank you. I was thanking the Members who joined ministers to go around the country to popularise the Parish Development Model programme. Welcome back. 

Madam Speaker, I start with the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. On this committee, the Government side has designated the following Members:

    1. Hon. Okori-Moe Janet	-	Chairperson 
    2. Hon. Dr Agnes Atim	-	Vice-Chairperson
    3. Hon. Aber Lillian
    4. Hon. Akello Christine
    5. Hon. Driwaru Jennifer 
    6. Hon. Lokii John Baptist
    7. Hon. Nyongore Enock
    8. Hon. Kamukama Davis
    9. Hon. Kabuura Derrick
    10. Hon. Komol Joseph
    11. Hon. Kesande Grace Bataringaya
    12. Hon. Wakabi Pius
    13. Hon. Magoola Rachel 
    14. Hon. Migadde Robert Ndugwa
    15. Hon. Muhumuza David
    16. Hon. Begumisa Mary
    17. Hon. Okumu Gabriel
    18. Hon. Okot John Amos
    19. Hon. Anywar Ricky Richard

Madam Speaker, I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. NUP?	

3.31
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. At the beginning of every session of Parliament, there shall be sectoral committees of the House, whose members shall be designated by whips – and I am the Chief Opposition Whip, Madam Speaker. By virtue of that office, in accordance with rule 187(1) of our Rules of Procedure, I have already supplied all the lists of Members that are to serve on the sectoral committees.

For your information, Madam Speaker, the changes are affecting only eight Members; those I have relocated and designated to new sectoral committees. So, I will seek your indulgence whether, in the interest of time, I should read the entire list, including those that have maintained the status quo or only the eight that have changed.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are reading the whole list; committee by committee. If NRM has not even changed one Member, they will be the ones to say, “We are maintaining the status quo”, but they are reading one by one. That is what designation is.

MR NAMBESHE: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. On my side, we have six parties and so I will commence with the People's Progressive Party (PPP). Under the PPP, on the sectoral committee, we have Hon. Okot Santa, on the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. I beg to designate.

Madam Speaker, on the Democratic Party, I beg to designate Hon. Okot Peter to the Sectoral Committee on Presidential Affairs –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: I thought we are on agriculture.

MR NAMBESHE: Let me deal with agriculture. On the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, for National Unity Platform, these are the Members.

    1. Hon. Bwanika Abed
    2. Hon. Mugabi Susan
    3. Hon. Kyebakutika Manjeri
    4. Hon. Matovu Charles
    5. Hon. Nanyondo Veronica

Uganda People’s Congress 

    1. Hon. Akora Maxwell

Forum for Democratic Change

    1. Hon. Apolot Stella Isodo
    2. Hon. Ekanya Geofrey

Democratic Party 

    1. Hon. Lukwago John Paul M.

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. UPDF and then the Independents. Is UPDF not here? We had Maj. Kavuma.

3.36
MAJ. DR JENNIFER ALANYO (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, with UPDF, we maintain the status quo.

THE SPEAKER: Pardon?

MAJ. DR ALANYO: The Members have remained and so we maintain the status quo.

THE SPEAKER: Where is the list? We want the names.

MAJ. DR ALANYO: The General is a bit committed. (Laughter) The Member on the Sectoral Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is Maj. Gen. Sam Kavuma.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Independents? Maj. Alanyo, designate. (Laughter)

MAJ. DR ALANYO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The UPDF member designated to the Sectoral Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is Hon. Maj. Gen. Sam Kavuma. I beg to designate. (Applause)
 
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, that is her maiden speech.

MR SSEMUJJU: Much obliged. Madam Speaker, our rules and the Administration of Parliament Act do not provide for the whip of UPDF. Therefore, under which rule is the Member designating soldiers here? 

THE SPEAKER: Independents.

3.38
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the record I am Zijjan David Livingstone, the Dean of Independents. To the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, I propose to designate the following Members:

    1. Hon. Moses Walyomu Muwanika of Kagoma County;
    2. Hon. Julius Tusiime Karuhanga of Rwampara East County;
    3. Hon. Martin Ojara Mapenduzi of Bardege-Layibi Division;
    4. Hon. Julius Mukasa Opondo of Bujjumba; and
    5. Hon. Baroda Kayanga of Kamuli Municipality. 

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that the Committee on Agriculture Animal Industries and Fisheries be constituted as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs

3.40
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, the Government side proposes to designate the following Members:

    1. Hon. Rose Mary Nyakikongoro, the Chairperson; and
    2. Hon. Milton Muwuma, the Deputy Chairperson.

Members include:

    1. Hon. Godfrey Wakholi;
    2. Hon. Jimbricky Noman Ochero;
    3. Hon. Alex Niyonsaba;
    4. Hon. Simon Peter Opolot;
    5. Hon. Patrick Aeku;
    6. Hon. Christine Nakwaga Tubo;
    7. Hon. Peter Okeyoh;
    8. Hon. Nuru Byamukama Joseph;
    9. Hon. Donozio Mugabe;
    10. Hon. Sauda Kawuma;
    11. Hon. Alex Brandon Kintu;
    12. Hon. Ibrahim Kyoto;
    13. Hon. Bashir Lubega;
    14. Hon. Peter Lokii Abrahams;
    15. Hon. Robert Mwesigwa Rukaari;
    16. Hon. John Bosco Ikojo; and
    17. Hon. Agnes Acibu.

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Have you read hon. Mwesigwa Robert Rukaari? Okay. Thank you. 

3.41
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE): Madam Speaker, on the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs, I propose to designate:

    1. Hon. Naboth Namanya of Rubabo County; and
    2. Hon. Moses Okot Junior Bitek of Kioga. These are all on FDC tickets.

On the UPC ticket, we have hon. Jonathan Odur and on the National Unity Platform, we have hon. Francis Katabazi of Kalungu East, hon. Abdullah Kiwanuka of Mukono County North and hon. Betty Bakileke Nambooze of Mukono Municipality.

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker,

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. The UPDF?

3.42
COL DR VICTOR NEKESA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, the Member designated is Lt Gen. Peter Elwelu. I beg to designate.
 
THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The Independents -

3.43
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Regarding the Independents to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, Madam Speaker, I propose to designate:

    1. Hon. William Museveni of Buwekula;
    2. Hon. Stephen Kangwagye Rwakanuma of Bukanga;
    3. Hon. Rauben Arinaitwe of Isingiro West; and 
    4. Hon. Margret Lamwaka of Chua East.

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I put the question that the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs be constituted as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on East African Community Affairs 

3.44
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on East African Community Affairs, the Government side proposes to designate hon. Noeline Kisembo as Chairperson and hon. Abdi Fadhil Kisos Chemaswet as the Vice-Chairperson.  

The members include:

    1. Hon. Lamwo Ismail Mohammed; 
    2. Hon. Apollo Masika;
    3. Hon. John Bosco Ngoya;
    4. Hon. Sarah Kayagi Netalisire; 
    5. Hon. Moses Ogwal Goli;
    6. Hon. Jallon Anthony Okullo Aabuka;
    7. Hon. Hellen Kahunde;
    8. Hon. John Kamara Nzeyimana;
    9. Hon. Anthony Esenu;
    10. Hon. James Baba Boliba;
    11. Hon. David Wakikona;
    12. Hon. Tom Alero Aza;
    13. Hon. Joel Leku;
    14. Hon. Luke Kyobe Nnesinko;
    15. Hon. Remigio Achia;
    16. Hon. Jancinta Atuto; and
    17. Hon. Michael Mawanda Maranga.

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Did I hear hon. Kibalya on your list? Okay. Yes, the Opposition.

3.46
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on East African Community Affairs, I have:

    1. Hon. Gilbert Olanya of Kilak South (FDC); and
    2. Hon. Tom Ekudo Julius of Kwani (FDC). 

On National Unity Platform we have:

    3. Hon. Aloysius Mukasa Talton of Lubaga South; and 
    4. Hon. Paul Nsubuga of Busiro North.

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Independents, please give us your members.

3.46
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. To the Committee on East African Community Affairs, I designate:

    1. Hon. Idah Nantaba Erios District Woman Representative Kayunga;
    2. Hon. John Musila of Bubulo East;
    3. Hon. Connie Nakayenze Galiwango,  Woman Representative for Mbale City; and 
    4. Hon. Agnes Ameede, Woman Representative for Butebo.

I beg to designate. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. UPDF, do you have any?

3.47
COL DR VICTOR NEKESA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the UPDF, we do not have a Member to designate to the Committee on East African Community Affairs. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I put a question that the Committee on East African Community Affairs be constituted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Education and Sports -

3.48
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  On the Committee on Education and Sports, the Government side has:

    1. Hon. John Twesigye Ntamuhiira – Chairperson
    2. Hon. Eng. Cuthbert Abigaba Mirembe – Vice-Chairperson
    3. Hon. Molly Asimwe Musiime – Member
    4. Hon. Dorothy Nyakato – Member
    5. Hon. Phiona Nyamutoro – Member
    6. Hon. Jane Awich – Member
    7. Hon. Josyline Kamateneti – Member
    8. Hon. James Kubeketerya – Member
    9. Hon. Phillips Lokwang Ilukol – Member
    10. Hon. Abdul Mutumba – Member
    11. Hon. Isaac Etuka – Member
    12. Hon. Sharifah Taban – Member
    13. Hon. Lillian Paparu Obiale – Member
    14. Hon. Annet Katusiime Mugisha – Member
    15. Hon. Joram Tibasiimwa Ruranga – Member
    16. Hon. Aggrey Henry Bagiire – Member
    17. Hon. Beatrice Akello – Member
    18. Hon. Catherine Akumu Mavenjina – Member
    19. Hon. Patrick Bingi Nyanzi – Member

Madam Speaker, I beg to designate.

3.49
The chief opposition whip (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): On the Committee on Education and Sports, we have:

    1. Hon. Emmanuel Ongiertho, Jonam County (FDC)
    2. Hon. Denis Oguzu Lee, Maracha County (FDC)
    3. Hon. Brenda Nabukenya, Luwero District (NUP)
    4. Hon. Joseph Ssewungu, Kalungu West (NUP)
    5. Hon. Patrick Nsamba Oshabe, Kassanda County North (NUP)
    6. Hon. Michael Kekembo, Entebbe Municipality (NUP)

I beg to designate.

The Speaker: Independents?

3.50
Mr david zijjan (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): On the Committee on Education and Sports, we have:

    1. Hon. Rev. Fr. Charles Onen, Laroo-Pece Division
    2. Hon. Geoffrey Macho, Busia Municipality
    3. Hon. Silas Aogon, Kumi Municipality
    4. Hon. Ronald Aled Akugizibwe, Buruli County
    5. Hon. Jonathan Ebwalu, Soroti West Division.

I beg to designate.

The Speaker: Thank you. UPDF?

3.51
COL DR Victor nekesa (UPDF Representative): For the Committee on Education and Sports designation, we have Hon. Maj. Dr Jennifer Alanyo. I beg to designate.

The Speaker: Thank you. I put the question that the Committee on Education and Sports be constituted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Speaker: The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

3.52
The third deputy prime minister and minister without portfolio (Ms Rukia Nakadama): On the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Government side designates:

    1. Dr Keefa Kiwanuka – Chairperson
    2. Hon. Jane Avur Pacuto – Vice-Chairperson
    3. Hon. Ignatius Womakuyu Mudimi – Member 
    4. Hon. Amos Kankunda Kibwika – Member
    5. Hon. Jackson Atima Lee Buti – Member
    6. Hon. Basil Bataringaya Rwankwene – Member
    7. Hon. Enos K. Asiimwe – Member
    8. Hon. Moses Aleper - Member
    9. Hon. Isaac Ssejjoba – Member
    10. Hon. Herbert Tayebwa Musasizi – Member
    11. Hon. John Lematia – Member
    12. Hon. Xavier Kyooma Akampurira – Member
    13. Hon. Faith Nakut Loru – Member
    14. Hon. Gerald Nangoli – Member
    15. Hon. Loy Katali – Member
    16. Hon. Maxmus Ochai – Member
    17. Hon. Opolot Isiagi Patrick – Member
    18. Hon. Richard Wanda – Member
    19. Hon. Samuel Okwir – Member

I beg to designate.  

3.53
The chief opposition whip (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we designate are:

    1. Hon. Patrick Ocan, Apac Municipality (UPC)
    2. Hon. Luttamaguzi Semakula, Nakaseke South (DP)
    3. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, Budadiri County West (FDC)
    4. Hon. Anthony Akol, Kilak North (FDC)
    5. Hon. Hanifa Nabukeera, Mukono District (NUP)
    6. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, Butambala County (NUP)
    7. Hon. Joel Ssenyonyi, Nakawa Division West (NUP)
    8. Hon. Flavia Kalule Nabagabe, Kassanda District (NUP)

I beg to designate. 

The Speaker: UPDF?

3.55
COL DR Victor nekesa (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, UPDF has no Member designated to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Thank you.

The speaker: Independents?

3.55
Mr david zijjan (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): On the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Independents designate:

    1. Hon. Paul Omara, Otuke County
    2. Hon. Muhammad Nsereko, Kampala Central Division
    3. Hon. Paska Aciro Menya, Pader District
    4. Hon. Juliet Kinyamatama Suubi, Rakai District
    5. Hon. Karim Masaba, Industrial Division, Mbale 

I beg to designate.

The Speaker: Thank you. I put the question that the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development be constituted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Speaker: Committee on Foreign Affairs.

3.56 
The third deputy prime minister and minister without portfolio (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Government side designates:

    1. Hon. Norah Bigirwa Nyendwoha – Chairperson
    2. Hon. Boaz Ninsiima Kasirabo – Vice-Chairperson
    3. Hon. Judith Peace Achan – Member
    4. Hon. Sulaiman Hashim – Member
    5. Hon. Yona Kayogera – Member
    6. Hon. Boniface Henry Okot – Member
    7. Hon. Noah Mutebi Wanzala – Member
    8. Hon. Patrick Mutono Lodoi – Member
    9. Hon. Stephen B. Kisa – Member
    10. Hon. Zumura Maneno – Member
    11. Hon. Muhammed Kato – Member
    12. Hon. Jenifer Muheesi Abaho – Member
    13. Hon. Abraham Isamat – Member
    14. Hon. Fred Opolot – Member
    15. Hon. Patience Kinshaba Nkunda – Member 
    16. Hon. Prossy Akampurira – Member
    17. Hon. Felix Okot-Ogong – Member
    18. Hon. James Olobo - Member 

Madam Speaker, I beg to designate. 

3.58
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Opposition designates the following: 

    1. Hon. Bob Okae – Kwania North (UPC) 
    2. Hon. Richard Lumu – Mityana North (DP) 
    3. Hon. Okin P.P. Ojara – Chua West County (FDC) 
    4. Hon. Lucy Akello – Amuru (FDC) 
    5. Hon. Muwada Nkunyingi – Kyadondo County West (NUP)
    6. Hon. Allan Ssewanyana – Makindye Division West (NUP)
    7. Hon. Stephen Sserubula – Lugazi Municipality (NUP)

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker. 

4.00
COL. VICTOR NEKESA (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, for the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the UPDF designates Gen. Wilson Mbadi. I beg to designate. 

4.00
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): To the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Independents designate the following: 

    1. Hon. Allan Atugonza – Buliisa County 
    2. Hon. Peter Ochen – Kole South
    3. Hon. Vincent Obong – Lira West Division 
    4. Hon. Christopher Komakech – Aruu County 
    5. Hon. Nathan Twesigye – Kashari South County 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I put a question that the Committee on Foreign Affairs be constituted as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
4.02 
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): On behalf of the Government side, I beg to designate the following honourable members to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development:

    1. Hon. Flavia Kabahenda – Chairperson
    2. Hon. Sarah Najjuma – Vice-Chairperson 
    3. Hon. Linda Irene – Member 
    4. Hon. Charles Bakkabulindi – Member  
    5. Hon. Dorcas Acen – Member  
    6. Hon. Melsa Avako – Member
    7. Hon. Laura Kanushu – Member
    8. Hon. Kevin Kaala Ojinga – Member
    9. Hon. Jeniffer Ayo – Member  
    10. Hon. Peterkhen Locap – Member
    11. Hon. Iddi Isabirye – Member  
    12. Hon. Pamela Kamugo – Member 
    13. Hon. Tonny Ayoo – Member 
    14. Hon. Linos Ngompek – Member
    15. Hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara – Member
    16. Hon. Peggy Waako – Member  
    17. Hon. Florence Asiimwe – Member 
    18. Hon. Yona Musinguzi - Member 
    19. Hon. William Chemonges - Member

Madam Speaker, I beg to designate. 

4.04
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): On the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, the Opposition designates the following: 

    1. Hon. Joab Businge – Masindi Municipality (FDC)
    2. Hon. Harold Muhindo – Bukono County East (FDC)
    3. Hon. Fortunate Nantongo – Kyotera (DP)
    4. Hon. Frank Kabuye – Kassanda County South (NUP) 
    5.  Hon. Hillary Kiyaga – Mawokota County North (NUP)
    6.  Hon. Allan Mayanja – Nakaseke Central County (NUP)

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker. 

4.05
COL VICTOR NEKESA (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, there is no Member designated for the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development by the UPDF caucus. 

4.06 
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): On the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, the Independents designate the following Members: 

    1. Hon. Arthur Waako – Budaka County
    2. Hon. Abdulhu Byakatonda – Workers’ Representative
    3. Hon. Miriam Mukhaye – Woman Representative, Mbale 
    4. Hon. Margaret Rwabushaija – Workers’ Representative

I beg to designate. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I put the question that the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development be constituted as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON HEALTH
4.07
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): On the Committee on Health, the Government side designates the following Members: 

    1. Hon. Charles Ayume – Chairperson 
    2. Hon. Yoweri Ssebikaali – Vice-chairperson 
    3. Hon. John Ninkusiima – Member 
    4. Hon. Brenda Namukuta – Member
    5. Hon. Hope Nakazibwe – Member 
    6. Hon. Ruth Lematia – Member  
    7. Hon. Sharon Balmoyi - Member 
    8. Hon. Josephine Bebona – Member 
    9. Hon. Betty Chelain – Member  
    10. Hon. George Bhoka – Member 
    11. Hon. Dan Atwijukire – Member 
    12. Hon. Isaac Otim – Member 
    13. Hon. Margaret Ayebare - Member 
    14. Hon. Erisa Rutahigwa – Member
    15. Hon. Joseph Ruyonga – Member
    16. Hon. Bernard Sekyanzi - Member 
    17. Hon. Irene Muloni – Member
    18. Hon. Esther Mbayo - Member 
    19. Hon. Tarsis Rwabuirindore - Member 

I beg to designate. 

4.08
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): For the Committee on Health, the Opposition designates the following: 

    1. Hon. Kenny Auma – Kwania (UPC)
    2. Hon. Michael Lulume Bayigga - Buikwe (DP)
    3. Hon. Christine Nandagire – Bukomansimbi (NUP) 
    4. Hon. Twaha Kagabo – Bukoto County South (NUP) 
    5. Hon. Francis Zaake – Mityana Municipality (NUP) 
    6. Hon. Nicholas Kamara – Kabale Municipality (FDC)
    7. Hon. Timothy Batuwa – Jinja South Division West (FDC)

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. UPDF?

4.09
COL VICTOR NEKESA (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, the Committee on Health has a member-designate; Hon. Col Dr Nekesa. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Independents?

4.09
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): To the Committee on Health, Madam Speaker, the Independents designate:

    1. Hon. Margaret Makhoha - Woman Representative, Namayingo; 
    2. Hon. Mary Nakato - Woman Representative, Buyende; 
    3. Hon. Samuel Opio - Kole North County;
    4. Hon. Sylvia Bahireira - Woman Representative, Kamwenge; and 
    5. Hon. Victorious Zawedde - Woman Representative, Nakasongola. 

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I put the question that the Committee on Health be constituted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Committee on Information, Communication Technology (ICT) and National Guidance. 

4.10
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Under the Committee on Information, Communication Technology (ICT)  and National Guidance, the Government side designates:

    1. Hon. Moses Magogo - Chairperson 
    2. Hon. Nathan Nabeta-Igeme - Vice-Chairperson.

Other Members, we have are:

    3. Hon. Cosmas Elotu;
    4. Hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire;
    5. Hon. Alex Ndeezi;
    6. Hon. Phyllis Chemutai;
    7. Hon. Ferigo Kambale;
    8. Hon. Julius Acon;
    9. Hon. Lolem Micah;
    10. Hon. Geofrey Mutiwa;
    11. Hon. Solomon Alinga;
    12. Hon. Edson Rugumayo;
    13. Hon. Caroline Kamusiime;
    14. Hon. Herbert Kinobere;
    15. Hon. Feta Geofrey;
    16. Hon. Esther Afoyochan;
    17. Hon. Anne Tumwine;
    18. Hon. Jane Bainomugisha; and
    19. Hon. Ojok Andrew Oulanyah.

Madam Speaker, I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.11
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Information, Communication Technology (ICT) and National Guidance, on the Forum for Democratic Change, (FDC) ticket, we have:

    1. Hon. Florence Kabugho –Woman Representative, Kasese; and 
    2. Hon. David Isabirye - Jinja North Division, Jinja City. 

National Unity Platform (NUP), we have:

    1. Hon. Joyce Bagala -Woman Representative, Mityana 
    2. Hon. Gorreth Namugga - Mawogola County South, Ssembabule; 
    3. Hon. Bashir Kazibwe - Kawempe Division South, Kampala City. 

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. UPDF?

4.12
COL VICTOR NEKESA (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, the UPDF has not got a Member designate for the Committee on Information, Communication Technology (ICT) and National Guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Independents?

4.12
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): On the Committee on Information, Communication Technology (ICT) and National Guidance, Madam Speaker, the Independents designate:

    1. Hon. Bumali Mpindi - PWD Representative; 
    2. Hon. Susan Abeja - Woman Representative, Otuke; 
    3. Hon. Noah Musa - Koboko North County; and 
    4. Hon. Kenneth Kiiza -   Bujenje County. 

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I put the question that the Committee on Information, Communication Technology (ICT) and National Guidance be constituted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs?

4.13
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, the Government side designates:

    1. Hon. Robinah Rwakoojo – Chairperson; 
    2. Hon. Yusuf Mutembuli – Vice-Chairperson.

Other Members, are:

    3. Hon. Bosco Okiror;
    4. Hon. Nkwasiibwe Zinkuratire;
    5. Hon. Bernard Odoi;
    6. Hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo;
    7. Hon. Richard Oseku;
    8. Hon. Stephen Baka;
    9. Hon. Emma Cherukut;
    10. Hon. Wilson Kajwengye;
    11. Hon. Joanne Aniku;
    12. Hon. Rose Obigah;
    13. Hon. Juliet Achayo;
    14. Hon. Stephen Kasaija;
    15. Hon. John Teira;
    16. Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo;
    17. Hon. Paul Kwezira;
    18. Hon. Peter Werikhe; and 
    19. Hon. Solomon Silwany. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Opposition?

4.15
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): On the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, Madam Speaker, we have:

    1. Hon. Santa Alum (UPC);
    2. Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju  (FDC);
    3. Hon. Anna Adeke (FDC); and
    4. Hon. Asuman Basalirwa (JEEMA).

Under NUP, we have:

    5. Hon. Shamim Malende - Woman Representative, Kampala;
    6. Hon. Medard Sseggona – Busiro County East; and
    7. Hon. Robert Ssekitoleeko - Bamunanika County. 

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. UPDF?

4. 16
COL VICTOR NEKESA (UPDF Representative): On the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, the UPDF Member designate is Hon. Lt Gen. James Mugira. I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Independents?

4.16
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): On the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, Madam Speaker, the Independents designate:

    1. Hon. Shartsi Musherure - Mawogoola North County;
    2. Hon. Abdu Katuntu - Bugweri County;
    3. Hon. Acrobert Kiiza - Bughendera County; and 
    4. Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba - Ndorwa County East. 

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I put the question that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs be constituted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Committee on Environment and Natural Resources?

4.17
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, the Government side designates: 

    1. Hon. Dr Otiam Emmanuel Otaala as the Chairperson; and
    2. Hon. Kugonza Emely as the Vice-Chairperson.

The members include: 

    1. Hon. Biyika Lawrence Songa; 
    2. Hon. Dickson Kateshumbwa; 
    3. Hon. Seith Wambede; 
    4. Hon. Juliet Bashiisha Agasha; 
    5. Hon. Joshephat Tumwesigye; 
    6. Hon. Sendawula Christine Bukenya; 
    7. Hon. Paul Akamba; 
    8. Hon. Clare Mugumya; 
    9. Hon. Flora Natumanya; 
    10. Hon. Alioni Yorke Odria; 
    11. Hon. Alex Ruhunda; 
    12. Hon. John Faith Magolo; 
    13. Hon. Apollo Yeri Ofwono; 
    14. Hon. Francis Kazini Twinomujuni; 
    15. Hon. Sam Otukol; 
    16. Hon. Fredrick Angura; and 
    17. Hon. Katalihwa Donald Byabazaire.

Madam Speaker, I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Stephen.

MR SERUBULA: Rt Hon. Speaker, I am just rising on a matter of procedure and clarification too; it may lead to legal issues - on designation. I heard the name of Hon. Kwizera Eddy and I suppose that this -

THE SPEAKER: Did you mention hon. Kwizera?

MR SERUBULA: I just wanted that clarification.

THE SPEAKER: No.

MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, I read hon. Paul Kwizera and not hon. Eddy Kwizera.

THE SPEAKER: We have two Kwizeras - Paul and Eddy.

MS NAKADAMA: For Municipality Kisoro.

MR SERUBULA: I just needed that clarification. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: It is a different Kwizera.

THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, on the Committee of Natural Resources I propose to designate the following Members: 

    1. Hon. Fred Kayondo of the Democratic Party;
    2. Hon. Jimmy James Akena of UPC representing Lira City East; 
    3. Hon. Betty Aol Ocan of Gulu City;
    4. Hon. Asinansi Nyakato of Hoima City from the FDC;
    5. Hon. Kaya Christine Nakimwero of Kiboga;
    6. Hon. Ronald Evans Kanyike of Bukoto East;
    7. Hon. Charles Tebandeke of Bale County; and
    8. Hon. Aisha Nalule Kabanda of Butambala.

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, UPDF?

4.20
COL VICTOR NEKESA (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, there is no Member designated to the Committee on Natural Resources by the UPDF Parliamentary Caucus.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Independents?

MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, I propose to designate the following Members:

    1. Hon. Abdu Adidwa of Bukhooli County South;
    2. Hon. Moses Kamuntu of Rubanda County;
    3. Hon. Agnes Auma Linda, District Woman Representative Lira City; and
    4. Hon. Eric Musana of Buyaga East County.

I so designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I put the question that the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources be constituted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Next is the Committee on Physical Infrastructure.

THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, the Government side proposes to designate the following: 

Hon. David Karubanga as the Chairperson and Hon. Robert Kasolo, from Iki-Iki County, as the Vice-Chairperson. 

The members are: 

    1. Hon. Sarah Opendi; 
    2. Hon. Nsegumire Mohammad Kibedi; 
    3. Hon. Hillary Lokwang; 
    4. Hon. Henry Maurice Kibalya; 
    5. Hon. Asaba Paul Nsabimana, 
    6. Hon. Michael Bukenya Iga; 
    7. Hon. Nathan Byanyima; 
    8. Hon. Aisa Agaba; 
    9. Hon. Pascal Mbabazi; 
    10. Hon. Stella Atyang; 
    11. Hon. David Kabanda; 
    12. Hon. Cissy Namujju; 
    13. Hon. Sylvia Vicky Awas; 
    14. Hon. Semwanga Gyaviira; 
    15. Hon. Mariam Naigaga; 
    16. Hon. Atwakire Catheline Ndamira; and 
    17. Hon. James Niringiyimana.

Madam Speaker, I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Opposition? 
Honourable Members, if Members are coming to the House, come to the House; stop peeping. This business of Members coming to peep and making noise in the corridors - I am warning you Members who are making noise in the corridors; this session is not for that. You are being paid a lot of money to come and legislate for your people. I am not going to allow any idling in the corridors.

THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Opposition wishes to propose the following designations to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure:

    1. Hon. Richard Sebamala of the Democratic Party; 
    2. Hon. Nelson Okello of Maruzi North from UPC;
    3. Hon. Moses Kabusu of Kyamunswa;
    4. Hon. Yusuf Nsibambi of Mawokota South; and
    5. Hon. Alobo Joan Okong of Soroti City. 

And, from NUP we have: 

    1. Hon. Godfrey Saazi of Gomba East; 
    2. Hon. Denes Sekabira of Katikamu North; 
    3. Hon. Nambeshe John Baptist of Manjiya County; and 
    4. Hon. Balimwezo Ronald of Nakawa East.

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, UPDF?

COL VICTOR NEKESA (UPDF Representative): On the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, the UPDF Parliamentary Caucus proposes to designate the Hon. Brig. Gen. Charity Bainababo. I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Independents?

MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, the following Independent Members have been proposed for designation: 
Hon. Elijah Okupa of Kasilo; 
Hon. Peter Mugema of Iganga Municipality;
Hon. Roland Ndyomugyenyi of Rukiga County;
Hon. Patrick Nsanja of Ntenjeru County South; and 
Hon. Rwemulikya Ibanda of Ntoroko County.

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I put the question that the Committee on Physical Infrastructure be constituted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Committee on Presidential Affairs.

4.28
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): To the Committee on Presidential Affairs, the Government side designates Hon. Jesca Ababiku as Chairperson and Hon. Naome Kabasharira as Vice-Chairperson. 

The members on the committee include:  

    1. Hon. Francis Adome Lorika
    2. Hon. Agnes Taaka 
    3. Hon. Naome Kibaaju
    4. Hon. James Mamawi
    5. Hon. Judith Alyek 
    6. Hon. Hellen Auma Wandera
    7. Hon. Tony Awany
    8. Hon. David Lagen 
    9. Hon. Janepher Kyomuhendo Mbabazi
    10. Hon. Albert Lokoru
    11. Hon. Jacob Karubanga 
    12. Hon. Fadil Twalla
    13. Hon. Brahan Ezama Siraji
    14. Hon. James Buturo Nsaba
    15. Hon. Faith Philo Kunihira
    16. Hon. Peninah Busingye 
    17. Hon. Benjamin Kamukama.

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.29
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Presidential Affairs, we have:

    1. Hon. Isaias Johny Ssasaga, Budadiri County East (FDC)
    2. Hon. Denis Onekalit Amere, Kitgum Municipality (FDC)
    3. Hon. Peter Okot (DP)
    4. Hon. Derrick Nyeko, Makindye Division East (NUP)
    5. Hon. Muhammad Ssegirinya, Kawempe Division North (NUP)
    6. Hon. Abubaker Kawalya, Rubaga Division North (NUP).

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. UPDF?

4.30
COL DR VICTOR NEKESA (UPDF Representative): To the Committee on Presidential Affairs, the UPDF Caucus designates Hon. Maj. Gen. Henry Masiko. I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Independents?

4.31
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County Jinja): To the Committee on Presidential Affairs, the Independents designate:

    1. Hon. Naome Kabasharira, Rushenyi County – (Interjection) - Yes, she is an Independent.

THE SPEAKER: He is right. That is his Member, not yours.

MR ZIJJAN: The NRM does not know who belongs to them and who does not. (Laughter)
 
2. 	Hon. Nancy Acora, Lamwo District 
3. 	Hon. David Livingstone Zijjan, Butembe
4. 	Hon. Stephen Aseera, Buhaguzi East
5. 	Hon. Everlyn Chemutai, Bukwo District 

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I put the question that the Committee on Presidential Affairs be constituted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS PACUTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to welcome you back from recess. I heard the name of Hon. Everlyn Chemutai read under ICT and I am hearing it, again, here. Isn’t that double counting?

THE SPEAKER: There is Chemutai Phyllis and Chemutai Everlyn. Meanwhile, welcome back – she got involved in a very nasty accident. We thank God for your life. (Applause)

Committee on Public Service and Local Government?
 
4.33
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): On the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, the Government side designates Hon. Godfrey Onzima as Chairperson and Hon. Christine Apolot as Vice-Chairperson.

The members include:

    1. Hon. Midius Natukunda
    2. Hon. Reuben Paul Chelimo
    3. Hon. Agnes Kunihira Abwoli
    4. Hon. Isaac Modoi
    5. Hon. Jovanice Twinobusingye
    6. Hon. Sanon Bwiire
    7. Hon. Yovan Adriko
    8. Hon. Joyce Acan Okeny
    9. Hon. Sowedi Kitanywa
    10. Hon. Martin Mugabi Muzaale
    11. Hon. Alex Byarugaba Bakunda
    12. Hon. Baatom Koryang
    13. Hon. Ephraim Biraaro Gashanga
    14. Hon. Michael Wanyama
    15. Hon. Robert Wandwasi
    16. Hon. Simon Peter Wokorach
    17. Hon. Florence Nebanda Andiru.

I beg to designate.

4.35
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, the designation is as follows:

    1. Hon. Atkins Katusabe, Bukonjo County West (FDC)
    2. Hon. Julius Emigu Ochero (FDC)
    3. Hon. Betty Ethel Naluyima, Wakiso District (NUP)
    4. Hon. Jimmy Lwanga, Njeru Municipality (NUP)
    5. Hon. Teddy Nambooze, Mpigi District (NUP)
    6. Hon. Juliet Nakabuye Kakande, Masaka City (NUP)

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. UPDF?

4.36
COL DR VICTOR NEKESA (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, the UPDF has no Member designated to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Independents?

4.36
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County Jinja): To the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, the Independents designate:

    1. Hon. Denis Nyangweso, Samia Bugwe Central County
    2. Hon. Patrick Okabe, Serere County
    3. Hon. Patrick Isingoma Mwesigwa, Hoima East Division
    4. Hon. Emmanuel Komol, Dodoth East County
    5. Hon. Joan Namutaawe, Masaka District

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, I put the question that the Committee on Public Service and Local Government be constituted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Next committee?

4.37
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): On the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, the Government designates Hon. Mwine Mpaka as the chairperson –(Applause)– and Hon. Catherine Lamwaka as the deputy chairperson. 

Members include:

    1. Hon. Mugole Mauku –

THE SPEAKER: All the members of the tourism committee are there; they are not going anywhere. (Applause)

MS NAKADAMA: Yes.

    1. Hon. Mugole Mauku David Stephen
    2. Hon. Mbwatekamwa Gaffa 
    3. Hon. Timuzigu Kamugisha Michael
    4. Hon. Afidra Olema Ronald
    5. Hon. Kemirembe Pauline Kyaka
    6. Hon. Aleper Margaret Achilla
    7. Hon. Amooti Bright Tom
    8. Hon. Awor Betty Engola 
    9. Hon. Busingye Harriet Mugyenyi 
    10. Hon. Edakasi Alfred Elalu
    11. Hon. Nayebale Sylvia
    12. Hon. Kirabo Agnes
    13. Hon. Katwesigye Oliver Koyekyenga
    14. Hon. Osoru Mourine
    15. Hon. Ssentayi Muhamad
    16. Hon. Gafabusa Richard Muhumuza
    17. Hon. Wanyama Michael

Madam Speaker, I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Opposition?

4.39
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): On the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry we have:

    1. Hon. Atim Ogwal Cecilia (FDC); and
    2. Hon. Francis Mwijukye (FDC)
    3. Hon. Okello Geoffrey from the Democratic Party.		

From NUP:

    1. Hon. Ssimbwa Fred				
    2. Hon. Kalwanga David
    3. Hon. Kayemba-Ssolo Geofrey	
    4. Hon. Lutaaya Geoffrey
    5. Hon. Wakayima Musoke

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. UPDF? (Member rose_) Yes?

MR SSERUBALA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you. You have just said the members of the committee will remain there. However, while the Chief Opposition Whip was reading them out, I did not hear of Hon. Aga, Member for Jinja City (FDC), who is a member of the –(Interjections) – Aga? I did not hear –(Interjections)- no, he did not read “Aga” –(Interjections)- Iga. He is not “Iga”, he is “Aga”.

THE SPEAKER: But they still have an option; they can change their Member if they want. It is not a must. Yes, UPDF?

4.40
COL VICTOR NEKESA (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, the UPDF has no Member designated for the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Independents?

4.41
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja):	On Science, Technology and Innovation, Madam Speaker, the Independents designate –(Interjection)– sorry, on the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry.

THE SPEAKER: We are talking about Tourism, Trade and Industry.

MR ZIJJAN: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. On the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, we designate:

    1. Hon. Koluo Joseph Andrew  
    2. Hon. Atukwasa Rita
    3. Hon. Were Godfrey Odero
    4. Hon. Mushemeza Elijah Dickens
    5. Hon. Amero Susan

Madam Speaker, I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I put the question that the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry be constituted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: We have done the constitution of the committees. We have Science, Technology and Innovation; we will handle it later. That brings us to the completion of our sectoral committees. The sectoral committees should go ahead and work; finish all the business in the committees, and present all your reports to the House. No business of sitting on reports, petitions, motions and Bills.

4.43
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Madam Speaker, this one regards the standing committees. There are Members who are on the Committee on Appointments who do not have standing committees. I think when we had just come here, the Rules of Procedure were misread. So, most Members on committees like the Committee on Appointments are entitled to be on another standing committee. 

So, Madam Speaker, I do not know when those Members’ names will be designated on the standing committees.

THE SPEAKER: Kindly designate the Members of the Committee on Appointments to other committees too because they are entitled to have three committees. Yes, another procedural matter from Imat Cecilia, Miss Uganda. (Laughter)

MS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that permanent title of Miss Uganda. (Laughter) I would like to draw the attention of the House to two specific clauses in our Rules of Procedure:

One; I beg to draw the attention of the Speaker of Parliament to rule 157(4), which requires – by our rule – that 40 per cent of the leadership must be women. So, in all this that the Prime Minister and the Chief Opposition Whip have presented, I believe that they have complied with the prescription, as per rule 157(4).

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I am seeking guidance from the Speaker; whereas rule 88(6) directs that no active Member of the UPDF should be designated chairperson or deputy chairperson, in the body of the rules, there is no specific prescription on how UPDF is represented. 

So, maybe by practice, we could say UPDF, since they do not belong to any party - although they are probably being misdirected to be on the side of the NRM – I know according to our Constitution, they belong to no party. They should be grouped with the Independents, in which case, in future, they should apply to the Office of the Speaker for the purpose of designation. That is just for us to be smart in the way we comply with our own rules.

Finally, Madam Speaker, rule 187 is very specific: Much as the Prime Minister, who presented the list today has done it very smartly, however, the rule is very specific. It says the designation must be done by the whips on the basis of party. 

Therefore, before we adopt this, can we agree that we put aside this particular prescription for the purpose of making our final decision, free from any challenge from Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit, but I seek your guidance. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Imat. One, I would like to assure you that the presiding officer is a woman, and mindful of the 40 per cent rule. So, the 40 per cent is catered for. 

Two, the UPDF, and the Dean of the Independents write to the Speaker and we nominate them for the positions. That is why the acting dean of the Independents was claiming his Member. 

I already made a ruling to the last guidance you sought, and the ruling still stands. 

MR SSEMUJU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I did not want to raise this at the time of designation. 

The Constitution, under which the Prime Minister is appointed, does not provide for a deputy; one, two or three. I do not know how many there are. Neither do our Rules of Procedure provide for a deputy Prime Minister. The Administration of Parliament Act does not also provide for that. As far as the law is concerned, anyone posing as a deputy; deputy one, two or three, under the Constitution are imposters. 

Madam Speaker, I need guidance from you again to help Parliament not to be taken to court. When you called the Prime Minister who is appointed under the Constitution - and you read the relevant Act – I do not know whether you meant someone who is appointed under no law.

THE SPEAKER: Do you want to tell me that the first, second and third deputy prime ministers are not appointed under a law, yet you approved them in the same House?

MR SSEMUJU: Madam Speaker, Parliament has in the past made mistakes and those mistakes have been taken to court. I have personally gone to court and the court has ruled in my favour.

I am bringing this in good faith, Madam Speaker - that maybe in future, since you are our leader - in the past, these one, two, three used to be for ministries, such as the Minister for Wildlife and Antiquities. They used to give them ministries so that they do not hang in the air. These particular ones have been given no ministry; they are hanging in air. It is for their own good.

Madam Speaker, the Constitution recognises the Prime Minister. The Administration of Parliament Act also recognises the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. I am actually helping them. They should be happy that someone gave them a kiwani assignment. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: What is kiwani? 

MR SSEMUJU: Madam Speaker, “non-existent”.

THE SPEAKER: “Non-existent assignment” would mean they are not doing anything. The Prime Minister-designate is here and she is performing her role. You have even thanked her for doing the work. I do not see any harm in that. Just like you have the Deputy Chief Opposition Whip, which is not provided for, but you have a Deputy Chief Opposition Whip.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rule 157(3) states: “Except as provided by these Rules in respect to the Business Committee, Appointments Committee and the Budget Committee, a Member shall not belong to more than two Committees.” 

Madam Speaker, the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation was initially a sectoral committee, and later turned into a standing committee. However, there are Members who are members of other standing committees, and now also, belong to this sectoral committee. 

Madam Speaker, that is against our rule. The procedural issue I want to raise is that Members cannot belong to two standing committees, except those provided for, which is the Budget Committee, Appointments Committee and the Business Committee.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sarah, there was an amendment on the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation, which was passed in this House. The amendment was proposed by the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline and it is awaiting gazettement. We are, yet to gazette it to be operationalised. Before gazettement, it cannot be operationalised. Wait for the gazette - that is why I said we would designate later, once it has been gazetted. 

Honourable members, I would like to thank you for today. I am not going to be sitting in the House like the world is ending tomorrow. I am adjourning the House to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.
 
(The House rose at 4.54 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 6 July 2022 at 2.00 p.m.) 

