
Thursday, 24 July 2014

Parliament met at 2.05 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. I will be making some alterations on the Order Paper to accommodate some two other items, which will be mainly about laying of documents. 

I have been receiving calls from Members of Parliament both within and upcountry in relation to hon. Nobert Mao. It is true that the hon. Nobert Mao is indisposed; he is sick. It is also true that he left Gulu on Saturday morning to a hospital in Nairobi from where he is receiving treatment and responding fairly well. What is not true is that he has passed on. Hon. Nobert Mao is alive and responding to treatment properly. This morning he was taken for scanning and from the report we have received, he actually looks much better than he left. So, there should be no alarm. Nothing has happened to the hon. Nobert Mao. All I ask you to do is to pray for him for quick recovery. Otherwise, he is responding well to treatment.

Hon. Members, we have now received three financial Bills – the Finance Bill, the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014, the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill 2014, the Excise and Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2014 and as you know very well, these are finance Bills that are expected to feed in on the revenue of our budget. Therefore, I urge the committees responsible for these to, while looking the ministerial policy statement, to also look at the Bills. And any other business for now should be suspended as this period is clearly designated for the Budget.
I also urge the committees that are handling the proposals to borrow monies that are supposed to feed into the budget to handle that expeditiously. So, issues of petitions and other Bills and related matters before the committees should be put on halt until the budget process is complete.

In the same vein, standing committees with the exception of the Committee on National Economy that is handling proposals to borrow and also the Public Accounts Committee that has a fair backlog, the rest of the standing committees should hold on business for now and focus on the budget process. This will help us to secure more committee rooms to enable the Sessional committees to conduct their work. I also would like to encourage the committees to begin interacting from Mondays and Fridays so that we can finalise with those issues quickly. As you are aware, by the 31 August, we should have completed receiving reports form the sessional committees. So, finish with that business so that we can move on to deal with the Appropriation Bill once the figures have been passed by the respective committees and the House.

I have confirmed that we received all the ministerial policy statements. The problem is that they have all supplied only hard copies of these policy statements although at the time of requisitioning these ministries were told to also hand in their electronic copies that are uploaded on Ipads for us to have access to them easily. The following ministries have not yet handed in their soft copies and I request those ministries to respond quickly to facilitate the committees in doing the work to finalise their reports. Those ministries include: Trade and Industry; Land, Housing and Urban Development; Ministry of Health; Ministry of Foreign Affairs; Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. We shall need soft copies of the policy statements for those ministries handed over to the Office of the Clerk to Parliament. That is why we have not also included those statements on the order paper.

I would like to alter the order paper to allow two items to be handled; a personal statement from the hon. Dr Kazirivu Atwooki and the laying on the Table of Addendum to the policy statement of the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities in relation to two issues, one being the budget and the staff list specifically from the Uganda Wildlife Authority. It looks like those documents were missing. So, we will be at an appropriate time be calling you to lay them on Table. I hope you have made enough hard and electronic copies just like I have said; we need it to be uploaded on the Ipads. Thank you very much.

2.15
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative):  Mr Speaker, I rise on an issue of national importance. I would like to bring to the attention of the House, the issue of the ID project that will be ending in the next three weeks, that there is a 16 percent population of Uganda comprising people who might not be registered. These are the people I represent; people with disabilities.

Mr Speaker, sometimes some people think disability is homogeneous; some think that all disabled people resemble hon. Asamo. Disability is not homogenous. As the exercise is going on, we have people with cerebral palsy; these are people whose bodies keep shaking. So, it is difficult to finger print them in a normal way. So, what happens at the registration centres? Such people are being sent away under the pretext that the officers handling the exercise cannot handle them.

We also have people who suffer from leprosy whose fingers have been amputated and so, they cannot be finger printed. Such people have also been told that the machines cannot capture such fingerprints. It is laughable but it is unfortunate.

And lastly, there are some people, maybe due to war or some other causes, who lost their limbs. Such people cannot register yet they are Ugandans who will need services but here they are being denied their right to register. The deaf members have no sign language interpreters at registration centres. When there is a communication gap, what the officers do is send them away.  If they want to do their best, they give them a form, but these people are not educated, they can’t read the form and the questions are very tasking to the category of people with disabilities.

I want to inform this House that we people with disabilities, especially the women, we have sex by chance and not by choice. So when you ask me who my husband is, I might be having four or five of them. They are not really husbands but mere friends who come at night and leave by morning. So when you ask me who this man is and the man does not want me to say out his name because he does not want the public to know that I am associating with him; what is going to happen to that question? And the registration people say, “Go, we want that information.” I think we need to look at the category of people who have been marginalised for a long time and because of the negative attitude, people do not recognise that we have such people in our communities.

I also want to say some people like a blind woman who has got children might not know the dates of birth of these children. When you ask her such, she may not know. Remember that some of us grow in convents, rehabilitation centres; we do not grow in our homes. So where do you get such information. I think there is a very big gap that has been ignored in recognising the rights of people with disabilities.

The Constitution of Uganda recognises the issue of non-discrimination but I feel that we are being discriminated as PWDs. I have met many of them and they are crying about how to get registered. This ID is going to be a gateway to education, health and whatever. That is the information that we have and so these people are going to be missing out; they will be put in some cages. I do not know but I think it is good to know what is going to happen to these people.

Most people with disabilities cannot go to those parishes because of mobility challenges and they are at home there but you have put it at the parish and there is no consideration of their moving. Even when they get to the stage -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, are you about to finish?

MS ASAMO: I am finishing. I would like to say that the Constitution also recognises the issue of affirmative action and I want to plead that the minister of Internal Affairs gives us some affirmative action either by creating special desks for people with disabilities or giving enough education to people who are down there and may be ignorant and they do not know about the rights of people with disabilities and also create an environment that is conducive because we believe that if the environment is good, then there is no disability. Create an environment that will enable us as Ugandans to participate in this important programme. I beg to submit.

2.21
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, I wish to thank the colleague for bringing this issue in time. I also want to say that repeatedly, Parliament has made an appeal to the sector minister to regularly come and brief us and also address some of the issues that have been raised. I came from Terego last Sunday but while I was there on Friday and Saturday, I had the opportunity to visit my sub-counties where this registration exercise has been conducted.

The exercise is marred with a lot of problems; structural problems and managerial problems. If you look at the write up of this project, every sub-county is supposed to get 60 litres of petrol for charging the batteries on a daily basis. That is 60 X 6 in a week and that is what is supposed to be given. Every registration officer is supposed to be given Shs 10,000 for lifting the machinery from the sub-county headquarters to the point where the registration exercise is supposed to take place. But this is not on the ground. The registration officials are struggling to carry these things on their heads and those who have got bicycles load it on the bicycles, which is a problem.
The same officials travel in the countryside to see whoever has got solar system in his House to come and charge these batteries and yet the money has been given.

I took it up with the RDC and the returning officer of Arua, I even took it up with EC yesterday. What I found on the ground was that from Kampala, this money was remitted, it was wired to the districts. When I asked the returning officer, he said they received the money. I asked him where the pipe is blocked to the extent that this water cannot flow because the people who were supposed to use this money for carrying out this activity are not getting it. The sub-county officials are coming out to say they are not getting this money. Where is this money? I think the minister really needs to come up and explain some of these things to us.

For example, in Arua, I have the data which was collected up to the 17th of this month, out of the 300,000 people they set out to register; they have only registered 41 percent. In all the sub-counties, the estimation is 41 percent and we are left with around three weeks or so. Really, are we going to look down when the responsible minister who has been asked to come and update us on the challenges and the successes of these things is not coming within three weeks? Do you think this exercise will be a success? 

I really want to appeal to the Executive through the Government Chief Whip who is here representing the Leader of Government Business, please in in your Cabinet, reconsider your decision that this exercise should stop on 4th August. You will not even have 50 percent of the entire exercise as a success. So what are you up to? Please consider that this important programme is marred with a lot of challenges, is marred with what I would call corruption because if money was given and it has not reached where it is supposed to reach, when will it reach? Will it reach at the end of the exercise? You need to interest yourselves as the Executive. I thank you, hon. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we had agreed that the minister would be giving statements regularly to update us on the process.

2.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Hon. Speaker and colleagues, I happen to be a member of the national steering committee. We are fully aware of these challenges. First of all, some of the equipment did not come as planned because the manufacturer delayed. We are aware of the challenges on the ground because either the officers supposed to do what they should do, sometimes they do not do it because of lack of knowledge. I want to tell members that the minister is soon coming to make a statement to brief Parliament –(Interjections)-  I cannot say on this day but possibly it should be in the course of next week.

We have come from a meeting, he did not tell me the exact date but it should be –(Interjections)– if you want, I can go and request him to make it next week –(Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The hon. Minister has forced me to put him on a point of order. The way he is lamenting as if this Parliament is not aware of what is going on; this Parliament requested the Minister for Internal Affairs who is chairing the inter-ministerial committees to come here and give us detailed information. 
Is the hon. Minister in order to begin deceiving the whole country and yet the country is watching this House and expecting a detailed report about the challenges of this national ID registration?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think it was not only about the challenges, it was also about the progress; the whole exercise, what has happened, what the challenges are. That is what the House was supposed to be briefed upon and the hon. minister has just said he is going to notify the Minister of Internal Affairs to come back here, which is what we have required. I do not see any issue that is violating any order here.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When this matter came before this House, some time back, the Rt hon. Speaker did rule that we shall not look for answers outside this House. He mandated the Internal Affairs Committee of Parliament to take off 15 days to go around the country and come back to this House with a report. I still remember that the Speaker did instruct that the committee be facilitated to do that work. 

It is over two weeks now and our own committee has not come back to us. Wouldn’t it be procedurally okay that we demand for this report from our committee and also be briefed if indeed they were facilitated as the Speaker did instruct and what they have been able to do? This is because I have not seen them in Mukono and I have not heard that they have been anywhere in this country and this is a committee of this House, which was instructed to do that job. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there are two requests; one that the minister updates this House on the progress of this registration exercise regularly and the other that our committee should interest itself in this matter and be facilitated to do the same.

The only way the Clerk’s office and the Speaker’s office get to know that a report is ready is when a copy is supplied to that office. When it is not supplied to that office, it is not ready.

2.29
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Asamo Hellen for raising this point and my colleague, hon. Wadri, for speaking on the same issue. 

Mr Speaker, the exercise of registration has been high-jacked by some people in different constituencies. For example, in Mbale, the cadres have high-jacked the exercise. As I speak now, the owner of Progressive School in Mbale commandeered the whole team to go and register the children at his school. This is happening at Progressive School in Mbale, as I speak.

The LCs have complicated the exercises by demanding that everyone who goes for a letter must pay them yet the registration should be done freely for every Ugandan to be registered. The LCs are acting outside the law because they were not elected. You know their term expired and they are there illegally and yet they are demanding for money. 

So, Mr Speaker, a request was made that the minister comes here but we do not see the minister coming to brief us - (Interruption)

MR BIGIRWA: Thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. Last week, I was in my constituency and I went to parts of my sub-county, particularly Lukyangwale. I want to give information that this exercise has been marred by a lot of irregularities resulting from corruption. Indeed it is true that some local council leaders have made it a habit to demand for money from those who go to get recommendation letters. 

In addition, from the beginning, these local council leaders were promised money in form of allowances, which up to now is not clear to them. In fact, the money is not forthcoming so they are using this opportunity to get money from the people. It has been made worse at the tables where photographs are taken. Some people are paying as much as Shs 5,000 and Shs 20,000. I can give information on that and in fact, I was going to prepare a petition in that regard but I just wanted to give information to this House.

MR WAMANGA WAMAI: Thank you very much for that information –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I really did not want to disrupt the flow of ideas on this matter but I do not know whether it is procedurally right for us to continue in this way. There is clear evidence pointing to the near failure of this exercise. When Government came to announce to this country and the world that they were ready to undertake this project, they told us that they were actually 100 percent ready. Two or three months down the road, we see that there are a lot of problems that are associated with this exercise.

Are we procedurally right, Mr Speaker, and I really want guidance on this, to continue flogging a dead horse? Every Member of Parliament who has stood here to contribute on this matter is pointing at total collapse of the exercise. I think rather than continue in this direction, we should ask the Leader of Government Business, the Rt hon. Moses Ali, who is present in this House, to tell this House and the country whether from the very start, we as a country were ready to undertake this exercise. 

If he says we were not ready and it seems we were actually not ready, then probably we have to prescribe solutions to this. Maybe we need to go back to the drawing board and withdraw people who are doing nothing. We are actually deceiving ourselves as a country that there is something happening and yet there is totally nothing happening in the villages. This exercise is encumbered by a lot of difficulties. 

I would like to call on Government to wear a brave face. Stand up and tell us that you have failed. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of Government Business, it is hereby directed that the Minister of Internal Affairs shall give a statement on the registration exercise at 2 O’clock on Tuesday next week. Hon. Members, it is finished. In the Gallery, this afternoon, we have pupils of St John’s Educational Centre in Mukono District. They are represented by hon. Peter Bakaluba Mukasa and hon. Peace Kusasira. They have come to observe the business of the House. Please join me in welcoming them. Where are they? They are on this side. You are very welcome to Parliament.

We also have pupils of St Lady Agnes Primary School in Iganga represented by hon. Abdu Katuntu and hon. Kwagala Olivia. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. Are you here?

We also have pupils from the Debating Club of Sir Apollo Kaggwa Boarding Primary School in Kampala District represented by hon. Nsereko Muhammad and hon. Nabilah Naggayi. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Thank you.

MR MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, I do not know if it would be procedurally right to go on with business and yet we had some hanging business. In your communication, there is something that you alluded to saying that you are putting a halt to most of the business such that we focus on the budget and other financial Bills. There are some petitions that were given 45 days like the recent one which hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi brought where people are going to be evicted. 

Yesterday but one, I got a problem of where people are going to be evicted again in my constituency which I represent in Parliament and the Government people are supposed to give a response or at least the Minister responsible for Kampala. 

I am wondering which information I am going to take back to the people because it is urgent and more people are being fed with notices to vacate. They are telling them to put up permanent structures in 28 days and these are over 200 people. I find it a bit awkward and that is why I am standing up to see whether it is procedurally right for me not to get a feedback that I can take back to the people and Parliament also helping me in this situation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, Leader of Government Business, was this communicated to the Minister and what is the response on this?

2.38
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): One, the petition that was brought last week by hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi and according to our procedure, that is supposed to go to the committee which you did as Speaker and so we have to wait at least for 45 days as per the ruling.

Then the issue that was raised by hon. Sebuliba Mutumba, before we even left here, I wrote to the Minister for the Presidency and KCCA. I discussed with him yesterday and he told me that he is following up on the matter and he is going to do what is within his means and report back to the House on Tuesday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. That is it. The member for Sheema.

2.39
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you. I rise on a matter of national importance. Yesterday, when hon. Tashobya raised an issue with regard to the twig borer which attacks coffee, it was down played and yet it is a serious problem that is affecting farmers across western Uganda and in particular, Sheema District.

Mr Speaker, through the four acreage plan that President Museveni is encouraging farmers to adopt, many people have gone into coffee growing. And as you are aware, Uganda Coffee Development Authority has been supplying seeds to both farmers and people have picked it seriously. 

But as I speak now, this twig borer has attacked many of the plantations and the pesticides that they are using are quite expensive. A litre of the pesticide that they are encouraging farmers to use costs Shs 120,000 which most of the farmers find difficult to access let alone to get because it is very expensive. 

As I speak right now, one of my prominent farmers has cut down 20 acres of coffee because of that twig borer that has attacked. There are many others. But what is surprising is that the Uganda Coffee Development Authority has advised to start a demonstration farm where they are spraying in one parish so that people can go and learn from there without providing the acaricides. At that demonstration farm, they are even using a hand pump for spraying and cannot reach at the top of the coffee plant. They did it in one parish but after some time, it again re-infected the part that they had sprayed because they do not have these bigger spray pumps.

Yesterday, when I talked about economic malnutrition, people thought that it was a joke. We were relying heavily on bananas. Bananas have been attacked by banana bacteria wilt. Now we were depending on coffee as our source of income. Coffee is now being destroyed by the twig borer and the government is not coming up to support these farmers. If it was for Government to come up with a massive – well, they are sensitizing but massive spray of these coffee trees – perhaps, these farmers would be given an opportunity to salvage their crops. 

These twig borers are not going to attack coffee only as it has a relationship with tea. So people who are growing tea had better come up and support the coffee growers because if we keep quiet – this has been going on for two years but the problem has not been rectified. 

So, if the Ministry of Agriculture, especially, does not come up with a very serious programme of spraying not with these hand pumps but the strong ones such that they can even spray the top of the trees, then we are doing nothing and yet this is an enterprise that the President has been encouraging people to take on especially in our agro zones where we have been meeting. If we just keep quiet like that, poverty is going to encroach on our families and hon. Members, I do not know how you are going to maintain those poverty levels especially when it comes to sustaining the school fees and all that you know coffee farmers have been benefiting from.

I want to request that Government takes it up seriously before all the crops are completely wiped out. I thank you.

2.34
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to contribute and supplement what the member is raising. I think that for lack of a better word, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister glossed over this very important issue that was raised yesterday because as we all know, Government is spending a lot of money in providing coffee seedlings.

We have been informed that a number of veterans are being used to distribute the coffee seedlings and this is an enterprise that has significant impact in terms of empowering our people. So one, we are spending so much money. Two, the coffee that we are providing is getting lost. We are losing that coffee and this means that even what we are planning to plant is also going to be wasted – (Interruption)  

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: To narrow it down to coffee is to under rate the extent of this problem as it goes even as far as bananas are concerned. In my central region area and particularly this one, even in my own personal plantation, there is a new wilt that attacks a banana stem and all that I have been told by agricultural officials is that once it is hit, you have to uproot the entire plant. Yesterday, in my own banana plantation, they reported that some five had been attacked and I ordered that they be uprooted. This morning, they told me that another 10 are under attack and I have ordered them to uproot. In the central region, the entire banana plantation and commercial agriculture has been wiped out by this kind of problem.

Therefore, it is not about coffee. Coffee was hit in central region long time ago but it now goes as far as bananas. I question whether the veterans and the military generals have any answer to crop science. (Laughter)

MR TASHOBYA: I think that I have to wind up. The point that I am making is that we are spending a lot of money on the coffee industry and we are going to lose this coffee on which we have spent a lot of money. We would rather, instead of even putting in more coffee, save and spray the coffee that has survived so that we do not lose what we have done. 

Could, for example, the minister come up maybe at a time that you could give, Mr Speaker, and tell us what programmes he has to spray the coffee so that we do not lose the money because we have put in a lot of money, effort and initiative so that we do not lose this important crop. I thank you so much.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The member for Isingiro.

MR TASHOBYA: Put a lot of money, a lot of effort; a lot of initiative so that we do not lose this important crop. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.47
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for this opportunity. Just like my colleague across the aisle, I want to add, rather sadly that hitherto giant banana producers in Isingiro will no longer be in that position. 

Mr Speaker, I raised this issue some time back last year that the bananas have been badly attacked by the banana bacterial wilt. Sixteen million Ugandans depend entirely on income directly or indirectly from bananas yet this major food and cash crop has constantly been devastated by the banana bacterial wilt. 

The Ministry of Agriculture has hitherto been glossing over this issue. I once raised it and they just conducted seminars and big workshops at regional level. But down to the people – how can you invite people to come from Isingiro to go to Mbarara for a meeting? I have consistently requested that funds be put aside to address this seemingly small yet very big problem that affects 16 million Ugandans. Uganda has 35 million people, but out of that number, 16 million are directly affected by the banana bacterial wilt. 

Money should be found within this financial year to ensure that we address the issue of banana bacterial wilt otherwise we are going to be faced with economic malnutrition, famine and so on. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

2.49
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, you may recall that yesterday, when this issue was raised by hon. Stephen Tashobya, the Prime Minister made an undertaking as Leader of Government Business; he did not gloss over it as one colleague has mentioned. I, Mr Speaker, as the Chief Whip, I will remind the Prime Minister to sit with the ministry and find a solution and also come and make a comprehensive statement because he made that undertaking as the Leader of Government Business. 

Otherwise, we are all concerned; you have raised issues that concern all of us; we come from communities where Matooke and Coffee are part of the major crops that we saw as we were growing up and they brought us this far in terms of school fees. So it is a concern for all of us and we will all take it seriously. The Prime Minister will come and do as he promised. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON CAPITATION GRANT FOR UNIVERSAL SECONDARY EDUCATION SCHOOLS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I had altered the order paper – I think this would suit a personal statement; let us take the personal statement at this time; proceed honourable minister; he will come after. 

2.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and honourable members, in the first place, this statement should be on your Ipads. But for those who may not be dotcom yet, I have brought hard copies –(Interjections)– okay, all Members of Parliament are dotcom. But I have also provided hard copies. 

Honourable members, you recall that during the debate in Parliament last Thursday, regarding my earlier statement on capitation grant, a number of concerns and requests for clarity were raised. The office of the Clerk to Parliament also followed up the matter in a letter referenced AB/186/186/01 dated 21 July 2014.

The issues which required clarity included the following:
    1. The delayed release of capitation grants to schools for second term of academic year 2014.
    2. Implementation of the change in government policy that requires the release of funds for capitation grants 15 days prior to the beginning of the school term. 

These days, release for capitation grant for second term of academic year 2014. Let me take this opportunity to inform this House that I have already released the capitation grants for UPE, USE and other post primary institutions based on the advice of the Minister of Education and Sports and I want to further inform the House as follows:
    1. Funds for the tertiary institutions were released on 11 July 2014.
    2. For the UPE and USE –(Interjections)– no, this statement was supposed to be delivered yesterday – (Laughter) – and I am correcting. Mr Speaker, you know that this statement was on the order paper and I was supposed to deliver it yesterday. By end of today, all school accounts will have been credited. 
    3. Implementation of change of policy which requires the release of capitation grants 15 days before the school term begins. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we recall that a total of Shs 189,361,000,000,000 was appropriated for the school capitation grants for financial year, 2013/14 to cater for service delivery in UPE, USE and other post primary institutions. 

Before the policy on harmonisation of releases with school terms, the capitation grants were being released in four equal batches with each batch released in the first month of a given quarter. This means that releases to schools would be effected in July, October, January and April in each financial year. 

This modality had a difficulty that schools would receive the funds towards the end of the school terms or during holidays. The above mismatch necessitated a change in policy whereby the release of the funds would be done 15 days before the commencement of the school term. Therefore, the new policy requires that funds should be released in January for the first term and April for the second term and in August for the third term. 

This has caused an apparent shortfall of funds released in July, 2013 to cater for the second term which had started in May under the previous financial year. As a result, the financial year 2013/14 allocation was exhausted in January 2014 arising from the differences in timing for the school calendar; January to December and the financial year which ends in June. 

Mr Speaker, the explanation of the apparent shortfall in allocation requires demonstration with figures and trends of the release in relation to the financial year and academic calendar which requires detailed information. It is against this background, Mr Speaker, that I pray this matter be referred to the relevant committee of Parliament for further discussion and scrutiny with an input by the technical officers both from the Ministry of Education and my own ministry.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable members, I wish to reaffirm that Government remains highly committed to ensuring the sustenance of service delivery under the education sector. Furthermore, I wish to restate that my ministry has released all school capitation grants for all government-aided schools for the second term for 2014.

As evidence to this, I wish to lay on Table the following documents: a release circular dated 11 July 2014, where a total of Shs 22.67 billion was released to tertiary institutions in addition to other grant transfers to local governments; a release circular dated 18 July 2014 under which a total of Shs 51.76 billion was dispersed to UPE and USE schools; and finally electronic payments instructions were transmitted to Bank of Uganda requesting that the bank credits the individual school accounts in the various commercials banks. I wish to lay a bank statement as evidence that the funds have been transferred. I wish to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture all those documents.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Lastly, as a measure to ensure the capitation grants are released to the targeted beneficiaries and also to eliminate ghost schools and ghost pupils, my ministry and that of Education and Sports will continue with the process of harmonising the numbers on enrolment and the total number of schools. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this will attract a debate but that debate should be structured in the following way so that we can get maximum opportunity on this matter.
The issue was delayed release of capitation grants to schools for the second term of this year, 2014. But that has been answered. The second was about the implementation of the change in government policy that required the release for capitation grants 15 days before the beginning of the school term. That has raised policy issues and the minister has requested that the committee should look at it in better details. Honourable members, your contributions should be along those lines. I will limit the time. Two minutes will be sufficient? Okay, three minutes because you have all researched on this issue? Okay, that is granted although not all of us can debate this matter.

3.02
MR LILLY ADONGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issues on the quality of education leave everybody shivering because of the grants that are sent to the respective schools. For example, in my district, the schools could not carry out their activities. They instead resorted to the local leaders. In almost all the schools in Nwoya, head teachers reported that they hadn’t received that money.

If the funds continue to go to these schools late, how do they expect the head teachers to run those schools? I want to suggest that if the funds cannot come on time, we should allow the parents to start contributing some money to run these schools. I am saying this because the trend is too much. What pains us more is the fact that it is the children of the poor – and not our children – but the children of the poor who are suffering. They are not receiving quality education.

Besides that, there are some teachers who don’t get paid their salaries because of such situations. And in my district, most teachers have resorted to ride boda-boda or to concentrate at their gardens because they can no longer afford to run these schools without teaching facilities such as chalks. My other request to the ministry is that if they have tested and realised that the policy of releasing these monies to the schools before the beginning of the term is not working, they can get to quarterly releases so that schools can plan on how to spend these monies. This will also enable districts to plan. This is important to consider because this other one has failed to work out. How can you expect the head teacher to begin the term when the funds will come in one month late? What will they be doing during that time? Do you expect head teachers to force teachers to teach without teaching materials? That is not possible. That is why I am suggesting alternative funding where we can ask the parents to supplement. It will be much better. 

In most rural schools like those in my district, many parents will tell you Government is sending the money. So, they will refuse to contribute even Shs 100 to support schools activities.  But if we get to know that funds will come in late – if Government cannot release money on time, that will affect the quality and teaching morale and perhaps can also cause a conflict between the teachers and the parents – (Member timed out_)

3.05
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegeggwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister for responding to our concerns. I am interested in page 4, paragraph nine because I am concerned about the accountabilities of the funds that we send to these schools especially the primary schools.

Mr Speaker, I used to be a chairperson of a school management committee. But what I got to know is that in most primary schools, there are bursars. The money that we send to the primary schools is basically and technically managed by the head teacher. But we need to note that most of our head teachers are not students of accounts. They go study their teaching but here they are made to be accounting officers. So, they have to do all the technical work in accounting for this money.

Mr Speaker, also the quality of our school management committees is to the effect that they have inadequate capacities even to audit what the head teacher decides to do with the money. If the head teacher can even take a cheque without figures of the money he is going to withdraw and the chairperson, who will be tired because they are from their gardens – he will simply append a signature to enable him withdraw whatever amount is dangerous.

In the event that this money even comes late after even the head teachers have taken materials from the shops on credit – Mr Speaker, I want to know whether it is by policy that the money that goes to primary schools should be managed by head teachers and no other technical accounting officer that will be able answer for the technicalities of spending and receiving this money and whether we are really doing a service to our schools because I have seen many times head teachers being caught up in mismanaging this money because they are not trained in accounts and they have no other technical people to work with. They only depend on incapacitated –(Interruption)

MS KABAALE: Thank you hon. Member. You see we come from different fields but I would like to give information about the teachers. You find that some teachers who are not well equipped with accounting systems always go for training and at the district, there are people in charge of monitoring disbursement and utilisation of funds. So you find that once in a while, these head teachers are invited at the district with their books of accounts and they are audited. I want to give you that information so that we enrich the debate. Thank you.

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you, hon. Member, for the information.

3.08
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu West Constituency, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister - when he was panicking as he was trying to give this report; I want to say this is when we are talking about this money –(Interruption)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Hon. Ssewungu, my dear brother, at my age and experience -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are addressing the Speaker.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Through you, Mr Speaker, is the hon. Member in order to say that I am panicky at this age with my experience and exposure? Is he in order? I want him to withdraw?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, are you panicking? 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Absolutely no, Sir?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Kalungu West, the hon. minister is not panicking and you have no system of measuring panic so please use more parliamentary words.

MR SSEWUNGU: I will prove that within my submission. When we are talking about capitation grant for UPE children, this is Shs 700 per child per month for nine months in a year. This report is not wholly genuine. In his own submission he is giving reasons why they delayed. Let the minister not mislead this House that it is the quarter system affecting this capitation grants to schools. Even before that – and members on the committee on education can bear me witness that even before the quarter system money was delaying.

But my major question is, are we going to achieve value for money? People are saying that head teachers are going to misuse the money. But the term is remaining with only three weeks to end. A box of chalk costs 3,500 Shs. A good UPE school can spend more than two cartons of chalk in a term. If you do not have these materials in time and you are bringing money at the end of the term, what do you expect teachers to do?
We are creating human waste in Uganda but the repercussions will come back to us. The boomerang will come back to us. Why does -(Member timed out.)

3.11
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Any of us will recall that last week, the hon. Minister’s statement put Parliament on a collision course. I was in Arua District and several parents and teachers kept on asking me why we as parliamentarians delayed the release of their money. The message which was run by FM stations quoted the minister saying that there was delay of release of funds because their efforts had been frustrated by Parliament which was very unfortunate.

I was tongue-tied; I could not explain myself because radios ran this message over and over. I am happy today you have come with an explanation and I believe the media fraternity will carry the message the way it emanates from this House. The explanation the minister has given giving reasons that it is because of the quarter system is completely unfounded. As I talk right now, the last quarter release even if it came up in April as it is stated, May, June - primary school students were already in school. Even if this money had come in April, it was still timely. They would still be able to use it.

As I talk right now, before I entered the Chamber, I received a telephone call from my constituency - as you know throughout the country primary schools are having football competitions right now. They are playing finals tomorrow on Friday and next week Friday they are going to play at district level. They were asking me, “Hon. Member, can you please help us facilitate our children from Terego to go and play at the district level?” Yet out of the capitation grant, there is what is specifically allocated for extra-curricular activities. This is what these people would be using. So you can see the type of problems you are causing us as members of Parliament. Now schools are looking to us to facilitate them and not only that.

UPE has been implemented for the last 18 years and I think it is high time we reconsidered this problem. When you are talking about Shs 7,500 per pupil per year, surely is that what you spend on your children in schools? You certainly pay more but when the teachers come up to organise the parents and say can you organise to pay more than Shs 7,500 that government gives, you find the RDCs, RISOs, GISOs saying that that would be frustrating government efforts. Surely are we realistic? Can we consider either increasing this allocation or you bring in cost sharing so that every parent should know that he has an obligation to make some little contribution as will be determined in order to sustain the level of education but as of now –(Member timed out.)

3.15
MR ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Bushenyi Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I look at this report that the minister has presented, it has a lot of challenges. For the minister to come here to say that they did not release capitation grant because there were ghost schools is quite challenging. Why can’t you release funds to genuine schools that you know and then you start querying those ghost schools? How can you -

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Hon. Speaker and colleagues, I have not said anywhere in my statement that the delay was as a result of lack of reconciliation of figures. I have not said that one. I thought it was pertinent, when I get an opportunity, to inform Parliament why certain things may not be moving the way we want them but not necessarily that because they were ghost teachers and ghost schools that we did not send the money.

MR SASSAGA: Hon. Speaker, last time we were here and the minister was very clear even on page 3, on number 9, he says; “It is about ghost schools and pupils as well.” It is for that reason that he is moving further to propose for a committee of Parliament to look into this.

The order I am raising is that the minister was very clear last time and we can refer to the Hansard. He said there were 33 ghost schools, which were discovered in the ministry. Parliament asked you, “Where did the ghost schools come from when the head count was done by the GISOs, the PISOs and the RDCs in charge and supervised by the minister and by the DEOs?” So are you in order to lie to this House, hon. Minister, that you have never talked about ghost teachers and ghost schools?

Mr Speaker, is the minister in order to deny his own statement, which is on the Hansard? It is in his statement where he talked about ghost schools and ghost pupils. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First of all, it is a factual matter regarding what the minister said when I was not there and I have not had the benefit of reading the Hansard referring to what he actually said. But if I can read the document before me, it says, “Lastly, as a measure to ensure that the capitation grants are released to the targeted beneficiaries and to eliminate ghost schools and pupils, my ministry and that of Education and Sports will continue the process of harmonising the numbers and enrolment and the total number of schools.” It does not say what you are saying.

MR ODO TAYEBWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the wise ruling. The minister is saying that the capitation grant was delayed because of not having funds at that time. However, we passed the Vote-on-Account here and that money is always budgeted for.

Two, you went ahead and paid salaries for teachers but you did not bother to pay the capitation grant. You are saying that there was no money but you got money for salaries. Did you fail to get at least Shs 700 per pupil to buy chalk and the rest? This is a national matter and we should take it very seriously because we always meet these things even in our constituencies.

Lastly, we now have private schools, which we are also funded for USE. Have you bothered to know that some ministry officials in the Ministry of Education sometimes input names of some of those ghost schools? I would have loved for you to come here with the list of those schools that you think are ghost schools so that we can know which ghost schools exist instead of just telling us that there were ghost schools. Thank you.

3.20
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a shame for the minister to stand and say that the release was late because there was a change in policy. It is really a shame because the Ministry of Education that releases the school calendar and the Ministry of Finance that releases the money are both government ministries so this mismatch should not arise.

Secondly, the parents and pupils/students do not want to hear this demonstration with figures and the trend of releases. What they want to see is the schools running. If they are not running, who is to blame? So this issue of taking the matter to the committee is important but it is not for the public, it is for us here.

Thirdly, when you look at our rural schools and how much we are releasing, there is a problem in that the children of the poor will not get adequate education. Hon. Members will bear with me that most of us here are sons and daughters of peasants but we are creating a very serious gap between the rich and poor by providing inadequate education for the poor.

Lastly, and this goes to all ministers and Government generally, it is becoming a habit and a mode of operation that for any activity to be done in this country, Parliament must rise and people must demonstrate. This should be stopped because it is not a very good and practical way of doing things. Parliament has come up and this is when you are giving these –(Interruption)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker and colleagues, for a Member of Parliament to come and tell the nation that Government only reacts when Parliament has said something - there are thousands of government business transactions, which we are servicing and the hon. Member comes and says that we only react after Parliament has received something. Is he in order? With the roads, hospitals - is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in every discussion of this House, we approve policies of Government and we approve budgets to implement those policies. But on this particular matter, you are speaking, hon. minister, because Parliament asked you to.

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: As I conclude, hon. Speaker, I thank you very much for the wise ruling and surely all ministers, you owe us an explanation and an apology to this nation because no nation can be better than its education system. If you are killing the education system, you are killing everybody. Instead of apologising, you come up and quarrel. It is a shame. Thank you very much.

3.24
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am extremely concerned and I want to voice a very general remark that Government, by failing to release money meant for capitation grant in time, is being extremely insensitive and irresponsible. Teaching and learning is a process. I guess some people sit on those desks of theirs and think they know everything. If you deny children chalk and facilitation to learn for two or three months and you come here and boast about a release of 11th - 18th July and yet you know that the school term is closing by 30th or thereabouts of this month, you know that you have let down the country. Those children have not studied for three months in terms of impact. What do you expect your money to do? 

Hon. Minister, what is this money that you have sent going to do to the children who are about to go home? Actually, if any head teacher stole this money, maybe he would even be justified because it is not going to go into the process for which it was required. For how long will we treat this nation with such level of insensitivity that our children have a raw deal and a whole minister of Government stands here and says, “After all, you should be happy we have sent money?”

This Parliament said to you years ago that you should send the money 15 days to the start of the term. You have revised it and now you are sending it 15 days to close of the term. You owe this country an apology. You owe our children an apology. Government must explain this type of behaviour because we stand doomed if this is the approach our leaders in Government are going to use for handling the affairs of this country. That you needed a supplementary budget, who does not know how many children enrol in schools every term? This is an envisaged expenditure that somebody comes here and says, “You see we need a supplementary.” There are so many things for which you need supplementary but not this one. You knew that the term will be opening, this number of children will be at school – and you even say that you want to pay teachers for not teaching and you think that we are happy. 

I am extremely disappointed and I think that this is an indictment on Government if –(Member timed out.)

3.27
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for attempting to please the hon. Members. (Laughter) However, I am worried that because of the rush they have gone through, we have always experienced shortages and yet schools have no way of claiming the top up. I hope that this time there will be no shortages because of the rush.

I would also like to find out from the hon. Minister because in Manafwa District, teachers were transferred this term and were told to go or leave teaching. There was no transport for those teachers. I do not know whether the money that you have sent includes transportation of teachers who are on transfer or the policy has changed that teachers have to transport themselves to their destinations. I thank you very much.

3.30
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Uganda is among those countries that has been highlighted in trying to address the Millennium Development Goals and even now, as we go to post 2015 Millennium Development Goals, I think there must be areas that you could have made strides and in this case, I think that education should be an area that we should not really take with laxity.

The minister has given a clear statement here and to me, the criticism in this House should be taken in a positive way because a lot of money is committed by the Government to ensure that we excel in education. 

As I speak today, the quality of the children that go through Universal Primary Education is still wanting and it is not that Government is not trying or putting effort but there is a lot of laxity. If we are talking about the new government policy of capitation grant release to the primary schools, I think this should have been envisaged earlier on – why should money be sent and for example, I know that in our system, the term will be closing in early August and we are still crying about releases! I think this is being unserious. We should just be thinking on how to make education better because in far as I am concerned, the President of this country is very committed because when he goes to the different –(Interjections)– yes because when he goes to the different international for a for meetings, he signs. He has signed most of these protocols and instruments. Therefore, the laxity must stop.

We have CAOs in this country, we have the District Inspectors of Schools in every district and when we are talking about education and the quality, the issue of ghost teachers and schools must not arise at this kind of debate.

Lastly –(Interjections)– lastly, Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure.

MR AYENA: I thank you. You know when we are discussing matters of serious national importance, we do not want subversions by colleagues who want us to appear like we are insulting Government. We are talking about a specific matter; the failure on the part of one ministry – about one important matter and there is nothing to do about assaulting the whole Government. We know that the government is committed in many areas but when we talk about the future of our children, I think that it must be handled in the right perspective. So, we do not want anybody who comes and talks about – [MS KASULE LUMUMBA: “Do not intimidate the woman.”] Is it therefore, Madam – [MS KASULE LUMUMBA: “How do you intimidate a woman? Button your coat!”] Is it therefore – [MS KASULE LUMUMBA: “Check your trouser”] (Laughter)

Is it procedurally right for the hon. Member holding the Floor to tell us that we are suggesting that the Government is not serious?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I have listened to the discussions and the submissions from the Members. There were statements from Members to that effect and that is what the Member is responding to. 

MS KASULE LUMUMBA:  He is intimidating a woman.

MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, I want to proceed in this way; that well as we look at the new policy for Government in regards to the capitation grant releases to the different schools, please, let us put a heart and emotion to what we try to implement. For example –(Member timed out_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that is the time I had slotted for this debate. Hon. Minister. Procedure?

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you. The minister’s statement on delayed release of capitation grant particularly on page 2, paragraph six brings in a different motion from the usual ministerial statements. The minister tries to concede that there is an apparent shortage but cannot be explained in this particular statement and he proposes that this particular matter that requires a detailed proper explanation of the apparent shortage be referred to the relevant committee of Parliament for further discussion and scrutiny. 

The point of procedure that I am raising is that how is this going to be done when there is no formal motion that this particular matter be taken to a committee? And if this House says that we go to a committee, what do we expect from that committee? Will it be a report that will be debated on this particular line or should we assume that this statement was hanging and therefore, be expunged from this particular statement? I seek your guidance.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister’s statement was responding to those two issues; late release of the money; he says the money had already been released, but the fact is that it was released late and the question is, why was it released late. That is what he has been trying to answer. And also on the implementation on the change of government policy that requires release of funds for capitation grants 15 days before the beginning of the school term. 

Honourable members, these matters are not connected to the order of the terms in the schools. This matter is linked to our financial year and every financial year covers all those periods. The question is, the money that you have appropriated as Parliament should be released 15 days before the term. Now, what the minister should tell us is why there should be a shortfall when the money is released three times instead of four times; 15 days before the beginning of each term. Why should there be a shortfall? 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, this is the very reason why I made this request – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, tell us because you are the one running the sector; why should there be a shortfall?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Because when money was being released quarterly – mark my words, the financial year runs from 1st July to 30th June. When there was a change in terms of release – originally, we would realise the money quarterly; we release it at the beginning of the financial year, which is July. Then we release in September, we release in January and in April; those are four tranches. 

Now, when we have to release starting with financial year 2013/2014; as you know, there are these two months that fall within a financial year, May and June; that is where the problem arises –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, can I be protected. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him first finish – honourable members, let the minister finish what he is saying then you can raised clarification. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Thank you for protecting me, Mr Speaker –(Interjections)– let me relate the story –(Laughter)– let me state the facts. When money is being released to schools quarterly in three instalments, to match with the school terms, we got a problem because once you release money for the second quarter in the financial year of 2012/13; there were two months that remained; May and June. 

Mr Speaker, since –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, am I still holding the Floor? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are still holding the Floor and it is your responsibility to hold it. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: And I am begging that I hold it –(Laughter)– through you, Sir. Let me go back to my original position that I want to answer this question in the committee –(Interjections)– yes, together with my technical officers –(Interjections)– let me - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, can we have some order in the House – and that includes the honourable member for Mukono Municipality. Honourable Kajara, do you want to say something?

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. The question of why there was a shortfall did not arise only yesterday. It started in financial year 2011/12 and in the dossier; the release was affected on quarterly basis. In the release for the financial year 2011/12, we were releasing money in January for first term; second term was in July and third term it would be released in October. 

Due to that mismatch in the release cycle and the school term, it warranted a change in the school term to align the releases with the school terms. Now, in a bid to harmonise the financial year with the school term operations, the Ministry of Education and Sports advised that the release dates be changed. In other words, the first instalments should – the months of release should be July, October and January. July for 2nd term, which is May to August, October for 3rd term which is September to December and January for the 1st term which is February to April. Now, in the financial year 2012/2013, Mr Speaker, the funds were released based on the new basis; I mean the dates that I have just read to you.

The releases were effected for the first quarter – July, September and for the second quarter, October to December, the funds for the third term were also released and in the third quarter, January to March for the first term. This provision once implemented, the money that had been budgeted for the third quarter release got exhausted –(Interjections)– I am going to explain that. This implied that there would be no money for the second term. This money - in July 2013, the releases were based on the timelines as I have just said and the directive to release funds 15 days before the school started came in later after the July 13 release had been effected.

Considering that there was no release during the last quarter of 2012/2013, the schools used the money to clear outstanding obligations. This is –(Interjections)– yes, outstanding obligations in the previous term, the money had been exhausted. So, if I tabulate the releases for 2013/2014, which is now the previous financial year – the first release was effected in July 2013 and we released Shs 63.1 billion. The second release was effected in September 2013 and it was Shs 63.1 billion and the third release was effected in January 2014, which was also Shs 63.1 billion all totalling to the sum of Shs 189 billion, which was the budget for the whole financial year and –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we have the report that the hon. Matia Kasaija presented. It says that the releases were as follows: July – Shs 53 billion and August with Shs 63 billion. That is the report you have presented. But now the hon. Aston Kajara is saying releases were made in July and September. That already confuses us yet these are reports from ministers in the Ministry of Finance.

Mr Speaker, when you look at the report that hon. Mathias Kajara –(Interruption)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I am called Matia Kasaija. There is somebody called Mr Kajara. So, is the hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to confuse the names that are so clear? He wants to baptise me Kajara and then baptises hon. Kajara, Kasaija? Is he in order? If he doesn’t know our names, why doesn’t he call us by our constituencies, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the difficulty with the names - I also suffer it from the Chair here many times. If I were to always be put to order, I would not be able to be chairing this House. If a Member mistook one name for another, that would not be easy to handle. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, let me now use their first names to avoid confusion. Now hon. Aston has just stated that the Ministry of Finance released funds in July and September. But the hon. Matia said in his report that the monies were released in July and August according to the report that we received last week. Mr Speaker, which of the two should we believe? Should it be hon. Aston or the hon. Matia?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that is not a matter for order but a matter for clarification.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, thank you for your wise ruling. Anyway, I was just informing the House on how the money got exhausted and therefore occasioned a shortfall. I was saying that in the financial year 2013/2014, we released three tranches of money, Shs 63 billion in July –(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When this matter came on Wednesday last week, and Parliament extensively deliberated on it, hon. Raphael Magyezi moved a motion that a select committee be formed to investigate this matter. I seconded that motion. It was then that the Minister pleaded with this House that we give her until Tuesday to come up with a statement that would be able to clarify all these issues. And the Speaker ruled that in case this House does not get satisfied with that statement – and by the look of things, it is very clear we are not – a select committee would be constituted to look into this matter –(Interjections)– please allow me to raise my point. Mr Speaker, I seek your protection. Figures are being mentioned and there are questions arising about where the funds are.

In the circumstances, Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally okay for us to revert to that ruling of the Speaker that now a select committee of this House be formed to look into this matter because the other time the fear was that we would disrupt the process of releasing these funds. But now that we are sure that funds have ben already released and that we just want to find out how and why there was a delay – isn’t it procedurally okay, Mr Speaker, that you rule that this motion is moved again to form a select committee? Even the minister himself has just requested this House to refer part of the issues to the committee. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, those of you who are saying seconded, are you seconding the ruling of the Speaker because there is no motion moved yet? (Laughter)

Hon. Members, if this House is going to proceed by select committees all the time, we might end up in problems. I think the matter is: why are there delays in releases? And now we have issues that the honourable ministers are trying to explain relating to things like shortfalls and us wondering why shortfalls should arise when months of the year are budgeted for. Those are the two issues. Now, does it require a select committee? 

If this remains outstanding by the time we resolve this matter, it would be easier to task the committee to look at this again since we are doing the budget and then come back in the course of reporting next week then deal with it. If you appoint a select committee, we will not be able to handle the report of the select committee until September or October. If we want to deal with this issue expeditiously, in a manner that will deal with the question squarely, we are doing the budget right now, the committee responsible for this sector is doing work on money and this is a money issue, can they among the issues raise the question so that when they come to report these issues are debated properly? Wouldn’t it be better?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much; you have raised very good issues. You have said that we budgeted for 12 months and I am sure every academic year has 12 months – (Interjections) - We have budgeted for a financial year and it has 12 months and an academic year also has 12 months. That means the money we budgeted for is equal; the only difference may be time. 

Let me give an example; if you started in 2013/2014, it means that the money which was released in the budget of 2012/2013 in April would go up to June. That means when we released the budget of July 2013/14, we would have released a portion of one month to cater for the balance of the month in the new financial year. That would be covered even under vote-on-account. 

The procedural issue I am raising is that the money was released for all the years in full and the number of months in a year is 12 and the number of months that children go to school is 12; so where does the shortfall come from? Why shouldn’t the minister here tell us where the money for the other two months went and we end the issue here? Isn’t it procedurally right that we task him to explain now? If he ate the money, let him tell us. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is exactly how I had guided because this is a budgetary issue and the committee is doing exactly that at this time. That is why I posed the question to the ministers to explain how there can be a shortfall in money when all the money was appropriated. If these questions cannot be answered now, we expect that when our committee comes back with the report from that sector based on the ministerial policy statement, that should be one of the issues which they should report to the House about so that we can deal with it squarely.

I hear people talking about a supplementary; there will be an opportunity to deal with these issues in a more organised way. Right now if we are to talk about a select committee, it may not be the best way to move. That is my proposal. I have posed the question to the minister and he was still trying to answer. If you cannot answer, tell us you cannot answer in a satisfactory manner so that we can give time to the committee to deal with this and they will deal with it. 

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, that is why –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There is an attempt by the two ministers to convince the House that it is the difference between the school calendar and the calendar for releasing funds that is causing a shortage. That is a desperate attempt. 

However, even in that desperate attempt, the two of them have made two fundamentally contradicting statements; the first one is that they, from the same ministry, are talking about different dates for releasing the same funds and I thought that needs to be agreed on. The question of who we believe is very critical. What we are doing is not an academic exercise; it is a very serious matter about our children and their future and the future of this country.

Secondly, the other procedural issue that I have is that one minister gets up on the Floor and says that it is the Minister of Education and unfortunately, the ministers of education have not even bothered to intervene and say that they are not the ones who directed the delay and the release of funds when the term is closing. So, who then will take responsibility for this mess? 

Is it okay, Mr Speaker, that we sort out the basics first - who among them is telling the truth and secondly, did the Ministry of Education, which is full of educationists, make the blunder of misdirecting the Ministry of Finance to release inputs for the school term at the end of the term? Once that is sorted out procedurally, then we could move to the next level. I would like you to help me if that is okay then we sort it out.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is okay. The issue is, there was an instance of delay and the second instance is that now there is a shortage. Hon. Kajara says that the money which was for the two months ending the FY 2012/13 was used up by the teachers to clear things that they had apparently borrowed during the course of the delay. So, what we do not know is whether what they used it to clear was the purpose for which the money was budgeted. Those are the issues that keep emerging. That is why I am saying that it is purely a budget issue and the committee can interact with these people and even call officials from education about these allegations that are being made so that we have a very processed recommendation on this particular subject. 

Right now, the two ministers do not even seem to have compared notes when responding to this issue - (Laughter) - and we should not move to make it a big issue of the days and so forth. Let the committee understand it and then we can be better briefed when they come back.

4.06
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to totally agree with your proposal that we give the ministers time to go and sort out issues with the committee, together with their technical people, which I think they cannot do here. So, to save the time of the House, I think we should agree with your proposal and put this matter to rest and we proceed. 

I concur with your proposal, Sir, that the ministry should go to the committee because the committee is already on. The most important thing is that money has already been paid and the issue is that there is a shortage, which cannot help. So, it must be explained and that is my proposal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are supposed to finish with all the sectoral committee reports by 31st August. That means our committee responsible for this sector should take up this issue, analyse it and the report should clearly show us how the budget performed in those periods so that you can clearly see what happened. If there is any shortfall, which they find justifiable, they will be able to tell us once they have talked to finance, education and everybody. They can then advise us better. Let us do it that way. It is so ordered. The committee should take interest and move on this matter seriously. Thank you, Members.

Honourable Members, in the gallery this afternoon we have pupils from Berkeley High School in Iganga District. They are represented by hon. Milton Muwuma and hon. Kabaale Olivia. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. I think they are on this side. You are welcome. (Applause)

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

4.09
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Mr Speaker, I rise under rule 46 of our Rules of Procedure to make a personal explanation. 

On Thursday, 17 July 2014, my sister, hon. Nabbanja Robinah, Woman MP for Kibaale District, in her personal explanation to this Parliament tried to associate me to an incident in which she was involved at a revenue check point on 15 July 2014 in Kibaale District. I certainly regard the incident as unfortunate as it could have been avoided if the paths of dialogue and discussion had been pursued. I want to categorically inform Parliament that I was not even remotely associated with this incident and I do not know the intention of trying to associate my name with it. For the record, I have never tended to do business with any district. 

Mr Speaker, in her explanation my sister indicated that one of my drivers had held her in the scuffle. Whether he held her to protect her or not does not come out in her statement. Nevertheless, I do not think I should be held responsible for whatever my driver or any employee of mine does especially when they are off duty.

That day, the 15th of July 2014, I was as usual at Parliament doing parliamentary business both in the sessional Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and later in plenary, and I am always here. My sister, in her statement, said she rung me and I did not respond. If what she says is true then her calls were never recorded on my phone, not even as missed calls. Otherwise, there is no reason why I should not have responded to her calls. I have never had a habit of not picking calls. I even call back when I find a missed call.

Mr Speaker, I am happy that this Parliament indicated that there would be an independent investigation to find out who was responsible for organising and executing this fracas. I pray and I have been praying to the Speaker that the truth comes out and the devil will be shamed. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the next item is laying of papers. I had amended the Order Paper to allow the addendum from the Ministry of Tourism to be included. We will dispense with this long list of the financial statements for now and deal only with the addendums because these are matters that should go to the sessional committees and they should be handled. 

There is an addendum on the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities – It is the only addendum, actually, and it is on the Order Paper. I think we should do just that and let the other ones be deferred so that we can conclude debate on that matter.

LAYING OF PAPERS

ADDENDUM FOR THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015 FROM THE MINISTRY OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES

4.13
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Ms Maria Mutagamba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on Table the addendum to the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, the budget of the Uganda Wildlife Authority and the attendant staff list for the Financial Year 2014/2015. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and it is referred to the appropriate committee to handle together with the main policy statement and report within the period defined. Hon. Minister, please provide a soft copy to the Clerk so that it is uploaded on the iPads for the Members.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure in my capacity as shadow Minister for Tourism and Wildlife. The minister has already presented her policy statement for that sector and as I speak, in my capacity as shadow minister I have already completed the report in response to the same. 

In terms of procedure, therefore, is it right for the minister to supplement the addendum at her leisure when everything is already officially done? I am saying so because in law, an addendum denotes something which can be added in the form of a document or a supplement and this is the explanation, which is shown elaborately in Black’s Law Dictionary. So, I am not speaking out of context.

Mr Speaker, it therefore bothers me, as shadow minister, to receive an addendum which has no explanation. I owe a responsibility to the people I represent especially under the docket of Shadow Minister of Tourism and Wildlife.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I clearly stated the contents of the addendum. One was part of the budget of the Uganda Wildlife Authority and there was also the list of members of staff. That is all it is. The staff list was not in the main ministerial policy statement. An addendum, as you say, comes when the initial document is already issued and the only way you can add to it is by issuing an addendum. If it had not yet been issued, we would not be calling it an addendum.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE PETITION BY FORMER WORKERS OF COFFEE MARKETING BOARD UNDER LIQUIDATION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that we had a debate on this subject and we did not finish. I had listed members that were supposed to contribute and I will start with the Member for Lira Municipality. Just to remind the members, it is the Members for Lira Municipality, Rukungiri Municipality, Mbale Municipality, Kassanda, Obongi, Kaberamaido, Gulu, Arua, Oyam, Kigulu and Nwoya.

4.17
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would firstly like to thank the committee for the work that they did in highlighting the plight of some of the citizens of our dear country. 

Mr Speaker, I find this issue disturbing. When we look at our national assets and how we have handled them, it is difficult to see if the purpose or the direction in which the policies Government has been promoting are actually delivering for this country. To take us back as to where we had come from, the role that coffee has played in the development of this nation has been crucial. The achievements which the previous governments have made in developing the coffee industry and setting up the assets is something that we should look at and understand for what purpose and from where and for whose benefit.

Currently, I fail to really understand what exactly the intention of Government was and what we hope to achieve. In the second five-year development plan, there were certain key objectives and work that was done in the coffee industry. Not to go into details but highlight a few points, it was to really increase the quality and to shift more towards Arabica Coffee than Robusta Coffee. 

Additionally, the government had set up a fund, which was administered by the Uganda Commercial Bank, which was for mortgage loans mainly utilised by the cooperatives to increase the quality and to increase the value of the crop that we are exporting. At the end of the day, we were able to set up a great asset and it was able to contribute greatly to the economy and wellbeing of many of the farmers. Up to this point I cannot understand why, unless Government can give me justification, under the guise of privatisation we had to pillage and plunder our own assets. 

During the period from 1968 to 1989, the coffee industry was governed by the quota system and annual increase was roughly three per cent. However, from the period of 1990 to date, the system changed and when you analyse the figures of Uganda’s production, we have not increased. The programme of the 60s yielded 2,970 million bags. Because very many exponents of Government always use 1986 as a reference point, I decided to go and look at the figures especially from 1990 when the quota system had ended. 

At the time when the quota system ended, Uganda was producing 1,955 million bags, which is substantially less than what we produced at the end of the second five-year development programme which ended in 1971. These figures keep fluctuating from 2 million, in 1995 it was 3.2 million, in 1999 it came down to 2.8 million, in 2003/2004 it was 2.5 million, in 2004/2005 it was 2.5 million and in the year 2012/2013 it rose to 3.2 million.

The importance of this is that if we look at other countries that have been producing coffee, there is something seriously wrong with what is happening in Uganda. Vietnam, for example, was never known as a serious coffee producer especially in the 60’s. In the 1990’s with the quota system gone, they produced 1,390,000. Five years down the road, they have surpassed us with 3,532,000 bags. By the year 1999/2000, they were producing 11,631,000 bags. As of the year 2012/2013, they were producing 22 million bags. If you look at the processes and policies that they have followed, it is what we had been doing previously.

Ethiopia, which is closer to home, in 1990/1991 produced 2,909,000 bags, which was mainly Arabica. By 1995/1996, it was 2,860,000. In 1999/2000, it was 3,505,000 bags. As of 2008/2009, it was 4,949,000 bags and in 2012/2013 it was 8,100,000 bags. Clearly, other countries in the same global world market in which we are playing are able to register increases and yet the policies are not different from what we had in the 60s. 

On top of that, today we do not have the assets; we do not have the Uganda Commercial Bank to support us. Additionally, some of the work done included a credit programme, and I will quote from the second five-year development plan: “A credit programme to enable the farmers purchase the necessary chemicals and equipment.” It was realised that by spraying and fertilizers, we could increase our yield threefold. 

The President, in the State of the Nation Address, was talking about possibilities of exporting to China but yet when we heard the Budget Speech, the pesticides, chemicals and fertilizers are now to be taxed. The policies that yielded results were credit, support to the cooperatives, and we now reverse and expect different results. The idea of privatisation and how it was marketed was that we were going to get massive yields if we were open to the market, but the figures do not show it. We have reached the peak of about three million and we are stuck there.

Mr Speaker, on top of that, the workers who were working on the value addition at our state-of-the-art processing facility in Bugolobi cannot even receive their terminal benefits. Instead, we get 5,000 workers who are “ghosts” receiving more than 15 times what the workers have been demanding and awarded by court. Shs 150 billion goes to “ghosts”! The workers who are justly seeking I think Shs 11 billion are not paid but we paid the “ghosts”. The important point here is: policy-wise, where are we going? 

If coffee is to play an important role, what is happening? Privatisation has not yielded results if we are to export to China. Vietnam now has 22 million bags per annum. What is Uganda going to export or when the Chinese market opens, we are now going to start thinking about how we can increase our yields and production? 

I am really challenging the government; can you please tell us where we are going? If we are not making any headway, you must have the courage to admit, for the benefit of the nation, that some of these programmes have not worked. It is not only Coffee Marketing Board; in my case, I am a product of cotton. I have Lira Spinning Mills where the workers have not been paid in similar circumstances; they went to court, the money was released and they still did not get the money. This is something that has gone on in almost every key asset, which was for the benefit of the citizens of Uganda. To whom – (Interruption) 

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Member holding the Floor is talking of Shs 150 billion having been paid to Coffee Marketing Board workers. The information I want to give to the House is that the total amount that was paid to workers of the Coffee Marketing Board was Shs 7,560,778,069 and not Shs 150 billion as he alleged. That is information that is well documented. I thank you.

MR AKENA: Mr Speaker, I wish to thank the honourable minister for attempting to continue to mislead the suffering citizens of Uganda. The committee of Parliament did a serious job in ascertaining the facts. In one of the issues where the issue of misinformation came out, there is a point where it says, “…if the payment in the report of the Auditor-General was to be compiled with the double payment of Shs 300 billion…” If your double is Shs 300 billion, your half was Shs 150 billion. The fact of the matter is that we have paid ghosts but the crux of the matter –(Interruption)

MR MUGABI: Thank you. Actually, you are absolutely right because this is from the report of the committee and this came from the Minister of Finance and the Privatisation Unit - they paid Shs 150 billion to 5,000 former workers. This is in our report from the Ministry of Finance and agency you supervised - the Privatisation Unit. So, I do not know where the minister is getting his figures from. That is a new figure I have never heard about throughout the investigations. 

MR AYENA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The background to this information is that there was a letter that was initiated from the Privatisation Unit by somebody called Moses Mwase, who is the legal secretary in the Privatisation Unit. This letter was paraded to so many people including the Prime Minister. In fact, in considering this letter, the Prime Minister wrote to the President and unfortunately, misinformed the President and you will find in our report that at one stage, the Prime Minister apologised that he had discovered that there was misinformation. 

Whereas the total number of all the workers that worked in Coffee Marketing Board is about 1,832, they were saying that they had paid 5,000 workers and the information was that if this payment was made, there was likelihood that the total amount that would be paid would be Shs 300 billion. So, if you halved that, it would come to Shs 150 billion. That is the basis of our information.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you use the word “Prime Minister”, - in the report they are talking about the former Prime Minister, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi - for the record, it might be confusing. 

MR AYENA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that information. There is always a Prime Minister in that office but I was talking about the Prime Minister at the time. So, if it is the former Prime Minister, so be it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is the former Prime Minister; you have to be specific. If you talk of an apology when the current one has not apologised - Some of those things are person to holder. 

MR AYENA: Well, much obliged for your correction. Thank you. 

MR AKENA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am appealing to Government; this issue of embracing privatisation and free market without careful thought, plan and organisation is taking us nowhere. We have stripped our assets. There were productive sectors which are no longer productive. There are issues I can go into in areas which affect large communities. 

How much money was injected into the Diary Corporation before it was sold for US$ 1? About US$ 4 million went into the equipment of the spinning mill which was sold as scrap and the list is endless. The workers who were working there cannot even get the little which they need to raise their families. So, while the President talks about ideological confusion, I think where I stand, I am ideologically clear on what is necessary to assist the productive sectors of this society to be able to achieve their abilities. 

It is some of the policies of the government and the resolves which are not clear, which we need to address, but we have missed the bandwagon of coffee. We may have dreams of exporting to China but we are late. Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the committee. I pray that Government considers the plight of our citizens. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to recast the debate because we are dealing with a petition that was fairly specific. The preliminary issues that were raised by the honourable Member for Lira are very important but we need to focus on the subject of this petition. If I could recast, the committee found that there were three distinct categories of former employees of Coffee Marketing Board Ltd namely: 
1. 	Two hundred and sixty-four (264) members of the trade union who took their grievances to the Industrial Court; 
2. 	Unionisable employees who did not join the trade union and were therefore governed under the Coffee Marketing Board Ltd’s terms and conditions of service;
3. 	The staff that could not be part of the union who were also governed by the Coffee Marketing Board Ltd’s terms and conditions. 

The terms of reference are very specific and that is what we need to be discussing because the findings of the committee are based on that for now. When we broaden the debate, we might lose the focus of this petition and the interests of the people we are trying to project here will get lost in the translation. So, we need to recast it. The terms of reference were reduced to: 

One, determine whether the Privatisation Unit had fully paid all the former employees of Coffee Marketing Board Ltd and if not, whether there were any credible reasons why they were resisting paying whatever balances were due to the former employees. 

Two, to find out whether the former Attorney-General, the former Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and all departments under them acted properly in handling matters related to the former employees of Coffee Marketing Board.

Three, to determine the background to Miscellaneous Application No. 74 of 2006 arising from Miscellaneous Application No. 66 of 1996 and find out whether it had any connections with the petition before the committee.

Four, to determine whether there was value for money for the assets and properties of Coffee Marketing Board sold and the application of the process thereof. 

Five, to do any other thing or act connected with and relevant to the above terms of reference.

So, we might need to deal with this specific debate so that we can resolve this matter and see what the entitlements of the people who presented the petition are. A broader debate can be generated on the broader subject because it is important, but we can have such a debate an appropriate time. Thank you. I do not see the Member for Rukungiri Municipality but I see the Member for Mbale Municipality; please, let us make the debate relevant to this petition.

4.38
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to also join all those who spoke before on this issue to congratulate the committee for coming up with a good report that has brought out a lot of facts. 

I am very passionate about Coffee Marketing Board because before I got a scholarship to go and study outside this country, I used to work in the Coffee Marketing Board in the go-down in Bugolobi. Not at any one time were there 5,000 workers at the Coffee Marketing Board.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I am also passionate because I am peasant of coffee. I grow coffee, and I want to correct one Member who said yesterday that Brazil produces the best coffee in the world. The best coffee in the world is Bugisu AA Arabica, which is known all over the world! I want to tell Members that Brazil produces Robusta coffee in plenty. Just a little bit of the Bugisu AA, less than a kilogramme, can be mixed in about 20 kilogrammes of Robusta coffee to get the scent of the real coffee.

Mr Speaker, Bugisu Cooperative Union participated in putting up the Bugolobi coffee plant. I feel so sad now when I hear – I recall vividly the State of the Nation Address by the President where he talked about the production of more coffee because the prices are now going up. This also brings me to the issue of Uganda as a country where about 85 per cent of our people are involved in agriculture. I recall that those days there were the 3Cs – coffee, cotton and copper - and the 3Ts – tea, tobacco and tourism, but as we talk this is history. So, when I look at my colleagues on the other side and I also read the speeches of 1986 –(Member timed out_) Mr Speaker, I am now the Leader of the Opposition, please give me more time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please continue.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Privatisation Unit came in and deprived Ugandans of the agriculture sector – the Coffee Marketing Board went, the Dairy Corporation went, NYTIL went, the African Textile Mills in Mbale went, UDC went, the Uganda Commercial Bank went – I could go on and on.  The Uganda Cooperative Bank that used to give crop financing to cooperative societies at very low interest also went. Today, for the cooperative societies to get crop financing, the interest is at 24 per cent. So, when we recall what happened – all these polices that deprived Ugandans – it really hurts me and I am sure even all Ugandans. 

Uganda Commercial Bank, which has now been taken over by Kenya Commercial Bank, we were told was not making interest yet the money that purchased UCB came from the bank. Kenya Commercial Bank is making profits, Tanzania Commercial Bank is making profits, and now all these institutions that used to offer employment to our people – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now going to come back to the topic?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Yes, Mr Speaker, but you cannot talk about privatisation of the Coffee Marketing Board and forget about all the enterprises that used to offer employment to our people but were all sold off at giveaway prices. When I look at the Dairy Corporation that was sold at US$ 1, I feel a lot of pain, Mr Speaker.

Going back to the report, there has never –(Interruption)

MR OKOT-OGONG: Mr Speaker, I am quite aware that the Government of Uganda came up with a policy to privatise institutions and organisations. I am also aware that the country has gained greatly from this privatisation policy.

I want to inform you right now that the Dairy Corporation that was privatised at US$ 1 is now exporting milk to 17 countries in the world, which was not the case before. I want to inform you that today, they are buying over 20 million litres of milk from farmers and they employ very many people. I wonder why the Leader of the Opposition seems not to be aware of what is happening.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MR OKOT-OGONG: Mr Speaker, before I give the point of order, I also want to inform the House that Uganda’s financial sector –(Interjections)– I just want to deliver information that Uganda’s financial sector is the strongest in Africa and this is because of privatisation. Therefore, is it in order for the Leader of the Opposition now to completely be blind about the achievements that have been brought because of the privatisation policy?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member is speaking from the other side of the House and I am sure it is within his mandate to say the things he said. But it is also within your right to give him that information.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When it comes to coffee, I become so passionate because I grow coffee –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, let us debate the topic.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, when you look at the amount that was paid - Shs 150 billion - and still they were asking for Shs 300 billion, that is corruption of the highest order. The report even spells out the people at the Ministry of Finance who were involved in this exercise. They are clearly mentioned but they have been promoted to high positions. I would like to urge Government to think about this and take serious action.

Mr Speaker, Bugisu Cooperative Union contributed money to buy properties abroad. The Coffee Marketing Board properties in the UK and Mombasa –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, we are not discussing the privatisation policy.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: No, but they were under Coffee Marketing Board. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but listen to the Speaker. I have just summarised the issues clearly. We will miss the people who have been sitting in the gallery and they have been there for weeks. They are the ones who brought this petition. 

If we want a debate on privatisation, we can structure that debate separately; let us first deal with the issue of the people who are grieving. They have not been paid; they have been walking to this Parliament since 2007. That is the issue we should discuss right now. Let us help the citizens who petitioned this House.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you talk about the Coffee Marketing Board, you have got to involve all the enterprises that fall under the Coffee Marketing Board and - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Here, we are talking about the workers who petitioned this Parliament. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, I want to agree with the report of the committee and the Auditor-General’s findings that all those workers who toiled for this nation must be paid their benefits. I worked with most of them and they worked round the clock loading train wagons, 250 bags per wagon, to go to Mombasa. They toiled for this nation. Coffee brought in a lot of money and therefore they must be paid their benefits. All those people mentioned from the Ministry of Finance must be held responsible for the money they stole. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.49
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the thorough investigation and the report they have come up with. 

My heart bleeds for my country because of the level of corruption and my heart also bleeds for civil servants who do not care about former workers. It is so disheartening to learn, according to the committee, that the overall number of former workers of Coffee Marketing Board was about 1,832 and yet the same report points out that over 5,000 people were paid. Painfully, of the 5,000 that were paid, these real workers were not among those paid.

I wonder whether those who have worked in the Privatisation Unit or whoever handled this still have any integrity left. Those with the mantle of running Government, we need to question whether they are still doing the right thing for this country. I wonder whether the same people think that when they leave work, they will also suffer like the same workers who are now suffering on the streets.

Mr Speaker, I want to concur with the committee that let all the three categories of people be paid. The mere fact that you cannot afford to join the trade union and go to court does not mean that you should not be paid. We have similar circumstances where many citizens have claims against Government and those who are clever and can meet the conditions of lawyers are getting lawyers. However, it does not mean that those who cannot afford or do not have the capacity to contact lawyers should not be paid. We also have the law - the workers Act – where we have a category of people who cannot join a trade union because of the position they are holding. These are the three categories of workers we are talking about. If there is any payment to be made, they should all be paid without any conditions because they served this nation.

Mr Speaker, not only do we have former workers of Coffee Marketing Board, we also have former workers of Lint Marketing Board. We also have other categories of civil servants who are either in court with Government or because they do not have the capacity to take Government to court, they are also languishing. We get these questions in our constituencies. I remember in 2005 when Government was undertaking restructuring, there were certain employees who were laid off but they were not fully paid. In your constituency, Mr Speaker, you also have former sub county chiefs, former parish chiefs and others. There are also veterans and former workers of the Uganda Railways Corporation. They are all languishing. 

I request this Parliament to investigate or at least advise Government. We should investigate whether all those parastatals that were privatised met all the conditions because as far as I know, you inherit liabilities or - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am going to be tough now on these issues. Let us discuss the petition that is before us. I said that if there is need to bring a debate on the entire privatisation process and the operations of PU, it can be brought. Unfortunately, that is not the debate now. Let us deal with what we have now. There is a rule on relevance.

MS ADONG: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. What I was trying to say is that there could also be other workers of other privatised units. I, therefore, ask the government to take the recommendation of this Parliament and please pay our workers – the former workers of CMB and others that are still at large that would still either want to engage Government in court or in any way. Thank you. 

4.55
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Inside is getting very cold; I am sorry. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Inside what? (Laughter)

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When I look at the report of this committee and if I were to give credit, I would give the committee members 100 per cent for this report. We want to thank you so much. I patiently waited for this report. At some point I followed proceedings and I completely got lost and gave up hope. However, that a report of this magnitude has come to the House, hon. Baka, the chair of the committee, you deserve the credit and we are very grateful. 

I would like to say, cry the beloved country. The former workers of this country are getting problems with payments, the pensioners are getting problems with payments, the current civil servants are getting problems with payments; who then are being paid? I even felt saddened when the Minister of Finance came here to dispute what was in the report. Read page 5, item 5(1) on the findings of the committee; the names of the people being quoted there are your team under your ministry. It is a shame that you came here when you were not prepared and you had not read the report, moreover the members of your team came and appeared before the committee where they gave testimony. So, it is not proper that you come and disorient the House.

Mr Speaker, I was looking at the process of the payment. If the members of the team from the Ministry of Finance inflated the number of workers who have been paid from 1,832 and they make it somersault to 5,000, I think it is only prudent and fair for these officials who sanctioned this payment to be charged. If they have all the facilities, they have technocrats working under them, they have been supervised and monitored, how can figures and names of people to be claimants somersault from 1,000 to 5,000?  Mr Speaker, is this still a country that we can say we are in charge of? Honestly speaking –(Interruption)

MR AYENA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give is that when we charged those who were responsible for the claim that there were 5,000 workers who had been paid, there was an attempt to smuggle some lists, which included lists of former workers of the Uganda Electricity Board, and we have these lists. This was in order to make sure that they boosted the number to close to 5,000 but alas, they never made it, not even to 3,000.

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, hon. Ayena, for the information. At the end of the day, the recommendation that came out because of the misinformation on page 7 of the committee report was that the petitioners should be paid their balances. I want to stand and tell this House that there were no balances and that these petitioners should be paid all their dues and in full. There are no balances and they have never been paid. So, I pray with this House about this.

The question of the Privatisation Unit - We can follow instances where the Privatisation Unit has been fraudulently engaging in issues of mis-payment and mismanagement of finances, but I am waiting for that day when the holders of the offices in the Privatisation Unit will be brought to book. If they have all the data and information, why do they somersault figures? 

Regarding the question of Shs 150 billion, where is this coming from and yet at the end of the day, there was no evidence? They claim to have paid Shs 150 billion but in the committee report on page 5, it says there were no documents to agree with the assertion that any funds were ever paid at all. On top of saying they paid out Shs 150 billion, this is not accompanied with any documents whatsoever. So, who is in charge of eating up all this money? It is therefore my good appeal to this House that the Privatisation Unit should be questioned seriously. 

Mr Speaker, I go back to the communication that has been taking place between the President’s Office and other relevant offices. The officials who are handling this matter could not even feel ashamed to defy the President over four times when he wrote to them to make sure this issue comes to an end. The first letter was written by the President from State House on 26 November 2006 and was addressed to the Attorney-General asking him to follow up on this issue. It was signed by Yoweri Kaguta Museveni but this letter was defied. The letter dated 5th April 2007 was also addressed to the Attorney-General concerning the former employees of Coffee Marketing Board. It was signed by Yoweri Kaguta Museveni but it was defied and still no payment took place. 

On 24 June 2009, payment of former employees of Coffee Marketing Board was the subject in a letter signed by Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. In fact, I will quote the President here: “I am of the opinion that the former employees deserve compensation especially since most of them are of advanced age. I require that you provide a report on the matter.” The last letter came on 10 May 2010 and it was addressed to the Ministry of Finance. The subject was “terminal benefits of former employees of Coffee Marketing Board”. The person who signed this letter still was Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of this country. 

These officials do not feel ashamed to defy the President over four times on directives that are clear, and they are still sitting in officers and most of them were appointed. I think this is a matter that one would fail to explain. At the end of the day, these petitioners do not get paid and most of them are dying and leaving this money behind and it cannot be followed up. Their grandchildren cannot come and follow up these claims. They have not been able to treat themselves, they have not been able to take their children to school and they have been chased out of houses where they are renting. I plead with us all to give the survivors of Coffee Marketing Board a chance. These people should expedite the process of payment and these people should honestly be given their dues.

As I wind up, I plead with the appointing authority and the office bearers in the Ministry of Finance; we are very disappointed with the level of fraudulence that is taking place in the Ministry of Finance. On cases that are very clear, you manipulate the processes at the end of the day to suit your whims. Honestly, very many families are crying outside there because of the inactivity, inefficiencies and deficiencies in the Ministry of Finance –(Interruption)

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, I was quite hesitant to interrupt the flow of ideas from my sister but what she says is extremely disturbing; that we can have a situation in this country where a President can give a directive and it is defied and then this House sits here and actually acknowledges that we are in a country where civil servants are more powerful than the President and this is on record! 

I want to seek clarification from my sister as to whether we have to sympathise with those who defy the President or we have to actually sympathise with the President who is very weak? May I get clarification on that?

MS EKWAU: Mr Speaker, the team from the Ministry of Finance should take note. You will be given time to respond to all our concerns. What we pray is that you kindly expedite the process of paying these petitioners. You will be blessed for that. 

To the committee members, you have made us believe that good work can still come out and we are very grateful. We waited for this report and the mere fact that you could attach a report and it comes to over 80 pages, we are very grateful for that. To the House, we have very many relatives who are former workers of Coffee Marketing Board; I really urge us to do justice to these families. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.07
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for coming out with this wonderful report. 

Mr Speaker, it is very sad that we live in a country called Uganda where both the former and current workers are suffering alike. (Laughter) I would to say that planning and implementing Government policy is very important and also having a framework and following it is very important. It looks like the ministry in charge of planning did not plan for the privatisation of these parastatals because if they really planned, we would not be having this kind of misinformation here and there. I would like to get clarification, basing on the report which is now before us, whether the ministry in charge knows the number of the former workers who were paid and those who are not yet paid. I also want to know what the Government intends to do about these former employees who did not get their payments. 

As I had earlier stated, it is very important to have a framework and even to follow it. There is something that I want to mention as far as this is concerned. If we had really followed the framework of disposing off these assets, we would not be having these problems. In the last sitting, an honourable Member of Parliament told us that there is yet another petition coming before this Parliament concerning the former workers of Lint Marketing Board. These are people who are capable of getting their way into this Parliament; what about those ones who cannot get their way to this Parliament? So, I feel that the Ministry of Finance should bring us the number of people who have not been able to get their payments.
 
On that note, Mr Speaker, I would like to recommend that first of all, the Government should pay these former workers without any delay –(Interruption)

MR AYENA: Mr Speaker and the House, you know that because of the difficulty of some of those who have no access to the courts of law or to this House or even to the Privatisation Unit, the Privatisation Unit is now legally defeating most of these wretched of the earth by what we call in law, the Limitation Act. When these people come, they say, “Well, you were sent off in about 1984 and therefore, you are not entitled.” So, this is the kind of trick that they are using. 

When these people come to them, they keep on postponing and telling them, “Come tomorrow; come tomorrow.” After about five years, it is already out of the limitation period. This is the trick that they are using. It is my view that this Parliament should take a stand on instructions to Government about those wretched of the earth who could neither go to court nor come here to have their matter sorted out within the limitation time and then ask Government to use what my learned friend, the Attorney-General, calls gratis. I thank you.

MR EKANYA: There is one sad thing and I request the intervention of the Speaker. For the entire Eighth Parliament, the Minister for Finance under PERD did not comply with the Act. The PERD Act is categorical and the Minister for Finance is supposed to submit a report here every six months to this Parliament. Since we opened this Ninth Parliament, the Minister for Finance has never submitted a report regarding the fulfilment of the PERD Act. The same people are now going to implement the PPP that we passed here the other day. Some of them have even been promoted. 

Therefore, the information that I am giving you, my sister, and seeking the indulgence of the Speaker and this House, is that we should compel the Minister for Finance to comply with the PERD Act and submit the report as required so that this House can debate this matter.

MS ALUM: Thank you so much, honourable colleague, for that information. Mr Speaker, the recommendation that I am now going to add onto what the committee has given is that the Ministry for Finance should come out with a database of all retrenched workers who have not yet been paid.

Two, I agree with the committee that the former workers of Coffee Marketing Board should be paid. However, I do not agree with the committee on the issue of the Attorney-General. The committee recommended that the Attorney-General should always make well researched and informed opinions to avoid giving contradictory opinions on the same subject matter. Mr Speaker, I do not know what happened when the committee reached this level of the Attorney-General. For all the corruption scandals that come to this Parliament, the Attorney-General has given funny opinions. You will find the President being misadvised to write letters. Sometimes, you will always find the Bank of Uganda there. So, I totally disagree with the committee on this recommendation. 

I recommend that punitive action should be taken against those whose names are mentioned to have done something wrong in this case. I pray that the Government of Uganda pays the former workers of Coffee Marketing Board. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will have the Member for Arua District and then I come to the Member for Bufumbira and then we close.

5.14
MS CHRISTINE ABIA (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you. Mr Speaker, I have been scanning around Africa and Uganda is the only country where we are teaching patriotism; the only country where we are being told and taught to love our country. Why? Such is the reason why we are being reminded to love our country. 

That said, it is very disturbing that I have actually grown up in the 1986 era but most of the people who sit on that Front Bench were beneficiaries of a government where these cooperatives were a backbone, where these cooperatives provided the parents of most of the members of the Front Bench with coupons that meant school fees. Today, our children are saying, “Please, can we have this?” That said, there are categories of these unionised and non-unionised former employees; I want to know from the committee how many people we are talking about. (Interruption) 

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (KARAMOJA) (Mrs Janet Museveni): Mr Speaker, is my sister in order really to state categorically that members sitting on the Front Bench here have benefited from cooperatives? I, for one, did not benefit from any cooperative. I can speak honestly and say that I know that many programmes have come up in this Government that were not existent in the governments before when I was young. 

I am quite sure that many Ugandan families have benefited from many government programmes presently; we can even talk about education itself and we can talk about patriotism. This government has introduced patriotism in our school systems. That does not mean that everybody is patriotic and that cannot be done by the government. So, is my sister and honourable member in order to state categorically about things that are not really true?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it was a specific reference that people from the Front Bench benefited from coupons from the cooperative society. Now the information is that the honourable Member for Ruhaama has not benefited from those. (Laughter) That means your statement that generalises, may not be good. You have to be specific when discussing some of these things. Secondly, I also grew up some time back. I used to study a subject called civics, whose content is very similar to what is patriotism today. 

MS ABIA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your ruling. I was very explicit; I had the opportunity not to go to UPE schools and I said most of the people in the Front Bench; that probably excluded her. I am a professional teacher and I did my school practice; I did not have the opportunity not to do my school practice and graduate with a degree in education, and that is why I am very careful –(Laughter).

Mr Speaker, there was a recommendation talking about Shs 300 billion and Shs 150 billion. As an economist, I know that there is always time value of money – (Interjections) – Can I be protected from hon. Kassiano Wadri and the man from Bugisu – (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected from the Leader of the Opposition. 

MS ABIA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am talking about the value of money. When there is a decision to be paid Shs 300 billion or Shs 150 billion and this money does not come in time, the money either loses value or appreciates. Now, so many years down the road, when these payments have not been effected, it is my opinion and suggestion that if these payments are to be effected, there must be time value of money factored in; there must be interest computed to justify the payments because time is of essence as far as money matters are concerned. 

Mr Speaker, when it comes to the contradiction in this regard, how is it possible that the Minister of Finance, who is seated before me, tells this House that there was Shs 7 billion which was paid? There is a contradiction that actually Shs 150 billion was paid, which Ministry of Finance denies paying. It is very disheartening that we have so many ministers in that ministry, who come to the Floor of Parliament and give contradicting statements that undo whatever would be relevant to us directly and the course of action we would take, especially since the Minister of Finance represents the President himself. 

Now, every one of you is seated in that ministry on behalf of the President and he pleads with you to pay and you do not pay; this calls for your resignation –(Mr Kajara rose_)– I am very well informed on this matter; you should have sought that clarification in your own chambers in the Ministry of Finance – (Interruption) 

MR KAJARA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I want to make to the honourable members is that many times, H.E the President gives directives and we abide by those directives. However, most of the directives that he gives – for example, the President advised thus: “This is therefore to advise that this matter be handled urgently to a conclusion to enable the retrenchees get what is due to them to avert the current suffering”. That is in one letter. In another letter he says, “This is therefore to direct you to handle this matter by settling the petitioners and determine what is due to them”. In another one he says, “I hereby reiterate my earlier directive that whatever is due to former employees should be paid”. 

What I am saying is that he said we should verify and pay what is due to them, which is different from saying, “You must pay”. Remember amidst that there is a court ruling, which says that this cannot be entertained because these people were dully paid. So how do you expect a civil servant or even the minister to give – (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order in respect of the averments by the honourable minister on this very matter alluding to a matter that is apparently sub judice. Mr Speaker, the petition before us involved former employees of Coffee Marketing Board Ltd who were either unionisable but were not members of the union or they were non unionisable and therefore were never members of the union and have never gone to either the Industrial Court or the High Court to determine their pay. 

The matter involving former employees of Coffee Marketing Board who were members of the trade union - they were only 264 – is the matter in court and is not a subject of this particular petition. The honourable minister appeared before the committee and he has had a copy of this particular report which clearly makes a distinction between the matters affecting the petitioners, who are 1,528. Is the minister therefore in order to delude and deceive the House that actually the matters we are discussing are matters pending in court?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the petitioners have never gone to any court. They have tried writing letters and have failed. They have only come to this Parliament. They are not part of the people in court so there is a distinction. Honourable minister, please be informed accordingly. 

MS ABIA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to bring to the attention of the minster the statistical loopholes in the figures they are giving. Now that we know about the 264, can we therefore know – in fact, the committee should have given us this – if they ever bothered to find out how many of these unionisable employees were there and individually, what was due to them so that these figures can be determined. The non-unionisable ones –(Interruption) 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, honourable, for giving way. The petitioners, that is, the former employees of Coffee Marketing Board who were eligible to be unionised but were never unionised and those who were ineligible to be unionised and were never unionised because of that ineligibility, are 1,568. The payment due to them was verified by none other than the Auditor-General, an officer of this House, to be Shs 10,336,013,506 only. This is the figure that we would want to see this House pass for these miserable people who could still be alive or for the dependants or administrators for those who passed on to take in good faith.

MS ABIA: Thank you for that information. Mr Speaker, this shows a lot of fraud. Where did these guys get the 5,000 workers? How about the Shs 150 billion that has been dispensed to these so called 5,000 workers who never existed? This is the highest level of criminality. People are suffering to pay taxes but the taxes are being abused by some individuals. It is very unfortunate and sad. The Minister of Finance and the people in there should act by paying these gentlemen and ladies who toiled for this country.

Finally, I do not know whether this isn’t the right time for the Ministry of Finance to be restructured in terms of the calibre of the people who sit there. This is important because it is one thing to be called the Minister of Finance and it is another thing to actually work as the Minister of Finance. I am saying this because in my opinion, a presidential directive is a policy. So, if there are people who have been appointed by the President to work on his behalf but who cannot execute his policy directives, what are they doing in those offices? What are they doing there? You have seen how they messed up the Capitation Grant. They cannot perform! So, isn’t it high time we require or we ask and plead with him to restructure the Ministry of Finance, especially the calibre of the ministers that he has appointed to that ministry? I thank you.

5.30
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to thank the committee for the good work they did and I also thank them for crafting good recommendations. 

The question we should be asking ourselves is: did we sell for gain? If the principle objective of selling off the Coffee Marketing Board was to make us better, are we better now? If not, then who advised us to carry out that transaction when knew we would lose out? We should not have gone into this venture because we are worse off now. It was not necessary to sell off the Coffee Marketing Board. So, we shall not only charge the people who contributed to this loss but we shall also ensure they refund the money because if the Coffee Marketing Board was sold at US$ 3 million and now the claim against Government is US$ 120 million, who has caused this loss and what has Government done? 

It is very unfortunate, and I really sympathise with the President who is the appointing authority, that the President can appoint the same people that have caused financial loss to Government to new positions. How could he recycle them, in spite of them not listening to advice? If the President wrote a letter instructing that payment be executed but the minister and the civil servants say, “No, I cannot pay” then who is who? 

Let us imagine that the President is not informed on matters of privatisation and financial management, but the Auditor-General, who has a constitutional office with this mandate, verified this amount but still someone at the Ministry of Finance says they cannot pay. What is this mis-coordination? What does this show? Parliament recommends the execution of payments but someone says, “I will not pay”. Why can’t we have someone penalised? We must have sanctions on these people who are causing these problems. Without recommending sanctions, we are just saying our Lord’s Prayer. 

We should put sanctions and a timeframe within which to pay these people. If they do not pay within that time, they should cease to sit on the Front Bench. Otherwise, why should they be there? (Interruption)

MR OKOT-OGONG: I want to inform my brother that Article 117 of the Constitution is very clear on the responsibilities of ministers. It states that ministers shall individually be accountable to the President for the administration of their ministries. So, when the President directs and you do not honour that directive, you therefore do not have reason to stay in that ministry. After that, we can now apply the next Article, 118, and you know what it says.

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, if a minister disobeys the President, we have to help the President under Article 118 of the Constitution. So, we need to know which minister failed to respect this directive. 

You know, there is a tendency in this House where the senior minister asks the junior minister to come and attend to Parliament issues. This kind of practice should be discarded. Who are we talking to now? Article 118 of the Constitution is specific; are we going to remove all of them - [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes”] - Yes, because we want to see a law that says that anybody who disobeys the President must go. Why should a minister sit in their office when they are disobeying the President? You have a delegated function and so, if you do not want to be delegated, you should just move out. Hon. Tom Butime was appointed Minister for Karamoja and he said he could not go to Karamoja; so, we expect some people to say, “I do not agree with the President; let me go away”. 

Why should we have institutional conflicts? Imagine the Auditor-General saying they have verified and that Government should pay Shs 10 billion and they attaching eight per cent. Because there are no sanctions on the ministers to lose their salaries, they are driving these big vehicles with escorts and they do not mind whether Government loses money. I think we should bring up a law that punishes anybody who disobeys the President or any other institution –(Interruption)

MR PETER ALEPER: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague that the Constitution has a provision for that in Article 118 (1)(a), which says, “abuse of office or wilful violation of the oath of allegiance or oath of office.” In this regard, there are those particular ministers to whom the President addressed this letter and these ministers had already taken the oath that this particular provision is specific about. If those ministers are here and have heard about Article 118, then action has to be taken.

Two, during the war in Iraq, the former British Prime Minister, Tony Blair, had to resign because he had misled the people of Britain. So, even in this context, for those who misled the President or did not pay allegiance, they should take responsibility. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, I have been intrigued by the statement made by the honourable colleague. I would like to find out whether the directive is legally binding because some ministers have gone on to implement wrong directives. (Interjections)- Yes, people like Syda Bbumba did it and it was wrong but it was a directive from the President.

According to the categories of the unions which you have met, if these people went to the Industrial Court and the court did not allow the permanent secretary to pay and yet there was a directive for him to pay, what would be the impact if he had paid?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I implore this House not to create a very dangerous precedent. Let me explain. More often than not when the President appoints a minister or when permanent secretaries are appointed, their responsibility is to guide and to help the President in executing his or her responsibilities within the legal framework of the country. Even if the President were to direct you and say, “I direct you to go and kill so and so”, if it is a directive, your duty as the officer concerned is to write to the President and say, “I have received this directive but there is this law in place; would this directive fall within the legal framework or within the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda?”

Let me tell you, the only exit route is to hold these officers responsible on what actions they take on those directives not whether they must comply with them or not – What have you done to fulfil that directive?

MR KWIZERA: Of course, the one who was informing me had conflict of interest; so, he is protecting himself. We take it in that faith.

Secondly, when the President makes a proclamation, it is considered that all the issues have been exhausted and all the arms of State have advised as such. We are talking about the Auditor-General verifying a figure and the President directing. If they direct and you do not do it – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I wish to thank hon. Eddie Kwizera for accepting this information which I am going to give, which will not only help him but more importantly will help the learned Attorney-General.

When I was chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee, the committee had on a number of occasions to interface with his Excellency the President over contents of his directives. He told us clearly that when he writes a letter to his minister, which letter is the directive, he does not compel the minister to act and comply as per his directive but that it is subject to advice by the minister. When I look at this report so far given to us, there is no indication that the addressee of the President’s letter - that is the minister - ever took trouble to advise the President accordingly. That is where we are faulting the minister. That is the information I wanted to give to my honourable colleague and the entire House.

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, as I wind up, the recommendation on page 9 says that the CIID should investigate the claim by the Ministry of Finance that they paid over 5,000 former employees of CMBL a sum being half of Shs 300 billion. 

Can the Minister of Finance, without guessing, tell this House how much money was paid to these individuals? The minister should come here and give evidence that they paid about Shs 150 billion and who took the money because we know that some people who were there never got the money. Actually, they paid ghosts; these people who are now petitioning were neither in court nor were they paid. If they were paid, the minister should have gone during the interface in the committee to say, “Although you petitioned, you signed here for your money or your account received this money”. However, when the minister comes here to just hide and cause institutional conflict, these ministers should be told that they have failed and they should resign. I thank you.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I want to draw you back to Article 119 (3), which states, “The Attorney-General shall be the principal legal adviser of the Government.” According to the report, His Excellency the President struggled to even raise the Attorney-General and this AG deliberately opted to become deaf. 

The procedural point I am raising is: hon. Ruhindi is the Deputy Attorney-General but he is the Attorney-General now because he said that if the President says that you kill you cannot kill. When the Attorney-General has been contacted by the President and you have refused to advise the President, what shall we do to you? (Laughter) That is the procedural issue I wanted to raise. I am at a loss because the Attorney-General has totally disorganised everything.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those are points of clarification for the learned Attorney-General. Do you want to respond to some of the issues?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I am not named in this report but what I emphasised when I spoke before - and I entirely agree with hon. Kassiano Wadri and if I did not put it as clearly as you did, I thank you so much - is that it is not by compulsion that you must act. If there was no action, certainly the long arm of the law will take its course.

In my opinion, the Attorney-General and those named in this report must have been called upon to respond to specific queries which the committee raised. I was not one of them but I believe that the report speaks for itself and whoever needs further clarification, those respondents can still be called for further clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will now put the question and we begin processing the recommendations. The motion is -

5.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker and honourable members, this petition by the former workers of Coffee Marketing Board has raised a lot of issues and as Government, we really sympathise that if the issues that were raised in this report were not attended to - and it is in our interest, Mr Speaker, to closely look at these committee’s recommendations. They commit Government to paying money but they also affect the lives of members of our population; senior citizens. However, there are also issues, which in our opinion, need to be adequately considered and comprehensive answers given on the Floor of this Parliament.

Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence to allow us as Government to study this report and also address the issues that Members have raised both on the Floor but also in the report and come and give a clear and concise position of Government by Tuesday or Wednesday next week. 
 
I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has prayed to the Speaker and I think the Speaker might have something to say about that. Hon. Minister, it would have been easier if you pointed out the issues that would require you to consider and come back to the House so that we know where your contest is. Are you contesting the whole recommendations of this committee, from the first to the last one? I think there are about seven sets of recommendations. Do you contest all of them? Do you say that these workers should not be paid? Is that where you are going? We would then see how to proceed from there.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, there are many issues that were raised; for example, whether or not Government settled the terminal benefits due to the petitioners. We need to closely examine this. As to whether the court case Misc. App. 076/2006 has any relevance on the petition because it has been adduced that the court ruling that is in our midst does not concern these particulars. We have to cross check this. As to whether the Minister of Finance defied any directives of H.E. the President - this is a subject that we have just been discussing. Also whether or not Government over-paid legal fees for the advocates and whether there was value for money during the disposal of the assets of the Coffee Marketing Board by Government. 

All these issues have financial, legal but also personal implications on those people who are claiming and yet we may need to pay them but also on Government addressing the plight of such people if they were not paid. So, the government needs to come out with a comprehensive position on this report so that we decide on it –(Interruptions))

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, please. I raised the question. What the minister has read is the terms of reference. I am talking about the recommendations that have arisen from the terms of reference because you were called and examined on the terms of reference. Now, there are recommendations that you were not party to because the committee handled it and made recommendations. 

Now, I am asking, of these recommendations, are there those you agree with and are there those you contest? For example, recommendation number one, which is on page 7 paragraph 5.3 says “The petitioners should be paid their balances in accordance with the verified report of the Auditor-General since there is no impediment to their payment.” Do you have objections to this?

Two, which is on page 9 recommendation 6.3 says, “Government should make arrangements to pay the terminal benefits of the petitioners verified by the Auditor-General at Shs 10.3 billion. Secondly, that “The above amount should earn an annual interest at the court rate of 8 per cent.”

Three, “The Criminal Investigations and Intelligence Directorate of Police should investigate the claim by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, particularly, that they paid over 5,000 former retrenched employees of CMBL a sum of half of Shs 300 billion” - I do not even know why it is paying half of Shs 300 billion but that is Shs 150 billion. Do you have contestations? That is the line I would like you to take so that -

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, if I take one recommendation, like the issue of 5,000 workers having been paid; the truth of the matter is that it is not 5,000 workers that were paid, it is 1,832. Regarding the money that is alleged to have been paid; Shs 150 billion, it is not true that we paid that kind of money. We need to come on the Floor with evidence and tell you that we have said we paid Shs 7,560,778,069. So, that is why I was –(Interruption)

MS GRACE NAMARA: Mr Speaker, it is not my habit to interject senior members of this House when they are submitting but when I was debating this matter, I remember very well that I said that committees transact business on behalf of Parliament. This committee, I am sure, invited the hon. Minister who is before us and this issue was raised. Is he in order to come now and contest, yet, he had an opportunity to interact and even give figures to the committee? Is he in order to come and start giving different information, which is new to the committee?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the statement just made by the minister that they were not 5,000 but 1,832 and it was not Shs 150 billion but Shs 7 billion suggests that our Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs of this House cooked up these figures. That is what in essence the minister is saying and it is serious.

Hon. Minister, we want you on record on this. Are you suggesting that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs of this House invented 5,000 workers and Shs 150 billion? Is it your statement on the record of Parliament?

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, I am not alleging nor am I imputing that the committee of this House did cook figures as you are saying. My contest is that we have a duty to give this House correct information. We have a duty to make sure that what this House takes a decision on is based on the right facts and figures. That is all we are trying to say, that –(Interruption) 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister has just said he has a duty to give this House correct information and the committees are committees of this House. His ministry made a presentation to that committee and he has just said that he has no intention of disputing what the committee has presented.
 
Is he, therefore, in order to come to this House and say that well aware that he was duty-bound to give this House correct information, that he actually went and gave the committee wrong information by implication. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will seek information from the Chairperson of the Legal Committee and then I will rule on that matter.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The information that is in the report was got in the process of the investigations. But I just wanted to go to the request of the honourable minister – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where did you get the figure of 5,000 and –

MR TASHOBYA: Whatever is in the committee was generated from the information that we got in the witnesses in the committee room. The point that I was trying to make is that if the honourable minister says that he has more information and he wants to consult and come and give a response, I really think that he is given the time –(Interjections)– yes, let him be given the time and he comes. I have been with this petition for a very long time. We have taken time to study and write this report and we are interested in the report. 

If he is asking for Tuesday or Wednesday, what is the problem with that?  

MR KAKOOZA: Supplementary information, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was a point of order that I had not ruled on. I was seeking information from the Chairperson of Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to enable me rule whether the minister is right in saying the things that he is saying.

Now, the chairperson has stated that these figures that are in their report were got from the course of their investigation and he does not say that they got it from the Minister of Finance and it leaves me with a gap that I cannot now explicitly deal with because if this information of 5,000 workers and Shs 150 billion and there was a definitive statement from the chairperson of legal that it came from finance – but I am asking a direct question and I am not getting a direct answer.

MR BAKA MUGABI: Mr Speaker, we did a very good job and for us as a committee, we think that no one should be worried that new facts will come to spoil our case. So, there is absolutely no problem in giving the minister time. 

But about the issue of the 5,00 workers, there is a gentleman called Mr Mwase in PU, under the Ministry of Finance, he is the one who started peddling this information and we have it on record in our minutes. Mr Keith Muhakanizi, in a letter addressed to the Auditor-General, referred to the figure of Shs 300 billion, which would ensue if they had paid the former workers of Coffee Marketing Board and the Shs 300 billion comes from the allegation that they had paid Shs 150 billion to 5,000 workers and all that is here if the Members can read through.

So, for us, we absolutely have no worry in giving the minister more time. I can assure this House that no facts are going to come up to dispute what we have on record. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us first tie this issue. Let me have the Member for Ndorwa.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, my worry is that we are now going into a ping pong game. The petitioners brought a petition and our committee has been with this petition for almost a year. I think the team from finance appeared no less than five times. I was Lead Counsel and I know what we went through to peruse all sorts of documents. 

My suggestion is that we should not stay or pend this particular motion. Let us make our recommendations and if they come up and they say that they will not comply with this because this particular information has come up, so be it. But adjourning this particular matter for the Minister for Finance to come and make a reply is like we are going back to the same committee.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to give information on this issue that we discussed yesterday in Cabinet. It was decided that the House continues discussing while finance was directed to go and reconcile their figures of the Shs 150 billion vis-à-vis the Shs 7 billion. This decision was taken yesterday in Cabinet for Finance to go and bring us information in Cabinet so that we know who is telling the truth. That is the position. 

Therefore, I think that I would once again advise that Cabinet be given time – [Hon. Members: “No.”] - Yes, because we must come and answer. We must come and answer because of the Shs 150 billion the reports talks about and the Shs 7.5 billion that our side is saying. That must be reconciled.

I request that Cabinet be given time to reconcile  these figures and then we shall come back ready to say Shs 150 billion or Shs 7.5 billion is correct. That is the information I wanted to give. Even if we decide now, it will not find us ready. So, Mr Speaker, I am asking that this debate is deferred until we are ready.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The rules and the Constitution that establishes Parliament and the Executive are clear. Parliament, the legislator proposes and the Executive processes. We are now discussing the committee report but the report has not become a parliamentary report until we take a decision. 

Is it procedurally right that before the House takes a decision, the minister is proposing to stifle the decision? Will that report be one of Parliament or of the committee? Which procedure are we following?    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am sure that the Leader of Government Business will find a lot of difficulty ruling from the dispatch box. All rulings are done from this Table here. (Laughter) 


Hon. Members, I think this issue is very important and the people who brought this petition have suffered for so long that at the tail end of the discussion, we should create controversy over it. I do not think it is going to help the cause of this Parliament. 

What we would want to achieve is that there is harmony and the only issue that had taken the Speaker back is when the minister at this late hour begins disputing figures that have been considered for over a year. And also, since they received copies of this report and they were not able to verify and come when they are ready. So, to bring it at this stage and in that form would not be proper. 

But in the spirit of trying to assist these people, so that we do not have any further contest, we might have to find a middle ground on how to deal with this issue. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I want to thank the committee again, because I have submitted already. I have a letter – you may check on your ipads. It was written by Mr Muhakanizi to the Auditor-General. Under 2(b), he says, “If you want to confirm this, it means we are going to do double payment, which will become Shs 300 billion” –(Interruption)– no, it is in the letter. Even the committee recorded it in the minutes. 

That means Mr Muhakanizi confirmed that they paid Shs 150 billion. And Mr Muhakanizi has been the Deputy Secretary to the Treasury for quite a long time and now he is the Secretary to Treasury. And Mr Muhakanizi has been directly involved in PU for quite long time; he has been the boss of PU. 

So, Mr Speaker, if the Leader of Government Business tells you that they need to go back to the ministry and reconcile the figures, who is to reconcile these figures? Mr Muhakanizi is the Secretary to Treasury; Now, Mr Muhakanizi who was the Deputy Secretary to Treasury who is now the Secretary to Treasury - how can he reconcile things? He agreed on the Shs 150 billion and the Shs 10 billion that hon. Kajara – he is a new minister in the Ministry of Finance. In fact, you are a young person there. The person who has been there long is Mr Muhakanizi who gave Shs 150 billion. And in Parliament, the issue is payment of Shs 10 billion; we are not talking of Shs 150 billion. 

So, given these facts, I want to agree with my sister hon. Christine Bako that the President is in problems, very big problem, extremely big – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, all I am asking is for you to point out clearly to the letter that says that. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, it is the last one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it annex C(2) – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then quote it properly because it is going the record of Parliament. What I am reading here is, in (b), “Settling this claim could result in financial implications for Government of up to Shs 300 billion for former CMB employees only”. I did not see the paragraph that talks of double payment and things like that; if I could be assisted.

MR AYENA: Mr Speaker, when we considered this petition, we received many documents some of which were not attached to this report. The very document that triggered the peddling of the issue of 5,000 workers vis-a-vis a half of Shs 300 billion was initiated by none other than the legal officer of the Privatisation Unit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that letter there as an attachment?

MR AYENA: I am giving background information and it is common knowledge to the Members of the committee. We interviewed the people from Ministry of Finance including the minister himself on that matter and they did not give us any information. 

But in any case, Mr Speaker, because we could not go to the root of this matter, we referred it to the investigative arm of the police. So, my view is that if this minister is complaining that he needs time to reconcile figures, let him go and give it to the CID after we have made a recommendation because we are not giving a final position. (Laughter)

Therefore, is it procedurally right for the minister –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, I indulge my colleague who is very magnanimous to allow me give him this information that this is the background to the alleged 5,000 former workers vis-a-vis the Shs 300 billion, a half of which was paid to the 5,000 workers. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You are right. The letter from Mr Muhakanizi says, “Settling this will result in implications to government of up to Shs 300 billion”. 

But if you read the report in the minutes, it is said; the payment of Shs 150 billion was raised by a legal officer called Mwase. He said, “We paid Shs 150 billion to 5,000 employees. That means that when you pay again, it will be double payment.” That is why Mr Muhakanizi multiplied it by two. He confirmed what Mwase said that they paid Shs 150 billion to 5,000 employees. So, Mr Muhakanizi is saying it is double payment and that is why it comes to Shs 300 billion. 

So, Mr Speaker, I do not think there is any contradiction here. Mr Muhakanizi is involved and Mwase is involved. For us, we are interested in Shs 10 billion for the workers. Let us process our things and then we will look for where the Shs 150 billion went. As my brother said, these are people who should answer to the CID. 

For us we should process. I am sure in a few minutes we can finish this, adopt the report and pass our resolutions. So, they can contest it in the courts of law if they want to. But now, they can see the CID or the IGG because we are going to amend this report to include the following: the Attorney-General, a one Mr Peter Nyombi, Mr Muhakanizi is not mentioned; Mr Mwase is not mentioned, Mr Ssebabi is not mentioned. There are people who were left out. We must bring all of them here to answer. That is the reason I say we should conclude the process and the Prime Minister can go to Cabinet and tell them our resolution, but the named people must see the CID.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, just hold on; I will come to you last.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, you have guided this House well. The concern of every one of us is to get good end results. The petitioners have been waiting for a very long time. But after listening to what the chairman of the committee and the vice chairperson who read the report – financial matters are things that need to be reconciled before we get the truth of the matter. And if on Tuesday - today is Thursday we have only Friday, Saturday, Sunday and Tuesday, we get this report and we debate it. 

Mr Speaker, you said something that there are three categories of workers involved in this issue. That is very critical – even the others who were paid might have been paid wrongly. It is very important that all of them get fair treatment.

So, my colleagues Tuesday is not far –(Interjections)– yes, it is not far and since the chairman and the minister are saying they will come out with the figures – everything in this recommendation is a cost, which must be done here because we are the people going to pass that money. But before we do that, to give to our workers money - when you read Article 164 (2) whoever misappropriated money will be answerable. 

So, I request Members to be patient till Tuesday when the minister will bring us what is concrete before we pass those recommendations for the petitioners to get whatever is due to them. Otherwise, this matter as we debate –(Interjections)– no let me finish my point because now, you can see what is happening to the figures.

There has never been 5,000 workers at the Coffee Marketing Board. The maximum was only 1,508 –(Interjections)– yes, that is what I am saying that these are things that need critical thinking because they will help this House as we take the decision on this matter. So, I request Members that – today is Thursday, then we have Friday, Saturday, Sunday, Monday – (Interruptions)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I did not want to disrupt hon. James Kakooza’s submission. However, I have been forced to do it. The hon. James Kakooza seems to suggest to this House that the committee should re-write the report. The committee did its work and concluded it and has now reported to the House for consideration.

In my opinion, we have concluded the debate exhaustively and I think there is nothing more to add to that report. We are now at the point of passing resolutions of this House that would compel Government to implement them in whichever way they will want. So, it is not upon us to begin looking for the money, as a Parliament. The proposals will come from the Government and we can only cross the bridge when we get there.

Is it, therefore, in order for the hon. James Kakooza to attempt to cause confusion that is within him and to import it into this House? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know there is a saying that once beaten twice shy. We have had recommendations passed by this House challenged in court and they have not been treated kindly because of the words they have used. So, as a person presiding, I need to exercise extra caution so that we do not fall in a trap. I am saying this because there are allegations of fraud and you know that in law, fraud has to be very particularised and strictly proved before a decision is taken.

However, what is not in issue from the report is the issue of the payment that has been verified by the Auditor-General. That is not in issue at all. I hope that the minister will confirm that this is not in issue so that we take a decision on that.

Now, on the issue of fraudulent conduct that should be referred to the police should be a matter that can be handled at that level. Otherwise, the issue on which I want a clear statement about from the minister is the entitlement of the former workers that has been audited by the Auditor-General. If the minister can make a statement on that, then, we will see how to move on. Otherwise, postponing the whole report with issues that have already been verified by the Auditor-General, who is an officer of this House, would not be leading us in a good direction. 

So, I would like to ask the minister to distinguish the issues that he wants to be deferred for discussions and he comes back on, but on this issue I do not think we need any further consultation.  

MR KAJARA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Office of the Auditor-General works with Government though it is independent. He issues reports on matters that are referred to it from time to time.

There is a letter from the Auditor-General dated 13 November 2009 in which he stated that the verification was based on the award from the Industrial Court in the Trade Dispute No. 192. It is on record. And this is the very decision that was quashed by the High Court in Misc. App. No. 014/2006 as noted by this report on page 11.

We also need to consult with the Auditor-General on these matters so that by Tuesday, we can come out with a clear picture for the House to make an informed decision.

MR AYENA: Mr Speaker, the matter that was quashed arising from the Industrial Court No.1 of 1992 was in reference to the interests of the 264 unionised members. It has nothing to do with the petitioners who are 1,552.

I am also aware that hon. Aston Kajara, if you want me to tell you more about his conduct, I will raise it because at one point he – well I should not do that. But because I am aware that after the Attorney-General had already tendered his opinion to the President, it was at the behest of hon. Aston Kajara, among others that the Attorney-General countermanded his own legal opinion to the President, even without informing the President.

But that notwithstanding, Mr Speaker, that matter that has now gone on and on, has nothing to do with the petitioners. Is it, therefore, in order for the hon. Aston Kajara to keep on peddling the same delaying tactics, which they have been playing around with the petitioners and which have now spanned for over 10 years without being paid?

Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, there are several letters from the Auditor-General signed by a one Francis Masuba. So, I do not know which one, in particular, you are referring to. For example, there is one of verified computation in respect of claims of 432 former workers and also those workers that were laid off in 1991, which totalled to Shs 1 billion. The one of 432 workers totalled to Shs 2.2 billion. I do not know which letter you are referring to, because there are several letters from the Auditor-General.

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, this problem is the element of having half delegation. As management consultant, the hon. Minister is failing to take a decision because he has limited delegation and the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business who would be here to guide is also not in the House. I am authoritatively saying it unless he proves that he is there to direct – (Interruption)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I would like to ask whether our colleague is in order to undermine the authority of the Deputy Leader of Government Business who is in the House. 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: A General –

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: General does not matter but he is Deputy Leader of Government Business. Is he in order when I got this authority from the appointing authority and I have reported and continuing to report on this issue in my position as Deputy Leader of Government Business?

Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am the Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda but when I sit in this Chair I am the Speaker. There is somebody who deputises the Leader of Government Business and if he is not there, he becomes the Leader of Government Business in the House because it is by delegation and those are clear; Parliament cannot sit without a Leader of Government Business. So, at any one time, there is a Leader of Government Business just like now we have an acting Leader of Opposition. (Laughter) What he says binds the Executive.

MR KWIZERA: Most obliged. What we are saying, Mr Speaker, is that even when we adopt this report, Parliament can do its work and the Executive has a system of responding to this report either by way of treasury memorandum or by ministerial statement. 

But we cannot be bogged down by a report that was in the hands of Government as far as December last year. They should have done all this research. If they have failed to do it in seven months, what evidence do they have that they are going to do it over the weekend?

I would suggest that we adopt the report and they come with the treasury memorandum of the same matter.

MR ALEPER: Mr Speaker, if I may recall very well, you guided this House when the minister was seeking for your indulgence to give him more time. I recall very well that you guided and asked the minister that instead of deferring our report to the Tuesday that he is asking for, you asked him to specify particular areas that he wishes you to grant him time.

Up to now, the minister has not done that. So, are we procedurally right to continue and yet the minister has not identified which he needs your indulgence on?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is; that the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the petition by former workers of Coffee Marketing Board be adopted. I now put the question on the recommendations.

Recommendation number one, page 7; “The petitioners should be paid their balances in accordance with the verified report of the Auditor-General Since there is no impediment to their payment.”
I put the question – 

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, our contention as Government is that we paid money to employees of CMB in full between 1991 and 2003 and we have evidence, which was placed before the committee according to the collective bargaining agreement and the terms and conditions of service. That total amount, which we paid, amounted to Shs 7,560,778,069. I would implore that even if this decision was to be taken, cognisance should be taken that part of this money was paid. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is saying “balances” in the petition. It says, “The petitioners should be paid their balances in accordance with the verified report of the Auditor-General since there is no impediment to their payment.” That is the recommendation.

MR BAKA MUGABI: Mr Speaker, as you have rightly said, the petitioners were paid some money. The amounts that were paid left some balances. The Auditor-General verified and put their figure at Shs 10.3 billion. The President directed that they should be paid, which directives up to-date have never been cleared. It is on the basis of that the committee has recommended that they should be paid their balances.

So, the allegation the minister is still peddling up to now, that they were paid handsomely and there are no balances, are not tenable and are falsehoods Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to this recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next on page 9, recommendations contained in 6.3, “(1) Government should make arrangements to pay the terminal benefits of the petitioners verified by the Auditor-General at Shs 10,336,013,506. (2)The above amount should carry an annual interest at the court rate of eight per cent per annum from the date of the Auditor-General’s verification. (3) The Criminal Investigations and Intelligence Directorate of Police should investigate the claim by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development particularly that they paid over 5,000 former retrenched employees of CMBL a sum being half of Shs 300 billion.”

MR WAMAKUYU: Mr Speaker, the first recommendation was talking about balances and the minister was saying that they had paid some money. So, for me, I could move that we delete the first one and we go with balances. Recommendation one -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, what he is proposing is that one is already redundant because we have already passed the first one.

MR WAMAKUYU: That is my proposal, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that is the proposal. I think there is some rationale because the one we passed actually says, “The petitioners should be paid their balances in accordance with the verified reports of the Auditor-General…” So, it captures the whole thing. I think he has a point. The only thing that is being done here is to put the figures but the figures are in the Auditor -General’s report. I think that is where he is coming from. I am just trying to understand what the Member is saying. (Mr Ayena rose_) Are you bringing another amendment or can we resolve this one first? I think let us first resolve this one of -

MR AYENA: Mr Speaker, for purposes of execution, can we now transport the figure in the latter recommendation and bring it to the first recommendation so that it is complete?

MR WAMAKUYU: Mr Speaker, the wording of “balances for the verified” is enough - assuming it is less or more - I think let us go by “verified”.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, in the first place, we said the “balances”. The second one says, “The balance verified by the Auditor-General”-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Even the first one said that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No. “...of Shs… shall attract an interest rate....” That is the second one because we do not want to go back and amend as we may get a problem. We have passed the first one. So, we should go to the second one and put the amount and interest rate. I think the first one was dealt with well. Now concerning the verified figures, if Members have read the report, the total verified figures are over Shs 11 billion. Now, they have removed the amount for the people who are in court and that is why they are coming up with Shs 10 billion. When we come to the balance, it is talking about those people who never went to court because the verified amount total is Shs 11 billion; we must quote the Shs 10 billion and the interest we are applying.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, maybe to clarify, Government paid some money, which we have quoted. So, if we were to accept any figure as verified by the Auditor-General, we have to put into account the money that Government already paid. That is what we are saying.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Precisely and that is why it is balances. I think that is straight forward. (Laughter) Hon. Member, I think this is clear. Now the question is, I think the figure they have put in (1) was meant to deal with the question of interest but you can deal with the issue of interest without stating a figure. You do not have to state a figure. It is not necessary because if the figure is known, then you only have to state the figure of interest and that will run through to the actual amount.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We do not want to leave room for the Ministry of Finance. We want to be specific in recommendation (2). We also do not want to bring in the CIID that the committee was suggesting. We should separate it so that CIID becomes (3) and the other one specifically says, “The balance of this amount will attract an interest rate of eight per cent.” We should leave it at that. 

Concerning the addition, which the committee is trying to propose that the Ministry of Finance - We have to go down and say in (3) - We do not have to say “ministry” as it is very big. We must specify the names of the people in the Ministry of Finance who were involved in this transaction. This business of leaving it wide is very dangerous.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have not resolved the issue of how we - You see, hon. Members, the figure audited by the Auditor-General does not, in total, apply to the petitioners. So, there is a specific figure from that that you are making a deduction from. So, you need to make that introduction clear because, now, it is not clear. Until hon. Nandala-Mafabi raised it, I did not know that that was the issue. So, we have not stated anywhere why this figure is Shs 10 billion and not Shs 11 billion. This next line should be framed such that it reflects that distinction.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, it is clear in our report-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, now this is the recommendation.

MR NIWAGABA: Okay but the figures are clearly distinct on page 7 of our report that the verification of Shs 10 billion was for the petitioners and Shs 1.3 billion was for the 264 who are still in court.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that distinction made in the Auditor-General’s audit? Is it made in the report?

MR NIWAGABA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay then it is good.

MR BAKA MUGABI: I would like to propose the wording of the recommendation: “That Government should make arrangements to pay the balances of the terminal benefits of the petitioners verified by the Auditor-General at Shs 10,366,113,506.” That is the figure that was verified by the Auditor-General for the petitioners; the non-unionised and unionisable members of the Coffee Marketing Board.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that captures the picture properly. Is that okay? I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next is the interest issue, which the Member for Tororo County wanted to -

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, the issue of interest rate is a serious matter. Two years ago, the Central Bank rate was more than 25 per cent. As we speak today, it has now come to 11 per cent. If these workers borrowed money from commercial banks, they have been paying between 22 per cent and 28 per cent. Therefore, I would like to propose that the interest rate be the prevailing commercial bank interest rate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the issue of decisions of this nature, including a decision of court, is not based on the running market rate. Court sets its own rate and that is why the legal committee actually suggests that we should use the court rate rather than go to the market and fetch rates. It might be good to go like that.

MR EKANYA: But, Mr Speaker, based on your advice, we are not court and this matter is not in court. In fact, even if Government pays, they would pay you the government commercial rate because last year, the commercial bank rate by the Central Bank was 28 per cent. It has just come down -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is lending rate not penalty rate.

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, I think we should go with the eight per cent because it would provide for the inflational measures instead of the commercial or lending rate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, these are not commercial banks. The institutions that are allowed to pay commercial rates are the ones who lend like commercial banks. They are not registered commercial people. What happens with them is that they would be taken at the rate as if they are saving; at the saving rate. So, if they are taking this rate, you have to look at the Treasury Bill and liberal rate where they say plus or minus two per cent. So, if it is 10, that is why I think the courts have decided to link up at eight per cent because it is 10 minus two per cent.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, on the issue of the amount, it has been set out clearly but the issue of interest, I think that there is a problem with the statement here especially with the last wording that says, “The above amount should carry an annual interest rate at a court rate of eight per cent per annum from the date of the Auditor-General’s verification.” I think that the intent of this whole statement is that with time, money loses value and because money loses value, it would be unfair, therefore, to stick it to the fact that from the date when the Auditor-General verified this information, that is when the interest rate must begin to be counted. 

I would think and suggest that we deal from the date when it was actually paid or due and we delete this thing of when the verification was done.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, what was the rationale for basing it on the date of the –

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: From the time the opinion of the Auditor-General came out and that is when the money fell due –(Interjections)-

MR EKANYA: The PERD Act - Mr Speaker for you and me, we are blessed to have been here for some time. The PERD Act is very clear that before divesture, the workers must be paid. That is the Act and, therefore, the date on which this payment was due was before the divesture agreement was signed. That is the Act.   

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I want to be helped because the amount to be paid is known and audited by the Auditor-General. But when it comes to awarding interest, I would like to be advised whether Parliament has the power to award interest of say eight or 20 per cent or otherwise because that is the mandate of the courts. We are acting on the advice of the Auditor-General that the amount to be paid is Shs 10 billion and it is the mandate of Parliament, therefore, to recommend that the amount recommended by the Auditor–General be paid but when it comes to awarding interest, I do not know whether Parliament can actually award costs or interest.  That is the clarification that I want - (Mr Niwagaba rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the Member for Ndorwa want to deal with that?

MR NIWAGABA: Not directly dealing with that. When we were considering this matter and in view of the constitutional mandate of Parliament that special committees of Parliament have quasi-judicial powers similar to the High Court, we looked at humanitarian considerations.

Two, we also looked at the fact that most of these petitioners were retrenched on a relatively very long period of time in sequence and we failed to agree on a particular commencement date when the interest should be paid and that is when we said that the confusion had been settled by the Auditor–General’s report, let us fix the commencement date of payment of interest on pure humanitarian considerations and guided by the court rate from the date that the Auditor–General made his report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, because even in one of the letters, the President said verified claims should be paid. So, there may be a basis as to why the legal committee recommended this.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: First of all, the person who has to give us a warrant is the Auditor–General. By the time he verifies and got that money, I am sure if Finance was agreeable, he was going to give a warrant because he audits on our behalf to say release this money. 

Now, since Finance delayed to agree with the Auditor–General, the warrant is going to be issued today or tomorrow; it would be clearly unfair that we pay these people without taking consideration of the time value of money. 

We can only have a middle ground which we can agree with the committee; that it should run from the period that the Auditor- General verified and he was ready to issue a warrant. If you go to 1991/1992, it would be a disaster. The best way to change then will be to convert that money into dollars and then we apply the dollars because inflation from 1991/1992 has gone to over 100 per cent and that will mean that the best value we should apply should be dollars but since we are applying Uganda shillings, we can stop there. 

That is what I wanted to bring out.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I see ourselves stalking about awarding of interest rates and the Attorney-General has kept quiet. What does the Attorney-General say about this? (Interjections) Does Parliament have the mandate to determine the interest rates? I wanted to have something from the Attorney-General and he is around. So, Mr Speaker, the principal legal advisor of Government is here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The learned Attorney- General, the Member for Mbarara –

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I kept quiet because when I try to speak, I am told not to - [Hon. Members: “By who?”]    - like you are beginning. [Laughter] Ordinarily, this is the realm of the courts of law. However, parties normally, for instance, negotiate out of court. They can agree on appropriate terms to settle their claims, which are likely to be in court in one way or another. 

I think the best that this Parliament can do is not to go into this very specific way of doing things as if really you are actually acting as a court of law. With all due respect to my colleague, hon. Niwagaba, even when our Acts of Parliament and Rules of Procedure specify that Parliament has judicial powers, those judicial powers are within specific limits: summoning witnesses, clarification of documents and so on and so forth. You are not really going to transpose yourselves as if you are really the Judiciary. Clearly, that will be ultra-vires to our own power.

So, I think having made the first recommendation, the best recommendation that this House can make is that Government may consider giving reasonable interest to the beneficiaries of this claim. In other words, it is just a recommendation but if you go into the specifity at court rate eight per cent - after all, these are recommendations and we must be seen to be players in the same field.

By the way, let me tell you. Even Government, after verifying – I am happy that the Deputy Leader of Government Business was saying that this matter came to Cabinet yesterday but there were some views that if certainly there are these allegations, further investigation is necessary - why not? If there is an allegation of fraud like it has been alleged, then there must be an investigation. And certainly, if there is a justifiable claim, there is no way Government should be looked at as if Government does not want a justifiable resolution of issues; it is unfair! 

Finally, my proposal is to recommend that Government considers giving reasonable interest on the amount given to the beneficiaries. 

MR SSEWUNGU: I want to thank the Attorney-General. You see, you are a real lawyer and you have used legal language. Now, let me try to speak like an upcoming lawyer. 

Mr Speaker, I would not support including figures but when you hear the statement of the Attorney-General, the moment you say, “Government may” then it is at liberty to do so or not. So, I suggest – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Even when you say, “Shall”, it may or may not. 

MR SSEWUNGU: I have spoken as an upcoming lawyer. So, I would like to seek clarification from the Attorney-General, whom I love very much by the way. Don’t you think it would be better for us as a House to make a recommendation that this amount of money should attract interest as a result of the delayed payment, so that we do not tie our hands to a particular figure? 

In case they disagree and there is a problem, then they can meet and solve the problem. So, I think we should make that kind of recommendation and sort out the problem. When they come back to Parliament, we shall say, “No, our recommendation was very clear, due to the suffering and the delay in the payment of this money, let Government pay”. Then within that one, we can decide to give an interest rate say of two per cent or three per cent; other than quoting figures. That is end of the upcoming lawyer’s contribution. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you now restate in view of that – 

MR BAKA MUGABI: The recommendation is, “That Government shall pay the petitioners with a reasonable interest rate.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, will I put a question to that? Okay, I put the question. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Criminal Investigations and Intelligence Directorate of the police should investigate the claim by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development particularly that they paid over 5,000 former retrenched employees of CMBL a sum being half of Shs 300 billion that is Shs 150 billion. I put the question to that – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, is that part of number two or are we separating it? If we are separating it, I want to propose that the Criminal Investigation Department investigates the payments, which were effected by: the Director PU one Ssebabi; two, the Legal Counsel for PU one Mwase; and three, Mr Muhakanizi, the then Deputy Secretary Treasury now the PST in relation to the 5,000 employees and Shs 150 billion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Members, what would be wrong with what is provided now? I think it captures the spirit of what is being done instead of going into individuals and things like that. There could be more than those three or less. 

MR EKANYA: You see, Mr Chairman, the Constitution is categorical and so is the Public Finance and Accountability Act. They say that any person who concurs in use of public funds contrary to the established procedure shall make good the loss. 

Normally, the problem we have been facing is CIID come back to us saying that if we do not name – the Constitution says “Any person”. And the President appoints appointing officers in names. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But in this case, nobody has been paid. 

MR EKANYA: No, Mr Speaker, the point is, at that time, there was an accounting officer in name appointed by Government who paid the money. Those are the people hon. Nandala is naming. 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to agree with your guidance because an investigation is an open process. It would not be fair and right – if you are naming those three or four people, supposing they are ten? We would be trying to enter into a job that we are not specialised in doing. Let police investigate whoever is responsible. It could be wrong for us to name persons because we do not know exactly who did what. 

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, the basis of our recommendation as it appears is because the kind of documentation on allegations that came before us were not adequate enough for us to come up with a conclusion that any particular individual is guilty or not. That is why we made it so blanket for CIID to take interest in it. If they do and find anyone liable then it should proceed. But if we restrict ourselves to naming individuals here, we stand two dangers: The first danger will be for the named individuals to go to court and challenge this report; that is an obvious one. 

The second one is, once they go to court and challenge this particular report, even the CIID, which you would have otherwise given leeway to investigate will have their hands manacled. So, I implore Members to maintain the recommendation as it is; it is in good faith and it will serve the purpose. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, for example, the mention of Mr Keith Muhakanizi, there is a letter he wrote. The letter is saying: “These people should not be paid because settling this claim will result in financial implications for Government of up to Shs 300 billion for former CMB employees only”. That is all he said. So, how do you now name him based on this letter that he – what should happen is, let the police do their work. 

The allegations are clear; that 5,000 people were paid a total of Shs 150 billion. Now, is it true? And if it is true, who paid; who benefited? Those people will just show up. Otherwise, we will create unnecessary tension on a very clear statement. So, I put the question to this recommendation. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, 7.3 which is on page 11, “The committee recommends that the petitioners’ claim be detached from the outcome of the Misc. App. no.74/2006 and the appeal therefrom and be paid immediately even if the claim of the unionised former workers must abide the outcome of the appeal.”

MR BAKA MUGABI: Mr Speaker, we realise that that recommendation does not come out clearly the way we wanted it to be. It is clumsy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In light of what we resolved on in 1 and 2. Not so?

MR BAKA MUGABI: Yes. So, the committee recommends that “The petitioners’ claim be totally separated from the outcome of Misc. App. No. 074/2006 because they were never part of that process.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Or should never be part of.

MR BAKA MUGABI: Yes, should never be part of that because they have never gone to court in respect of their claims. So, the committee recommends that the petitioners’ claim be separated from the outcome of Misc. App. No. 074/2006 because they have never been part of that court process.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay but supposing you put it the other way round that, “The outcome of Misc. App. does not affect these petitioners because they were not part of that process.”

MR BAKA MUGABI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you then phrase it?

MR BAKA MUGABI: “The committee recommends that the outcome of Misc. App. No. 074/2006 should not affect the petitioners’ claim because they were never part of the suit.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that better, hon. Members?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, we now move to the recommendation 8.3 on page 12. The recommendation reads thus: “The committee recommends that the Attorney-General should always make well researched and informed opinions to avoid giving contradictory opinions on the same subject matter.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the Attorney-General is an educated person. So, giving two conflicting decisions is a sign of incompetence. In light is that, I would like to move an amendment to read as follows: “The Attorney-General should be held liable for giving contradicting legal opinions and should be relieved of his duties.” (Laughter)

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I just want to clear my mind whether hon. Nyombi was heard on the submission of his second letter and whether the committee obtained any reasons from him explaining why he did it. This is important because it goes to the rules of natural justice to give a person an opportunity to be heard.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, was the Attorney-General called to explain the circumstances of the two letters?

MR BAKA MUGABI: Mr Speaker, we had an opportunity to listen to the Attorney-General. And it was on that basis that we made that recommendation. We just fell short of – we did not want to – because this issue started much earlier and by the time he went into office, it had already been messed up by the previous officials. That is why we made that recommendation and we would like to allow the honourable members to take it in good faith.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I am not aware of the impact of the contradictory letter in terms of how much loss it caused to Government. From the report, it is not clear. Could you remind us on that?

MR BAKA MUGABI: When you look at appendix J, there is the opinion he wrote to the President and Appendix L, he wrote an opinion to the lawyers of the former workers. The difference is that in the second opinion, the one he wrote to the lawyers, he was tying it to the court process. So, we realised that he had been misadvised by the officials in Finance. That is why he was tying it to the court process and wanted them to wait for the conclusion of the court process on which we of course disagreed with him.

So, in that case, it was clear that he had been misguided by officials at the Ministry of Finance because that is not a matter of law, if you look at it clearly.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, of course, we had a difficulty on this particular recommendation especially bearing in mind the events pertaining then where the Attorney-General had been issued with a certificate of incompetence by the Uganda Law Society.

What we realised when we interacted with him, we noticed that some of these particular matters began as Trade Dispute No. 01 in 1991. Subsequently, there was another Trade Dispute No. 2 that used to move from here to there. Around 1998, there were other employees that had not been affected by the retrenchment exercise. So, there were very many correspondences and very many files that we got to realise that he had based his opinion on information that had partially been given to him by the officials of the Ministry of Finance who never wanted to see the clear truth come out. That is why we decided to be lenient – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the subject of the departure in the second opinion?

MR NIWAGABA: The first opinion was to the effect that these petitioners were entitled to payment. In the second opinion was based on the ruling that court had given affecting 264 people who were not part of the petitioners and it was not clear to him that actually these 264 were separate from the petitioners who had petitioned the President and subsequently, Parliament.

MR BAKA MUGABI: Mr Speaker, this is the letter he wrote to change the opinion that he firmly gave in respect that the former employees be paid. He said to H.E the President: “The above refers. It is true I had offered my legal opinion to the effect the official receiver withdraws the suit. Misc. 074/2006 pending in court. 

However, the officials at the Ministry of Finance (PU) requested me for a meeting to provide me with information that had not been brought to my attention at the time of writing the legal opinion. I, therefore, convened a meeting on 31 January 2012 in my office. In attendance were: hon. Aston Kajara, the Minister of State for Finance, Mr Kanyerezi Masembe, Dr Apollo Makubuya (lawyers of the Coffee Marketing Board), officials from PU and the Ag. Solicitor-General together with their technical staff.

During the meeting I learnt that at the time I advised the official receiver to withdraw the said suit, the matter was in court at the advanced stage only awaiting judgement thus the arrest of judgement at this level would be most appropriate.”

So, he was advised by the team –(Interjections)– which was wrong.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, hon. Members, these are factual matters; it is not a question of law that he gave an errant opinion on. These were facts, which he was not privy to but he was now being told that “this is what happened.”

MS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, if the Attorney-General went ahead and wrote after making the first opinion, is the mistake his for not having accessed all the required information before he made his opinion? Secondly, would he have gone jumping over to pick document? The client is the one to provide the information.

I would like to be guided, isn’t the Attorney-General entitled to changing an opinion? Based on the answer, I would move a motion that we delete this and we proceed.

DR BITEKYEREZO: I entirely agree with the Chief Whip because it is like telling a doctor to scrub before carrying out an operation, because it is obvious. To say that the Attorney-General should first ensure - an Attorney-General that does not read is not an Attorney-General! I move that we delete this recommendation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is accordingly deleted. 

Recommendation 9.3 “Government should come up with a conclusive position in form of guidelines on how presidential directives should be acted upon.” Based on the guidance from the learned Attorney-General, is it a necessary recommendation?

MR BAKA MUGABI: I think it is redundant in view of the guidance we received. The truth is that when you receive a directive, you must be able to act in accordance with the law. 

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, I just want to render this information; you remember when we were holding two Members of this House accountable namely; the hon. Syda Bbumba and Khidu Makubuya, the Lira Municipality MP attempted to move a motion on how this House should resolve on how presidential directives should be handled and that motion was defeated.

In light of that fact, we should just delete that recommendation.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Speaker, we should concede that in light of the information we got from the Attorney-General, we can proceed and delete it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this particular recommendation be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The next recommendation is on paragraph 10.3 on page 14, “The Auditor-General should carry out a comprehensive audit of Coffee Marketing Board to determine whether there was value for money in the entire process of disposing of the assets and the application of the proceeds of sale.”

I put the question to this - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you will remember that I requested to move a motion. If we only look at Coffee Marketing Board from these indicators, we need to do the entire Privatisation Unit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you propose that we stay this one and we bring it in the motion in a broader way? What are you suggesting?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I was suggesting that we delete it and bring it in a broader motion.

MR BAKA MUGABI: I concede, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that this recommendation be deleted.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The next is on 11.3 page 15, “In view of the amount already paid, Government should ensure that MMAKS Advocates handles the matter pending before court to its logical conclusion without any further payment.”

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I feel that this may not fall within our jurisdiction as Parliament. Therefore, I want to move a proposal that this recommendation be deleted.

MR RUHINDI: I just wanted to caution Parliament on making any resolution or recommendation that would interfere with the principle of contract. If parties have negotiated and concluded the deal and then you come here to overturn it, you would certainly be infringing on the principles under the Contract Act.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that this recommendation be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I now put the question –

MR EKANYA: I am proposing to move a new recommendation that Government should report on the implementation of these recommendations. I want to ask the chairman what timeframe is appropriate?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Isn’t that a standard requirement of Government briefing us on what we have decided.

MR BAKA MUGABI: Mr Speaker, can we say 30 days that Government reports back to the House on the implementation of the recommendation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They can come and report that they have gone this far.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, I can appreciate the concerns of Members. However, I would implore that you give Government time –because 30 days is such a short time.  I would propose that you give us 90 days, three months.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we take middle ground, two months? He comes back to the House in two months to tell us what they have done and what they have not yet done? So, the timeframe is two months. I put a question to that timeframe.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Petition by Former Workers of the Coffee Marketing Board be adopted as amended. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, it was not that bad after all. So, now you have time to deal with these issues, consult and see how we can move forward while the Police and other people find out the truth of these issues and they also take action appropriately. It is out of our hands, it is out of your hands except those instructions that you have been given to fulfil.

MR BAKA MUGABI: Mr Speaker, on behalf of the committee and behalf of all the Members I wish to thank the House for the zeal with which they have debated this report and staying up to late. For the last many sittings we have been leaving at 6.30 p.m. but now we are coming to 7.30 p.m. I wish to thank the honourable members and of course, Rt Hon. Speaker, for steering us through this report.

We have been on this report for over a year and it has been paining us because you would never imagine that the people who have been coming to the committee have ever worked for Government. They were in a very bad state. But we are happy that today, we have cleared our house and we hope the government will respond as we have stated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, the legal committee, the chairperson and especially the deputy who presented the report and dealt with the questions. I thank you, Members for this very involved discussion we have had and for answering the call of citizens of this country. When they get affected, they come to this House for some recourse and we should be able to give it to them, one way or the other. It is only the spirit of moving together and helping our citizens that restores confidence in the operations of Government and the operations of this Parliament. 

So, I thank you very much for sitting this long for today and I apologise to our friends from the Islamic faith for exceeding the time. We only hope those ones who are in the House will find time to deal with those issues later. This House stands adjourned to Tuesday, 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7.00 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 29 July 2014 at 2.00 p.m.) 
