Monday, 23 July 2012 

Parliament met at 3.02 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this special sitting which we have convened to honour our colleague, hon. Michael Oromait. I received the news of the death of hon. Oromait with great shock, grief and sadness mostly because there was no sign that he had been unwell.

Indeed last week, he was here vigorously carrying out his duties and we were not aware that there was anything worrying about his health. Therefore, his death has come so suddenly and it is really a great shock to all of us. 

I take this opportunity on behalf of Parliament to express our heartfelt condolences to the family who are here; the people of Usuk County; the people of Jinja Municipality where he has lived for many years; the general Teso region and the country at large. 

Although Parliament just finished its First Session where he was a very active participant, it is unfortunate that just as we commence the second session, death has come to rob us of one of our own. 

Hon. Oromait was very committed to serving his people. As you know, his attendance both in the Committee on Finance and the Committee on Government Assurances was satisfactory. As you are aware, he was always here in the plenary and had very serious staying power. He regularly contributed to various debates on the Floor of Parliament; he was very passionate about social development especially in respect to issues of education, Medicare and physical infrastructure. He often complained about roads and bridges and I am told that last Thursday, he stood several times to catch the Speaker’s eye on the matter of paying tribute to the late hon. Adimola, but apparently, he did not get the chance. Through providence, it would seem that he had wanted to say farewell, but God decided otherwise. 

He was committed to securing total peace for his people and it is in respect to that that he had brought me a petition which he presented here in this House on issues of cattle rustling within the sub-region, as well as the one on border issues. 

We pray that his soul rests in eternal peace and that the family will be given the courage to go on with their lives. He lives behind a very large family, Ms Rose Kedi and Ms Christine Anyoit are also here and he had 10 children – Dennis Imat, Proscovia Alenget - I think she is the one who spoke at church; Stella Akullo, Fortunate Opio, Hope Adong, Mathew Akello, Aron Opio, Martin Oromait, Mark Otim and Ashen Aken and of course various members of his family and the people of Usuk are also in the gallery. 

I will also recognise the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly. I recognise the former MP for Usuk, hon. Oleny; I recognise the 10-point programme, the former Minister of Labour, hon. Butele; my former MP Nakasongola, Grace Tubwita; you are welcome. And former MP Amuria; Rodha Acen is up there. You are welcome. Yes, I see the Auditor-General and for the others members, when I get their names, I shall let you know. Thank you very much. 

Honourable members, today we had arranged to hold the Appointments Committee to consider the nominations to the Citizenship and Immigration Board, but because of this tragedy, we were not able to do so. I had thought of postponing the meeting to Thursday, but that is also the day that we are burying our colleague. So, I now give notice that the Appointments Committee will sit on Monday, 6th August at 10.00 a.m. to deal with the issue of citizenship and immigration vetting. Thank you very much. 

We have received condolence messages. The Auditor-General who is here in person has written: “I learnt with deep sorrow the sad news of the passing away of hon. Oromait, which occurred on Saturday, 21 July 2012. On behalf of the Office of the Auditor-General and on my behalf, I wish to express my deepest sympathies and heartfelt condolences at this time. We give you our assurances that we stand with you in this most trying moment. 

Based on his commitment to work, respect for others and service of this nation, there is a clear testimony of the impact brought about by the late hon. Oromait. I, therefore, implore you to focus on celebrating his life. We thank God for guiding him through as a responsible person to this country and join you in prayers with the Almighty, the giver and taker of life, to grant the family courage, strength and firmness.

John SS Muwanga, 
Auditor General”

I also have a letter from hon. Bernard Mulengani on behalf of the East African Legislative Assembly, Uganda Chapter.

“To The family of the late Oromait, I have learnt with profound shock the demise of our colleague, hon. Oromait. I wish to express my deepest sympathy on behalf of the Members of EALA. My prayer is that the Almighty God guides and gives strength to the bereaved as they go through this difficult moment. 

No doubt this sad event is very disturbing for the family and for the many other people who knew and cared for him. I am thinking of them in this time of loss and bereavement.  I believe our prayer will be with the family. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

Bernard Mulengani,
Chairperson EALA.”

We also have a message of condolence from the Health Service Commission. This is addressed to me. “I have learnt with deep sorrow and shock of the untimely death of hon. Oromait which occurred on Saturday, 21 July 2012 in Katakwi. The sudden death of hon. Oromait has robbed Parliament and the people of Uganda of an honest and hardworking Member of Parliament who will be greatly missed. 


On behalf of the Health Service Commission and on my behalf, I hereby express my heartfelt condolences to you the Parliament and the people of Uganda. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

Pious Okong, Chairperson Health Service Commission.”

We also have a message from our Member for Kampala, hon. Naggayi. “I am deeply saddened by the abrupt death and demise of my committee Member and friend hon. Oromait. No amount of words can describe the gap and sorrow that I feel at this moment. He has walked and worked his life journey diligently and nobly, only the Lord gives and takes away. I convey my deepest sympathies to the whole family at large, but to also the people of Usuk County. May the good Lord strengthen you in this trying period. May his soul rest in peace. Nabila Naggayi Sempala, MP for Kampala.”

If there are other messages, I will pass them on. I want to recognise Mrs Keto Nyapendi, the Assistant Auditor-General. She has also come with the Auditor-General to give support to Parliament on this Thursday. Thank you. 

(Entry of the late Michael Oromait.)

National Anthem (One Verse)

Laying of Wreaths

THE SPEAKER: I want to ask the Leader of Opposition to permit us to facilitate Members’ free sitting in this House. A number of Members have nowhere to sit. Thank you very much. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. OROMAIT MICHAEL, MP USUK COUNTY, KATAKWI DISTRICT

3.31
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I stand here on behalf of the Prime Minister, to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to our colleague, the late hon. Michael Oromait under Rule 47.

WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda notes with deep sorrow the untimely death of hon. Michael Oromait, which occurred on Saturday, 21 July, 2012 at Katakwi; 
“AND WHEREAS the late hon. Michael Oromait was an able self-motivated and hardworking representative of the people of Usuk County, Katakwi District in Parliament, which he represented with distinction; 

AWARE that hon. Oromait was a distinguished civil servant who served in the Uganda Police Force as well as serving  in several other capacities with the Uganda Posts and Telecommunications before joining Parliament; 

CONSCIOUS that hon. Oromait has been a dedicated legislator as well as an ardent Member of the Parliamentary committees on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and that of Government Assurance; 

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves that: 

(i)  	It collectively conveys its deep condolences to the family, relatives, friends, the people of Usuk County and the entire country for the loss of this gallant Ugandan;

(ii) 	It takes cognisance of the distinguished service and contributions rendered by the late hon. Michael Oromait to this Parliament and the entire country.”  I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: It has been seconded. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I want to briefly comment that our brother was born on 12 January, 1964 in Olera-Kelim, Usuk Sub-county in Katakwi District. He was born to Nicholas Inuat and Lucy Opure who were his parents.   

In 1980, he went to Usuk Boys Primary School. In 1984, he studied ‘O’ Level in Lango College and ‘A’ Level in 1987 also in Lango College.

In 2004, he earned a BBA at Namasagali University, Kamuli. In 2008, he got a certificate in Law of Law Development Centre. In 2008-2009, he got a Post-Graduate Diploma in Human Resource Management of Uganda Management Institute.

In 1987-1989, he was a Police officer. In 1989 to 1998, he was a sales officer at Uganda Telecom. In 1998-2003 he was the Superintendent and supervisor in Uganda Posts and Telecommunications. In 2003-2005 he was a regional cashier at Uganda Telecom Limited; and in 2005-2008, customer service officer, Uganda Telecom. From 2011 till his last breath, he was a Member of Parliament, Usuk County, Katakwi District and also a Member of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and Member, Committee on Government Assurances.

Like all of us, our brother had contributed 25 years of his active life and served the country in different capacities as it is said, but what is normally not said is his contribution or our contribution for that matter in maintaining the country. For 25 years, whatever little he was getting, part of it went to the government. That is a very serious contribution.

The members of his direct family and the extended family who rely on him will now feel his absence like all of us. Our brother did not know he was going to his constituency to meet his death. That I think is a very important decision by God when He was creating us; that we should not be party to our death and we should not know when we are dying. Otherwise, if we knew we were dying while we are sitting here, Madam Speaker, I don’t think you would have quorum because I don’t see a reason why I should come here when something very serious is happening me.

So, we want to thank God for keeping us ignorant of this knowledge because it would cause commotion in the world. For that, I want to pray that his soul rests in eternal peace. Thank you, Madam.

3.37
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I stand here to second the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Oromait Michael.

On Saturday 21st, I was at the burial of my uncle and by instinct I was prompted to read my text messages, and the message I saw was telling me that hon. Oromait Michael had died. I initially thought it was a joke, but I was wrong because I had been with him on Wednesday, we had been here joking and talking about bad roads in our areas and I was giving him a story of how I got stuck in Katakwi and he said, it is still bad.

We had agreed to go and visit our people in Kenya because he is my muko, and then in the same process he reminded me of a joke that for him when he is sleeping, he has to face Katakwi. That recently he travelled to Miami in the US and he was asking, where is Katakwi so that he could face there. That is why I thought it was a joke that my colleague had died.

Of course it is very difficult for me to accept, especially that we had just lost Lord Adimola and also one of our journalists James Odong, and we were all still in shock and still struggling to recover from all these losses.

As the Prime Minister has said, I also want to echo the same and this is from the Bible which says, “Be prepared always because you don’t know the day or the hour when death comes”. It is like a thief. Indeed, death has again robbed us. I am sure hon. Oromait Michael could have afforded to go to any hospital in Uganda and even abroad, but he was not given a chance.

Honourable members, that shows that there is someone greater than us; so whatever you do, know that there is someone greater and if you do not know, that is God.

On behalf of the Opposition and on my own behalf, we sincerely commiserate with the family of the late hon. Oromait Michael for the untimely death of your loved one. You have our sincere condolences.

But as we pay our last respects, such moments should enable us to come out with something to learn and I wish to suggest two lessons from this sad moment. The first one is tolerance. We are all Ugandans and we must tolerate each other despite the different creeds we uphold. Why do I say this? 

Last year when the Rt Hon. Speaker approached me to house the Independents on our side, we were initially hesitant to have them because we thought all of them were NRM leaning, because some of them had lost in the NRM primaries. However, as Opposition, and invoking the human instinct and value of tolerance, we accepted and all the Independents are comfortably seated with us. Yes, they are very comfortable. Even a few minutes ago, we have allowed more to come across. We are honoured and appreciate greatly having sat and associated with hon. Oromait for the short time we have been with him.

The second lesson is to strive to get what you want justly. Hon. Oromait started his career as a Police officer in 1987-1989. He was definitely working while upgrading his education status. When he lost in the primaries, he knew that justice had not been done to him and indeed when he stood as an Independent, justice prevailed.

Honourable colleagues, let us allow moral virtues to play a pivotal role in our lives. Let us stop the cancer of corruption that has eaten the moral fibre of our country. Let us stop embezzling money meant for drugs for health centres. Let us increase salaries of civil servants like nurses, doctors, policemen – because I am sure that if the salary for the policemen was good, he would have not left to go to Uganda Telecom. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I recently saw a cartoon in the Daily Nation showing a grave and a message saying, “I have struggled to grab all land, money and others, but imagine where I am going to stay the rest of my life.” So, tolerance and commitment to life of honesty can guarantee a better life after and a good legacy like my brother did. 

For those whose values are arrogance and greed, that is up to them. Your wages are separately prepared for you. Such a time is a time of reckoning and if we kept that at the back of our mind as we run the affairs of Government and the state, this country would accommodate, feed and take care of everybody.

Madam Speaker, I pray to God to strengthen the family, relatives and friends at this trying moment. And at the same time, I bid farewell, on behalf of the Opposition, to my brother Michael. May the good Lord accept you in His Kingdom and may your soul rest in eternal peace.

3.46
MR SAM AMOOTI-OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Madam Speaker, on behalf of my colleagues, the Independent Members of Parliament, I would like to extend our sincere condolences to the bereaved family, the children, all of you, Members of Parliament, the people of Usuk County and the country at large.

I said something this morning in church and I would like to repeat it because it is a fact that we have to live with. It is true that in the Seventh Parliament we lost a number of colleagues – I think about 12 Members of Parliament. It is also true that in the Eighth Parliament we lost a number of colleagues. And when I came back to the Ninth Parliament, I looked at all of us as we sit in this Chamber, and wondered who would go down in the span of five years. That kept ringing in my mind and the answer was provided on Saturday when we all woke up to the sad news of the demise of our colleague. I think this invites us to continue praying for each other and to know that our work is a stressful job and so we should use some of the facilities provided for by this Parliament. We have the gym and a clinic down there at the basement and the parliamentary football club to keep us fit. At a time like this, we should think about our lives in regard to that.

Having said that, I would like to say that, I first got in touch with hon. Oromait when I called him soon after our elections; we spoke and I heard the voice of a very happy man. Eventually, we met and formed the caucus for Independent Members of Parliament. I met a friend and a man I came to know as a humble, principled and confident man. He was also a very good debater. 

Hon. Oromait was very strong and steadfast on certain principles; he was strong and steadfast on the issue of good governance and human rights. In fact, he had wished that an opportunity should have been availed to him to deputise the chair of the Human Rights Committee. In his view, that committee was bipartisan and, therefore, an Independent Member would be best suited to lead or deputise it. He was equally passionate about the issue of equal opportunities - that all of us should be equal. If we had issues like where an Independent Member of Parliament should sit, and it turns out that after some negotiation, Independents can sit somewhere.  And yet it is a fact that a Member of Parliament must sit somewhere; it should not be negotiated because the business of being a Member of Parliament is about sitting when you are listening to others and standing to talk when contributing. At least you must sit somewhere. As someone passionate about Independents, he often said that, “The right to belong includes the right not to belong.” And, therefore, he was a very strong Member of our caucus and we shall miss him.

Hon. Oromait was very strong and steadfast on the issue of corruption. There was a debate that was on the Floor and hon. Oromait – as he was known for sitting on the second row – caught the eye of the Speaker, and he said a number of things. However, I want to attempt to quote him; he said, “Honourable Members, can we fight corruption and put the corrupt people behind like we sent some of our front bench Members and now they are languishing on the back bench.” This is what he said. 

And, Madam Speaker, the Rt hon. Jacob Oulanyah was in the chair and he sought clarification from the hon. Oromait. “Hon. Oromait,” this is what the Deputy Speaker said, “there is no seat in this House; there is no corner in this House which is a corner known for languishing. So, can you clarify on that statement?” (Laughter) Madam Speaker, all of us will bear me witness: The humour and the humility in hon. Oromait came out when in his humble way he stood up and said, “Mr Speaker, I meant that they were sitting behind.”

Honourable members, hon. Oromait loved the people of Usuk County. He loved Usuk County to the extent that he would stand on the Floor of this Parliament and say, “I am Oromait Michael, MP for UK.” And we would say, “What is UK?” and he would say, “Usuk in Katakwi.” This was the man. It is true he also loved his country. 

Hon. Oromait, in one of our caucus meetings, raised the issue of travel. Sometime last year, he said, “Next year I will make 50 years. I have been concentrating and working within the confines of Uganda. I think it is about time that I should venture into some foreign trips, but most especially, I wish I could visit my constituency in the UK. I would be very happy.” And we said, “Well, honourable, we are here for five years. I am sure the Office of the Speaker will accord you the necessary cooperation.” 

After that meeting I actually communicated a number of times with the Speaker in regard to this subject matter. Now, is it prophetic that when the Speaker accorded hon. Oromait the opportunity to travel to the UK, which he wanted, a couple of days ago, upon his return he dies? 

One of our friends, hon. Mariam Nalubega, bumped into him and said, “Now, Michael, you are back. What have you brought for us form the UK?”  He said, “I want to first report to the smaller constituency in UK and then I will come and report.” And that is how he was preparing his trip to go down to Usuk County. So, I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving our friend the opportunity which he wanted. 

May I also wind up by inviting all of us who are here that as a tribute to hon. Oromait - at least something that we owe to him - it is known that he presented a petition here on the issue of border disputes between Katakwi District and Karamoja? Can we give it to him? Can we have that resolved by way of a tribute to him? He was very strong on the issue of cattle rustling and he was happy that Government had done quite a good job. Government, can we do more in tribute to him?  May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, now that the movers and the seconders have spoken, I will limit the contributions to two minutes. I want to recognise two people who worked with him closely: Hon. Odonga Otto, Chair of Government Assurances and hon. Frank Tumwebaze, Chair of Finance, and then I will recognise the other Members.

3.59
MR ODONGA-OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much. My name is Odonga-Otto and I am the Chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances. I worked with hon. Oromait and I want to extend my deepest condolences on my behalf and on behalf of the committee, to the family members and the people of Usuk County, Katakwi. For over one year, I worked as the chairperson of the committee of which hon. Oromait was a member, I learnt three things, which I think on behalf of the committee, I should let the whole country know. 

One, hon. Oromait was a very humble man. The person who invented the word “humility” then in the English times should have had hon. Oromait in mind. When the Committee on Government Assurances travelled to Karamoja in the parliamentary van, the roads were impassable. So we had to abandon the van. We had one committee pick-up - the official pick up - and there was an NGO on the road that gave us one double cabin pick-up. But when we counted all the Members of Parliament, the front seats in the double cabin pick-up were not enough; they would still be less by two. I decided to release my driver so that I drive the official vehicle and we saved one more seat. But we still needed one more seat to carry an additional MP; and with that humility, and yet we were going to Katakwi, hon. Oromait’s constituency, he said to me, “Mr Chairman, I will sit behind the pick-up.” 

As we drove throughout the constituency he was comfortable on the pickup and waving to people in every trading centre. How many of us would do that? -(Interjections)- How many of us would do that? Even some of us who had the occasion of being arrested by Police, they were very courteous to put us in the second cabin, not even behind on the pickup. 

So, the kind of humility hon. Oromait exhibited, Madam Speaker, is immense. How many ministers would do that? (Laughter) We have seen ministers coming to Parliament when the front bench is full, but because they are very important they have to stand and others give them seats. So, the kind of humility that hon. Oromait had is something to learn from.

The second and last experience which I must state, because this is a very important moment for us as committee Members, in the van when we were travelling from Kampala to Mbale and Soroti, he told us endless stories. You would laugh your head off. There is one story he told the committee Members, and other Members will bear me witness. He made an appointment to see a minister - whose name I would not want to mention now - and the minister said, “Come to my office tomorrow at 9 a.m.” When he arrived at the office of the minister, he sat at the reception waiting for the minister, who is also a Member of Parliament. There happened to be several people in the waiting room. So, the minister opened the door and called a female visitor to get in first -(Laughter)- a female Member of Parliament. So, he went for the meeting and hon. Oromait said he waited and then after a while - he talks while laughing - the minister came and opened the door and said, “Can you please go and get me some mineral water.” (Laughter) Him, the one who was waiting - and he ends with the story that, “I have really suffered in this country.” (Laughter) Being the first to arrive, then you first have to go and bring water, then you wait for another hour and then you enter. I see that as humility. 

As I sit down, Madam Speaker, I think those appointed ministers should also learn from the humility of hon. Oromait. Being a minister is not everything in this country; we are all potential ministers. So, any day, we can all be ministers. We do not really have to suffer like that in our country. 

In his speech which was being displayed on the television, hon. Oromait said, “How can we give all this money to an individual yet the cows of the Itesots have not been paid for.” Those who steer this country, how many more people should die before the cows of the people who were taken away are paid back? So, as a good tribute to our colleague, let those who lost their animals during the war be paid.

As I take my seat, a humble policeman in a space of 20 years became a Member of Parliament. I think it is also a lesson to all of us. Whether you are in the Police and whether you are a cleaner, you are capable of being anything in life. (Applause) Do not be contented where you are. I have heard the lyrics and the Police band playing the best music; learn from hon. Oromait’s death that there are times in life you have to put a comma or a full stop and try to venture somewhere else. If you are going to spend the whole of your life blowing those flutes without looking left and right, it may not be the best opportunity. (Applause) May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.05
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT(Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Speaker, thank you so much for an opportunity to me and to the committee to bid farewell to our colleague and friend, hon. Oromait Michael. I worked with hon. Michael Oromait in the last one year on the Committee on Finance. As hon. Odonga Otto said, there are moments of hon. Michael Oromait I will continue to remember vividly. One of them is when we travelled from Nairobi by road through Nakuru and Naivasha as we were trying to inspect the pipeline up to Eldoret. The journey was long as you know that road. Somehow in the middle, the road is swollen, but we did not realise that because hon. Oromait was in charge. The stories were very many. 

Two abbreviations would make up his constituency; US plus UK equals Usuk. That famous trip to the UK: When he was in the UK, he called me on a number +444, “Mr Chairman, guess who this is. The lucky man Oromait”. I said, “Where are you Mr Oromait?” “I am in London with the President”. And he laughed. You know the way he would laugh and, “Please tell Members this is not a favour from the chairman. Oromait is always lucky”. Hon. Oromiat was very wonderful. The way he died, it was like Mayombo; dying very fast. He was never annoyed and was very humble. His jokes aside, really on a lighter note, man - when I say man, I also mean the female gender; that also defines man, and it defines your humanity and the way you relate with us on a warmer note. 

He has been in Parliament I think for one year and a few months, but you can see how visible he has been. A regular attendee of the committee. Madam Speaker, if we begin publishing the attendance as you directed us, I am sure hon. Oromait will rank No.1 in the committee. 

We have just finished the Accountants Bill; he was on our sub-committee. Because of his business experience, he was very key. He came in and acknowledged that he is not used to Parliamentary issues, but he was willing to learn and after one year, he was a very good participant. 

He came to me when he entered the committee two times and said, “Mr Chairman, you keep talking of the former MP for Usuk who was your great friend...”- hon. Oleny was my great friend. “For that matter, can you also be my friend? Do not refuse to be my friend because the other one was also my friend”. 

I said I will be your friend, but what happened? He told me the good story and said he is actually still my friend and I am really happy to know that even when my comrade is dead, they were friends with Oleny. 

Hon. Oromait died on duty. He died in his constituency. On Thursday, as we were winding up the Accountants Bill, he called me and called the Clerk on how he was not going to attend - we had a session with the Privatisation Unit - because he was going to Katakwi. So, he really died on duty and I think this calls for another debate. I know it is controversial, but it calls for another debate. When Members die on duty while stressing constituency endless demands sometimes beyond our mandate, Madam Speaker, I appeal to you and to the institution of Parliament to really run a vigorous crusade outside there to tell people what an MP should be doing. (Applause) 

Sometimes when we are engaged in these media debates with people from civil society, someone asks that, “Are you under any obligation to do those things?” Sometimes you have no answer as a reply. By virtue of the pressures, whether you like it or not, you have to be part and parcel of that stress at the expense of your family. May the Almighty God rest hon. Oromait in eternal peace.

4.10
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the other Members to send my condolences to the bereaved family. Honourable members, when I became a Parliamentary Commissioner, one of the challenges that I faced was when we were handling the budget of Parliament. All the other issues looked obvious; because of the financial stress, the budget was not changing. We had to discuss this issue of funeral expenses and you had to plan that somebody was going to die; so you must provide for it and the question was, who was that one? 

It became something strange that I had never done in my life and the other day when Dr Chris Baryomunsi rang me at about 6 a.m. to tell me that our colleague had passed on, I became very sad. 

Outside, people do not appreciate what we go through as Members of Parliament. The time I have been here in the House - right now, we have Members of Parliament who are bedridden because they got accidents on the way and they got wasted. Hon. Kiggundu is one of them. We have Members of Parliament who have left their lives and their families early. I read the comments made by one of our colleagues in the funeral book, when he said, “God’s ways are different from ours” and for sure, hon. Oromait has been taken so soon. When you see what he has achieved in so short a time, you would believe, if he had lived throughout the term of Parliament, he would have achieved more. 

But let us appeal to the public of Uganda to appreciate what we go through. Whereas I agree with my honourable colleague hon. Nandala-Mafabi that the public servants must be paid better, I want to disagree with him that people do come to Parliament to look for better pay. People come to Parliament to do service which hon. Oromait had done. Actually, outside Parliament, he was getting better money than when he was a Member of Parliament, because of the businesses that he was doing. He sacrificed because he chose that he must help the people of Usuk to be better than where he got them. 

Whereas we must support the public servants of Uganda to be paid better, as Members of Parliament, it becomes difficult to tell members of the outside world that a Member of Parliament earns Shs 1.5 million, something we have kept repeating and the media has chosen to portray us on the other side. There is nobody who will tell the public apart from us. While we are doing so, let us understand the stress and try as much as possible, progressively - maybe through the Commission – to also introduce counselling sessions so that Members of Parliament can be helped to live better lives. May his soul rest in eternal peace.  

4.14
MS FLAVIA RWABUHORO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to extend my condolences to the family of hon. Michael Oromait, to the friends, to the constituents and to all of us, colleagues.

From the death of hon. Oromait, I learn a lesson. This has been a reality which most of us, including myself, have taken for granted. The culture of regularly having knowledge about our health is a myth. I know this is our life and it is us, me and you, and not any other who should endeavour to be in good health in order to even encourage our constituents to do the same. I would like to call upon my colleagues and remind myself as well that this is our life; we need to take care of it. 

I know and I take cognisance of the fact that in this country we may be inadequate in diagnosis, especially regarding the critical nature of our health. Nevertheless, we have an obligation to our health. In this same spirit, I would like to request that the sickbay, which exists in this institution, be upgraded to a clinic where we have a doctor at least for the days we are supposed to be here, Tuesday to Thursday, and we are encouraged to take regular health checks. 

I cannot say much about hon. Oromait more than what the members have said. He was a friend, he was a colleague but that is God’s take. Let us hope to find him when we meet there. All the same, may God rest his soul in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, for the record, the Commission is in the process of upgrading the clinic. We have discussed it for this financial year to see whether we can get a doctor. We have budgeted for an ambulance as well so that it is here to facilitate members. 

4.16  
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very sorrowful that hon. Oromait is lying before us yet just some few days back he was an active member of this House. I was his Member of Parliament. He lived in my constituency for more than 10 years. He was such a personal friend that when I got the news, I had to call his number. I thought they were making a mistake. I rung the number and there was no response. I said, “I think it is true.” I called his home and it was actually true. 

He did something which brought him to Parliament. He told me, “From my first income, I want you to help me obtain an ambulance for the people of Usuk.” He bought the ambulance in his first three months in Parliament. (Applause) Sometimes, many of us quit when we have done nothing for the people who have trusted us. Many of us have long-term plans and we do not achieve any, but Oromait has left something, which the people of Usuk will always remember. 

When I went to his house and found the children, I said, “I cannot believe this has happened.” I talked about the ambulance and his daughter who is seated there told me, “Can you believe, honourable, the same ambulance had to bring him back?” From Katakwi, the ambulance had to pass his home in Jinja - his own ambulance which he bought for his people. Sometimes we do not know the implications of the things we do. He offered himself a service. Maybe there was no ambulance in Katakwi, which as Parliament we have to look into - the issue of ambulances. Members of Parliament do not have to buy ambulances. The government should be able to plan and buy ambulances. 

Oromait was a very appreciative man. Sometimes in politics we give small donations; I give exercise books to children in my constituency. His home also gets exercise books. He always called me and said, “Honourable, I have received the books.” Most people do not appreciate small things but they count. 

He was a humble man with a very humble beginning doing even some business of money lending in Jinja. Yesterday, I went to see his office where he was operating from and I found cheques of over Shs 70 million, which the Police had to supervise and give to the family. Even us if we do not stand for our colleagues, nobody will stand for us. 

As MPs, we have to remember that we are one family. He is gone but we cannot forget his family. Forget this issue of somebody dying and you say, “Help his children. Government should come in.”  We have to remember that we have to work for our families. Hon. Oromait worked for his family. They will still need our support but we should also ensure that we keep at heart the people we have worked with, the people we have sat with, the people we have eaten with, the people we have lived with. It is very important that Parliament as an institution does not just talk good things about somebody when he or she has died. He was a very humble man. Everybody has something good to tell about him. Nobody has said anything negative. (Member timed out)

4.20
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join my colleagues in conveying my condolences to the bereaved family on behalf of the people of Bukedea.

Hon. Oromait and I were members of the Committee on Finance. As part of the Committee on Finance, I was one of those who travelled with him to the US, Miami, for a conference on accountancy, that is, the International Consortium on Governmental Financial Management (ICGFM). Perhaps that was his first time to travel abroad in an aeroplane, but all that time we had together with him while in the US, hon. Oromait made fun. In fact, I learnt that Oromait had an infectious character. If he stepped in any place, you would not go out without remembering that you met a person called hon. Oromait. 

When we were walking in the US, he would say, “Now, my sister...” - he called me his sister because he always reminded me that we were born in the same year, only that I was about 10 months ahead. He would tell me that, “Now, you are here, you tell me, where is my other constituency Usuk? You show me the direction from here.” He would send all of us laughing. That was him.

Even last Thursday, we were together in the Committee on Finance and he was reminding us of the adventures he had when we were in Miami together. Because he had issues, he would have to move to and from a certain mall called Aventura and somehow we called him Aventura Mall. For some reason, he had to move about four times there.

As a member of the Committee on Finance, hon. Oromait has been a very hardworking person. He never missed attending meetings and indeed those who came for those meetings, the bodies which we oversee as the finance committee, would not miss hon. Oromait. The Office of the Auditor-General is here to testify to that.

Madam Speaker, hon. Oromait intimated that because of the conflict between Napak and Usuk, he was going to build his home right at the border so that he would be the one to reconcile any conflict that exists between the two. He also said there are 38,000 square miles of land that Government wants to turn into a military barracks. But he said this is very fertile land and he must make sure he saves this land for his people. So, colleagues, a petition was made here and part of it was to save that land. Let us see what we can do to make sure his dream comes true.

I was in church today but I believe all is not lost even though Oromait is lying here before us. His daughter spoke and I thought, “This is the girl who is going to live to represent her father and make the father arise from the ashes.” I believe one day, that girl will be here as a Member of Parliament. For those who were in church, you heard what that girl said. It was a short but very powerful speech. (Applause) May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.25
MS JOYCE ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to extend my condolences to the family of hon. Oromait, friends and relatives including honourable Members of Parliament. I learnt of the sudden death of the honourable member on Saturday when I was in my constituency. I had also gone to bury a loved one who died in a land wrangle in Otuke District. It took me by shock; I remember I shouted when I saw the message. 

In this Parliament, I do not remember seeing hon. Oromait on the third row, fourth or fifth; he sat on the second row. Colleagues asked me about the honourable member. Many of the colleagues I went with did not know him, but I told them that Oromait Michael was sometimes referred to as “almighty”. When pronouncing his constituency, he would say, “I am Oromait Michael from Usuk County.” That name Oromait would sometimes be pronounced as “almighty” and sometimes he would say, “I am almighty”. I am very sorry for what has happened. 

If hon. Oromait did not know your name, he would not call you anyhow. He would say, “My sister, what is it? Can I also be part of that story so that I share the information?” I knew him because of his humility. All Members of Parliament knew him as a humble Member of Parliament. He has contributed a lot and he talked a lot about his constituency. 

I know the honourable member left behind a family; he left children and other dependants. Michael was a bread winner in his family and above all, he met his death in his constituency. There are quite a number of things he could have done in Kampala but because of the love he had for his constituency, he met his death there. (Member timed out.)

4.29
MR MARTIN BAHINDUKA (Independent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Ntoroko and on my own behalf, I would like to send my sincere condolences to the family of the honourable member who has been a friend and a colleague. As independents, we are more like a family. So we have really lost a brother. 

I last saw Oromait on Thursday at around 4.00 p.m. He was carrying a bag and putting on a T-shirt at Bauman House. I asked him, “Honourable, where are you going?” He said, “I am going somewhere quickly, but I am coming back”. It seems he had not yet set off. So I was shocked when a got the news of his passing on last Saturday. It was really sad. 

A lot has been said about hon. Oromait and I do not want to repeat that. He was really a friendly person. Look at the age gap between me and hon. Oromait, but we would sit down comfortably and discuss issues. We would talk as if we were of the same level. For us as the young people who are here, he has mentored us and we, together with the people of Usuk and the country at large, shall miss him. 

One of the colleagues made a statement that when we were in church, some of the kids made important points and they expressed themselves in very good manner. Hon. Oromait has left behind what we call a legacy, both in Parliament and Usuk. 

I happened to sit in that chair one time in 2007 when I had lost my father. He was a Member of Parliament and had served only one year. Surprisingly, I am also here as a Member of Parliament. A lot is said when someone dies, but I would like to encourage the young people; hon. Akol said time will come, but I would like to assure you there is no other time; the time is now. The only person who can represent the legacy of hon. Oromait in this House and represent Usuk is only you. No one else feels what you feel for the loss of your father and no one else can champion the causes that your father died for - equality, good representation of the people in Usuk and the rest of the country. 

I would like to encourage you and the people of Usuk; like the young girl said, the candle will not stop burning. So I would like to encourage you and the people of Usuk to look at it in this way; hon. Oromait was a commander trying to get good things for the people of Usuk. When a great fighter dies, the people behind do not run because if they did, they would become traitors. What they should do is to stand for the cause he died for and advance it until they achieve victory. That is the only way you can make hon. Oromait rest in peace.

4.33
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like first to convey my condolences to the family of our fallen colleague, hon. Oromait, and the Teso community within Jinja Municipality where hon. Oromait was a stakeholder. 

It is very surprising that on Wednesday afternoon, hon. Oromait told me, “I am a very big stakeholder in Jinja.” He actually told me, “I have over ten houses in Jinja and I always stay in Jinja, but do you know my place? If I got a problem in Jinja and I called you, would you come to my rescue?” To be very sincere, I did not know his place. So he told me, “I am going to Usuk, but when I come back we must arrange and you come to my place and I also come to your place so that you actually know where I stay.” To me, that meant that many of us are here in this House but it may be very difficult for us to even know the home of our very great friends.

Madam Speaker, on Saturday, I received a call from one of the constituents in Jinja informing me that my colleague had passed on. That was at around 7.00 o’clock in the morning. I did not believe it and so I called his numbers; he had two lines. I talked to a driver or an assistant and asked him if it was true that hon. Oromait had died. He said that it was actually true. 

The description given by one of our colleagues about the character of hon. Oromait shows that actually, this country has lost a patriot. He was – (Member timed out.)

4.35
MR GEORGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I also stand to convey my sincere condolences to the family and the people of Usuk. Hon. Oromait was with me on the same committee and he was my personal friend. We often shared lunch together and even a few moments before he died, I had spent an hour on phone talking to him. 

We discussed a lot; he wanted to learn from my constituency what he would take to his constituency. It was quite a trying moment when I heard that hon. Oromait was dead. After that hour long conversation, he requested me to go and meet the Minister for Education and talk to her because I was supposed to lead a delegation of friends from the US to his constituency. 

Hon. Oromait told me that he wanted to pass by my home. He said, “I want to pass by your constituency and learn from your experience because I want to go and build a hospital for the people of Usuk.” That was the first thing he told me. The second was, “I am going to Usuk because I want to improve the households of the people of Usuk.” The third thing he told me was, “I want to leave a legacy behind.” 

Indeed, I did go to the office of the Minister for Education and shared with her how best I could lead a delegation to Usuk. The Minister for Education gave an input and advised me that on our way before we reach Usuk, we first go to Toroma County. She said that she would not be in the country but I would be able to represent and speak on her behalf when we reach Katakwi. Our plan was for the next Saturday to lead the delegation of Americans to Usuk County. Shortly, I left the minister’s office – that was around 1 on Friday; after 40 minutes – (Member timed out)

4.38
MS LYNDA TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. It is quite sad and very painful that today, in front of us, is the body of our colleague, hon. Oromait. I learnt about hon. Oromait’s death on Saturday. Before that, I knew him as a friend through my brother, Patrick Rujumba, in Jinja. I got to know him on the day I became a Member of Parliament.

The death of hon. Oromait has brought to my mind something that is common, something that we are supposed to do but in most cases we do not do it - the issue of writing wills. In most cases, educated and uneducated, during sudden death we do not leave something in writing. Culturally, this is because they say that when you write a will, it causes sudden death. Hon. Oromait’s death has taught me a lesson that when you are walking, however educated, sick or wherever you are, you must make a formal will. 

I also request that the names and photos of MPs, whether dead or alive, or those who served in the last Parliament, should at least be printed and put in a specific place for remembrance. It could be like a monument, such that even when their kids, parents, relatives or people of the nation pass by, they know that hon. Oromait and another member that served in Parliament is here and their photo is somewhere here. (Member timed out.)

4.40
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would say that I am happy today by the turn up of Members of Parliament to pay our last respects to our dear friend. We were here with hon. Oromait on Thursday and he was speaking. 

On Friday at 9 they were in the canteen with three friends of mine, and I got a call. He said, “My dear friend…” and I said, “Who is this?” Somebody picked the phone and said, “Now you have known who your friend is.” Hon. Oromait has been my good friend for over 15 years when he was in Jinja and before I became a Member of Parliament. When I came to Parliament, he also became my first great friend from the other side. He would always say, “Thank you for being my friend.” Very few people say that without implications. (Laughter)

Hon. Oromait will be remembered for his kindness. You did not know him, but he was a loaded man. In matters of money, he would assist people without interest. It would only be when you go for business - like a project- of over Shs 50 million that hon. Oromait would impose interest. We ask you members to live by his example. If somebody needs Shs 2 million from you, do not put interest on it, at least to remember hon. Oromait. (Laughter)

Lastly, I thank God for the life of hon. Oromait. If our members – we had a development group of 11 members where people would contribute money and hon. Oromait was the only man. We thank him for being our friend and we pray that the Lord God rests his soul in eternal peace. I thank you.

4.43
MRS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to pay tribute on behalf of the people of Ibanda and on my own behalf to the late hon. Oromait. I also pass on my condolences to the bereaved family. Life has taught me from the untimely death of hon. Oromait, which I learnt about on my way to a private function in Budaka. When I received the SMS, I said that this cannot be true. 

Hon. Oromait was a very friendly person and very social. Two or three incidents come to my mind. While in Miami together, he swore that we were in the Miami of Usuk. I asked him how he compares the two. He said, “As long as one is alive, you can never say ‘never’”. He said he would transform Usuk to the level of Miami. 

He told me two humorous stories of how he edged out his opponents. He said he bought an ambulance powered with sirens and a loudspeaker. He said in one incident, a woman had been bitten by a snake deep in the jungle. He said that he drove the ambulance with the sirens on, telling the people to come nearer. He drove the ambulance deep into the jungle and he rescued the woman. To his relief, the woman got well and that had a multiplier effect. 

The second incident, which was even very funny, was that of a man who had beaten his wife to nearly coma because she had eaten a gizzard. He said when he drove his ambulance with the sirens on, when he got deep into the village where the people where gathered, he got a white hankie from his pocket, went right in front of the ambulance and pretended to be weeping. The people told him, “Oromait, stop weeping and rush this lady to the health centre.” He asked the husband why he beat his wife to near coma because of a gizzard when he could have bought for him 100 hens and he would have eaten 100 gizzards. Indeed, he rescued this woman too. So, this shows you the type of man he was, always ready to help his people. 

He intimated to me that we need to transform the health centre IIs, the health centre IIIs and the health centre IVs to make sure that our people get services in those units because – (Member timed out)

4.47
MR MICHAEL MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Madam Speaker, aromait in Ateso is a scar. The late Oromait had the most stressful constituency in Uganda. The longest staying IDPs in Uganda were from Oromait’s constituency, from 1982. 

One day I travelled with him. When we went a little after Soroti, about 3kms out of Soroti, we found a little girl lying on the side of the road with another friend standing. We thought it was just a normal rest. When we came back after two hours, we found a large number of people who had gathered around where we had left the little girl, only to realise that this girl had died of malaria. I have never forgiven myself, and the late Oromait promised that he would find a way of paying back. He bought an ambulance – the one hon. Balyeku was talking about – just to give back to society in remembrance of this little girl.

In his constituency, for those who read Etop, there was a man who had a scar and had been in a camp for a long time. This man amputated his leg. He had a longstanding scar and he cut off his leg with a panga. It made headlines in Etop. 

Oromait, the person lying here, was a man who was committed to his constituency. Every other week, he was in his constituency. I want to tell you comrades that because I have known him for a long time – he was a member of the National Resistance Movement but because of the primaries, which were marred and were irregular, he decided to go independent - (Member timed out).

4.50
MR VINCENT KYAMADIDI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Rwampara and on my own behalf, allow me extend our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family, to the people of Usuk County, Katakwi District and the people of Uganda. 

A lot has been talked about hon. Oromait. I met hon. Oromait when we went for a workshop at Hotel Africana. I could not pronounce that name well, so he always taught me to call him “almighty” and indeed he was “almighty”. Oromait and I were always punctual to this House. Every time he would come to the House, he would cross over and greet me and say, “Kyamadidi, how are you this evening?” He was a very good man.

Now, I am here to preach, for he has already died. For those of you who read the Bible, if you read Job 14:1-6, it says, “The man born of a woman has little time to live and because the days are predetermined, you have little to add. Don’t put your eyes there for you leave him to rest.” Proverbs 27:1 says, “For you do not know what happens between today and tomorrow. Those of you who are boasting should stop.” 

Honourable members, the death of hon. Oromait teaches us a lot. At a time when this country is grappling with very many vices, we have a lot of stress. You have stress from yourself, stress from the family, stress from the constituents, stress from the plenary, stress from the committee, stress from even the country. How many bodies shall we see out of stress? The leaders, the powers that be, you must learn, - every time we talk - no one has control over death but some of it you can control. (Member timed out.)

4.52
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The Banyankole have a saying that when a man dies, he will never be remembered by how much food he has eaten but he will be remembered by what he has left behind. My colleague has left behind a legacy, and I listened to the speech of his daughter. I thank you, hon. Oromait, for being a wonderful person. 

Madam Speaker, I fear befriending people who are not honest. I normally dramatise my submissions. I want to remember hon. Oromait for having said, when he was giving his maiden speech, that “Rt Hon. Speaker, we are broke”, when everybody feared to tell you, and things happened; it rained. (Laughter)

Secondly, when we debated the issue of the breasts of Ingrid Turinawe, I saw what we call honesty. Hon. Oromait was an honest person. He said, “How many of you have never suckled a breast of a woman?” He was almost crying in this Chamber.

Madam Speaker, I listened to the post-mortem report from Dr Epetait. As physician, Dr Epetait, suspiciously I think this man died from a likely ruptured aneurysm in the brain. This is because it was sudden, it gives a very bad headache and if it was malignant hypertension, we should have had end-organ damage including the kidneys. I hope they will give that report out there. 

Anyway, what I want to talk about is the health sector. This sector must be rejuvenated. (Applause) When I got to Parliament for the first time, I realised that all of us are potential patients; we can die any time. We must save our people. I bring you condolences from my people of Mbarara Municipality upon the loss of a wonderful person like this one at this age, after he had spent such a short time in Parliament. Madam Speaker, I am in pain. How many of you will be picked by aeroplanes from where you will be? (Member timed out)

4.55
MR STEPHEN BAKA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I rise to pay tribute to a colleague who is going to be missed by many. He will be missed by MPs, former colleagues in the Uganda Telecom and mostly by his constituents. 

His death is indeed untimely to us because we have only been with him for one year yet we were supposed to be with him for five years. That is the time you develop sisterhood and brotherhood at another level. One year has been too short for us with hon. Oromait. This is especially due to the fact that we have realised that he had attributes of an astute legislator and those of a wonderful man we would have loved to interact with throughout these five years. We will dearly miss him!

His death is untimely for his constituents. Usually during the first year of being here, most of us keep grappling with debts incurred during the campaigns. It is only during the second year when you start delivering services to your people. I am sure the late had not had a wonderful time with his people. He was just about to start delivering services to them; unfortunately, that is the time he has died. It is very sad that we have lost him at this time. 

I wish to convey my condolences to the bereaved family, the people of Usuk County and all the MPs upon the loss of such a colleague. I have two things to say about the late. One is that he liked and loved his constituents. I met the late shortly after he had bought his new double cabin pick-up.  When I asked him where he had got the money to buy such a new car, he said, “This one is fairly comfortable but also it will be able to reach all the corners of the constituency.” That is the man who spent over Shs 150 million to buy a car so that he could be able to reach all the parts of his constituency.

Two, his former colleagues at Uganda Telecom can testify, and those of you who will attend the burial will hear these stories, that he was very useful to them; he worked very well with them. As you have heard, he was blessed with excess liquidity, which he used to lend to those who were in need and he used to lend it without any interest being levied. That is the man lying in front of us now. (Member timed out.)

4.58
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like, on my own behalf and on behalf of the people Budiope County East Constituency in Buyende District, to convey my heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family and the entire nation upon the loss of our fallen comrade.

My first serious interaction with the late occurred some two months ago when we were travelling together in a Parliament bus to Pallisa to attend a fundraising function that was presided over by H.E the President. Due to his humorous nature, as already attested to by the previous speakers, immediately he got into the bus from Jinja, he posed a question that, “What do men really want; do men really know what they want?” He then posed a second one: “Do women really know what they want?” 

I can assure you, these questions generated a spirited debate, which even led into the generation of a checklist because each side was trying to justify that they actually knew what they want. Our female counterparts reasoned that the women actually know what they want. For us the men reasoned that it is us who know more of what we want. That debate ended up in a document that he had promised to launch by forming a social network club codenamed, “Do people know what they want?” That shows the social part that the late exhibited. 

Along the way, as we moved closer to Pallisa, he also jokingly made a declaration and this is what he said: “Colleagues, you know what, I think I am serving my last term in Parliament.” When we asked him why, – around that time EALA campaigns were going on – he said that after this term, he would mobilise support to be elected to EALA and he was – (Member timed out)

5.01
MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Ngora and on my own behalf, I would like to add my voice to the voices of my colleagues in paying a special tribute to the late hon. Michael Oromait. 

I met the late Oromait the very day I was sworn-in as a Member of Parliament. After two days, we met again and he said to me, “Amongin, I want to meet you.” When we met, he asked, “How old are you?” I said, “I am 29 years old.” Then he said, “I do not want you to spend your five years wasted. I want you to know the financial aspect so that after five years, you decide whether you have left a legacy behind, whether you have empowered yourself or you can again run for Member of Parliament.”

From that day onwards, hon. Oromait became my friend. He actually inspired 11 of us to form a group from which we usually shared ideas on financial issues. Actually, we have been giving out money to ourselves, but that was at the initiation of the late hon. Oromait. 

When he was in the UK, he called me on phone and said: “Hon. Jacqueline Amongin, this is the place I have always longed to reach because it is the UK of Uganda, the constituency that I represent. But my dear, you have always helped me; I am going to bring you a necklace.” I got so excited on hearing that from him.

The last time I saw him was Friday morning. He called me because I needed some money from him – he has always been my bank. Whenever I was broke, I would call him and not the bank, and he would give me money interest free. On Friday, while I was with hon. Harriet Ntabazi, we met hon. Michael Oromait and I asked him whether he would give me some money. He told me, “Jacqueline Amongin, I have the money here. You are one of my friends, but you have never bothered to know my home. So, in that case I am going to Katakwi but I am going to leave the money with one of the students in my house in Jinja. Drive there very early in the morning and pick the money, so that when I die you people will know where I come from.” 

I asked hon. Harriet Ntabazi how I would travel to Jinja for that money. Hon. Tiperu said, “Jacqueline, I know you are badly off, please have Shs 1,000,000 but make sure you go to hon. Michael Oromait’s place.” He also called again and said, “Please, I am not putting the money on your account, travel to my home very early in the morning.” 

I woke up very early in the morning, dressed and drove from my home in Munyonyo up to Nsambya. On my way, the first call I received was from hon. Tiperu and she asked me, “Jackie, where are you?” I said, “I am on my way to Jinja; I want to pick some money.” Tiperu then said, “My dear, you need to cancel that journey because as we speak, the information I have got is that hon. Oromait is dead.” I said, “No, it cannot be!” When I called his number, someone picked and said, “Yes, we are moving with the body to Mulago; he is actually gone.” I changed my journey and I began texting members telling them of the untimely death. 

What do we learn from hon. Oromait? Sometimes, there is that part of the brain that speaks. I was with hon. Harriet Ntabazi and he emphasized that he was time barred saying, “I must rush and see my mother, I need to see my mother; I have very little time.” We asked, “Why are you in a rush? That is why people die of stress because you are always rushing to the constituency.” He said, “Jackie, goodbye, I am going to see my mother.” I imagine he died besides his mother.

What do we learn from the death of this lovely man? One, as we socialize as colleagues in this House, can we just take time to know where each member stays - (Member timed out.)

5.04
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of my colleagues in conveying condolences to the family of the late Oromait. I will not say much because a lot has been said about the type of person who lies fallen before us. 

The late Oromait had a wonderfully strong personality, which could permeate all characters in society. He would permeate all considerations - political, social, economic and physical; that is why today, everybody is saying all that about him. It is not surprising that today, like someone again wonderfully said, the House has merged because of our fallen brother and many of us have confessed we have learnt lessons. 

One very useful confession I heard, which was made by our brother, the Leader of the Opposition, is about tolerance. I am very sure DP and UPC are learning the same from hon. Oromait today. 

Hon. Balyeku has talked about the business that the late was doing. Hon. Jacqueline Amongin has talked of what she was about to get. The information I want to share is that in the process of trying to check around for the late Oromait’s belongings within the precincts of Parliament, we checked his office and there was a sign that he had been lending money to many of us. It is my appeal, as chairperson of the Teso Parliamentary Group, and on behalf of the family, that for those of you who had got money from the late, please, – (Applause) - as a sign of respect and love for a friend and as a sign of respect for the family, we shall be very glad to receive that money and forward it to the family of the late. (Member timed out.)

5.08
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on behalf of all the old boys of Lango College to pay special tribute to the late hon. Michael Oromait. He spent six years at Lango College and I equally spent six years. To all of us OBs of Lango College, both within and outside Parliament, we really convey our deepest condolences to the family and the people of Usuk. Lango College is where he started nurturing his leadership skills. He was a dormitory captain for Odora House in Lango College.

There are three or four traits that must go on record about the late hon. Michael Oromait. One is that as a leader, he believed strongly in servant leadership and he was a servant leader. That is why he died in the service of his people. 

Two, he had a strong conviction that leadership is a calling; not simply a calling but a calling to serve your people. Indeed, the late had total dedication to serving his people of Usuk. 

Three, I want to put it on record that as an Independent Member of Parliament, the late Michael Oromait was independent but dependable. He was dependable to almost all Members of Parliament in the Ninth Parliament. It is sad that he is the first to die in the record of the Ninth Parliament. It is a big loss to this Parliament, a big loss to all the OBs of Lango College and a big loss to the people of Uganda. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

5.10
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the same spirit, I would like to convey my sincere sympathy to the family, to the Members of Parliament and to Usuk Constituency. 

Hon. Oromait was one of our family members - the family of the Independents. Having known hon. Oleny, the former Member for Usuk County, who was Independent then and I was Independent too, at first I was very uncomfortable with hon. Oromait. This was because I always related well with hon. Oleny and I thought I would not be a friend to hon. Oromait. However, in the course of work and as secretary to the caucus, I discovered that hon. Oromait was a great leader who replaced another great leader. He was so cooperative, always punctual and very constructive. 

If there is anybody who does not believe up to now that hon. Michael Oromait is dead, it is me because on Wednesday, he had promised to bring me what he had brought for me from the UK.  I had hoped to receive it this week, but the only gift I received was a message from hon. Alaso about the sad news that hon. Oromait had passed away. 

He died in the course of duty. I know that he spent over five hours at the health centre. This takes me to the point Dr Bitekyerezo made. On Thursday and Friday, I was monitoring health centres and hospitals and I got a similar case in Kawolo Hospital. A person who was in a similar situation like hon. Michael Oromait’s was delivered to Kawolo Hospital but they lacked just a stabilizer and the patient passed away. I believe that as he struggled in those five hours, there was something lacking in that hospital. 

The government should do something about our healthcare service delivery. I believe hon. Michael Oromait was going to attend a fundraising or something. These are government programmes. Government, deliver your programmes and save us from the stress. Time and again, we are running to attend school fundraisings, hospital fundraisings. Please government, deliver and save us the stress. Why do we have to drive in the middle of the night to attend a fundraising – (Member timed out.)

5.13
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Bunya East Constituency, Mayuge, and on my behalf, I wish to convey my condolences to the family of the late hon. Michael Oromait. 

Uganda has lost Michael Oromait, Usuk has lost Michael Oromait, Parliament has lost Michael Oromait and the NRM too has lost. Much as Michael Oromait was an Independent MP, he was a friendly force to NRM. As much as FDC was keeping track of these Independent MPs, the late Michael Oromait would sneak into our camp in Kyankwanzi and we chat while FDC is sleeping and then he comes back.

The information I have is that the late hon. Michael Oromait collapsed on the steering wheel. Maybe this is food for thought for our commissioners; should MPs drive themselves or not. We lost hon. Balikoowa; hon. Kigundu is bed ridden and other MPs. 

This man has been a simple and free person to access. We used to meet in Jinja. He used to eat at a restaurant behind his House on the main road just opposite the barracks. When we were laying down strategies for the EALA campaigns, we had an interest in one candidate. He told me that I first make sure that the candidate goes through the primaries in NRM and then he would take over from that stage to mobilise the Independents and the Opposition so that our candidate goes through. Unfortunately, the strategy did not work, but that was Oromait Michael. (Member timed out.)

5.16
MS CHRISTINE ABIA (FDC, District Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My first encounter with the late hon. Oromait was at Bauman House. He asked me whether I was trained in UK and I told him, “No, I was trained in Terego.” He said, “No, in Usuk in Katakwi”. So we laughed. He then asked me, “I used to see you so lean and in trousers, what happened?” Then I said that there is a structural adjustment programme that I am undergoing. We then laughed and that was it.

The gentleman lying before us is 49 years. The average age of Ugandans to die now is 47, meaning that Ugandans are not living anymore but we are staying. No Ugandan is living because if you checked your hospital statistics, the average age of deaths in Arua Hospital is about 39 years. So we are not living as Ugandans anymore but we are staying, and this is very unfortunate.

We have heard about the humility of the gentleman lying before us. I wonder how many of us are humble enough. I wonder how many of us would get such a tribute from this House. I heard members saying he was lending to them money sometimes interest free. I wonder how many of us would even part with Shs 100,000 interest free. 

To the family, my dear widow and your children, I want to leave you with one powerful message. In an event of death, there are usually people who come around fighting for what they have not worked for, and that is the extended family. I can assure you that you have to stand very firm, take full charge and responsibility because nobody will ever look after your children except you. To the extended family, there are times when you come under the guise of being the brother, the chief and others; do not crave for what you have not worked for and do not disturb the family of the deceased because he had to work in order to keep it.

Madam Speaker, when I look at all of you present and you look at the statistics or figures brought to your attention for fees, for fundraising for whichever churches and mosques, you would think that your cars are wagons of money. (Member timed out.)

5.18
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Mpigi and on my own behalf, I join the rest of the honourable members to mourn the demise of our colleague, hon. Michael Oromait. I remember hon. Oromait introducing himself as the only representative of UK. 

He was my office neighbour and I sat with him on two committees, finance and government assurances. Whenever he reached his office, he would call me and ask whether I would be in the office. If I asked why he wanted to be in my office, he would say, “I want to charge my phone because the sockets in my office are not working.” He would then say, “I have suffered for this country but do not mind, I was born lucky; my name is being mentioned everyday by almost everybody in the whole world because everybody has to mention the word “almighty”. He was always joking like that.

I want to extend my sympathies to the bereaved family. The people of Mpigi have also sent sympathies and they are mourning for the country because of the loss of a great nationalist. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

5.22
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Kasilo, I want to convey my condolences to the family for the untimely death of my brother, Michael Oromait. A lot of humour about my brother has been shared here but I also want to give two incidences. 

As part of the Committee on Finance, when we were in Miami Florida in April, hon. Oromait made us feel at home. At one point, he went with hon. Wadri to Aventura Mall for shopping but as they bought things, he forgot some in the shop. The following day I went for shopping, I went to the same shop. Because I was putting on the Ugandan flag, the Israeli person who was selling said, “There were two gentlemen who were here yesterday and they forgot some things here. They bought so many things and they forgot some. Would you know them?” I mentioned names and he said, “Yes, that one called Oromait.” I picked the things, brought them to the hotel and I called my brother and asked, “Do you remember this stuff?” He said “yes” and continued to say, “Indeed, I am “almighty”; how could my brother be the one to go to the same shop?” That shopping mall is about one square mile but we somehow went to the same shop.
 
As we moved in the train, he asked me, “We are entering this train, but I have not seen you pay and I am not seeing the driver.” In Miami there is a public train to take people around free of charge; you can roam the whole city. He said, “I wish Usuk could be like this.” That was the humour. My colleagues who were with us on that delegation will tell you a number of humorous stories that the late Oromait was giving us.

Hon. Oromait was a business person and he trusted a number of colleagues. As he sat in the House here, he would identify the honest people and those are the people he would lend the money to, not because he had limited money. I am happy that some of those the late Oromait had given money, even without any documents have come up to say that they owe him some money. Thank you for having that kind of heart and we should continue like that. We are ready to help the family get back his property. (Applause) 

When we went to open and change the lock for his office, there was a suitcase that I bought for him in Miami. In Miami he said, “When we get back to Uganda, I will refund the money.” But there was no need for that. Before he went to the UK, I was again together with him sharing ideas. He had wanted to join my team with hon. Omolo - we used to handle fundraising drives in each other’s constituencies. The three of us would go and make a lot of impact and so he had wanted to join our team. 

So, we were discussing some of those things and he also wanted me to supply him with some suits, which I have been supplying him with. I found the suitcase intact - not open up to today.  We know what is in that suitcase; we shall hand it to the family members because there are some things he bought which were for the family. So, I will deliver them at an appropriate time. The family members do not know about it, but they will get them when they open it.

The other interesting thing is the level of honesty, which is typical of the Iteso. When some money was paid to hon. Oromait’s account – Shs 3.9 million - and the trip did not materialise, he refunded it. How many people can do that? They would make it a problem to recover that money. He also made sure that the person who was receiving that money signed that he had refunded it. That is the Oromait we are talking about today.  

He loved Usuk, and that is why he pushed the government to provide security to the people of Usuk and to help resolve the border problem. He said, “Let me go and build and be killed there at the border as the MP if Government fails to provide.” We should really work towards seeing that that problem is sorted out in Usuk. Within only one year, hon. Michael Oromait had made a mark even more than some of us who have been here for five years. We should also be able to make that mark both in Parliament and in our constituencies.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I thank your office. For the members who are going for the burial, there will be two coasters leaving for Katakwi at 6.00 a.m. on Thursday morning - (Interjections) - Do you want more than two?  

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes! 

MR OKUPA: We are asking you to register so that we can establish the number and then see what to do because we have the vehicles. There is one leaving on Wednesday evening for those who would want to leave earlier and be there for the prayers. Thank you so much and may God bless you. 

To the family; there is a girl there called Akello, the one with braids. I was touched yesterday when I went to the late Oromait’s home in Kyaliwajjala and I found that girl leading prayers. She was singing church hymns off cuff and it beat everyone. That is the family that the late had brought up - God fearing. May the Almighty protect you and guide you all.  May the Almighty rest his soul in eternal peace.  

5.27
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to convey my heartfelt condolences upon the demise of hon. Michael Oromait whom I fondly called muko. 

I was shocked on Saturday morning while in Jinja to receive an SMS indicating that hon. Oromait was gone. Why was it so much of a shock to me? It was a shock to me because the day when we were here paying tribute to the late Lord Adimola, hon. Oromait passed here and we shook hands. He told me that he was in that suit which I identified for him when we were in Aventura Mall in Miami, USA, which he proudly referred to as “Wadri suit.” For those of us who were there, that is what Michael was. 

I remember Michael for majorly three things. Time and again, people have said he was loaded but all that he had was out of frugality. He was a very frugal man. When we reached Miami with Michael, we found that where we had been booked to sleep in Mariott Hotel was full and there were a number of tourists in Miami beaches. Muko came to me and asked, “What do we do; are we going to sleep on the streets?” I said, “No, they will make alternative arrangements.” Indeed, when they made alternative arrangements in the hotel where even hon. Rose Akol was, we were compelled to share the room with the hon. Michael Oromait. Before we would retire, he would come up and say, “Muko, I am used to facing Usuk; from here, which is the direction of Usuk so that I face there.” Such a very humorous man! 

His frugality could even be seen further when we went to an electronic shop and in this shop there were Israelis who were selling electronic equipment. One of them was becoming a little funny, trying to take advantage of us thinking that we were tourists. At the end of the day, the late Michael told this man, “You see me here like this, I know money and I know the value of money. I am also a businessman back home in Uganda. Do you know where Uganda is?” That was what he asked him, “Do you know where Uganda is? You are telling us to add more dollars; do you know what a dollar means to me?” So, all that he has acquired is through a frugal life. 

We would be with Michael and some of us would want to go out and get some cartons of beer. I was fond of the American beer, Budweiser. He would say, “No, you will be on your Budweiser, but for me I will be on my sodas.” (Member timed out.)

5.31
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I would like on behalf of Gulu District and my own behalf to convey our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family. It was on Saturday when we were with the Deputy Speaker of Parliament in Koro that he announced that one of us was dead. When I asked who it was, he said the name and I tried to remember when he wanted me to take him to Gulu. This is the man who has been very cooperative, humble and lovely.  

He approached me when there was a health camp in Gulu and said, “You know, there is a function in Gulu that I would like to attend, can you take me?” First, when he called me, I could not pronounce his name. So, when I asked him whether it was okay to call him Michael, he said it was okay. So I told him that I would take him to Gulu but not bring him back because I was going to remain in Gulu for a while. So, he said we would see how to handle that, but he did not come with me. From that time he became a very close friend and a friend to everybody. 

Some of us could not believe that he was dead because on Thursday, he was here trying to get up and pay tribute to the late Lord Adimola. When hon. Jacob Oulanyah told me that he had been poisoned, I got surprised. He then told the group in Koro that when we refuse to eat their food, they say that we are bad people but our own had been killed. I was, however, comforted when I read that it was not poison but pressure. 

Dear colleagues, when we pay tribute to our fallen colleague like this, we are actually crying for ourselves. He has finished his race and it is now the family that we mourn for, but we should also think about ourselves. How about when the time comes for you -(Member timed out)

5.34
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Oromait used to be my good neighbour. He used to sit here with all our neighbours in this particular area. Whenever he entered in this august House, he struggled to make sure that he made his way to this particular area. Therefore, today we miss him.

I remember last week when the hon. Minister of Local Government was presenting the list of new districts, we sat here and we were looking at the list one by one. It was he who challenged us to count and look at the areas of these new districts, wondering why they were concentrated in western Uganda - “Why is it that in eastern Uganda we have very few districts as well as in northern and central Uganda?” Hon. Oromait died before getting the explanation from the honourable minister. 

I call upon the honourable minister to give that explanation very clearly. Though he has departed in the body, I am very sure his spirit shall be willing to get a very clear explanation. Hon. Oromait used to believe in the equitable distribution of resources. He used to compare how the resources were being allocated in this country.  Therefore he was a real statesman.

To the family, we know hon. Oromait has departed from his family members but this is not the end of life. The family should not lose hope. In many families when the head is gone, you find the family being torn apart. Just take heart. What hon. Oromait used to do to the people of Usuk, continue with that spirit. Let the ambulance he bought continue doing its work for the constituency. Let what he dreamt for the constituency become true. (Member timed out)

5.37
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Obongi, whom I represent here, and on behalf of the Greater North Parliamentary Forum executive, I would like to express our condolences to the bereaved family, this Parliament, the people of Usuk and the people of Katakwi for the loss of a great man dedicated to transforming his society.

Many good things have been said about the personality of my dear brother and friend, hon. Oromait, now lying here. I associate myself with all those good things. However, honourable members, what are we going to do after the hon. Oromait is taken away from here and buried? The plans he had for his constituency, the children he has left behind; are we going to transform this good memory of our brother into some means of supporting the family after he is gone from here? 

It is likely that the humour we used to remember him for will fade from our minds and therefore we may not remember him anymore when he is gone. So, I would like to appeal to all of us that we remember the family. If we hear a knock at our door and the name Michael Oromait or that of his son, daughter or grandchild is mentioned, we should be supportive, otherwise the good things we have said about our brother will be meaningless.

Hon. Oromait was a person who would remind a Member of Parliament who did not think so much about his constituency to do so. I worked closely with him in the Greater North Parliamentary Forum. In addition to the issue of the ambulance, he was working for a tractor through the development partners, working with the Greater North Parliamentary Forum. I know that there were many plans he had made but which have not been finished. The people of Katakwi - (Member timed out.)

5.40
MR FOX ODOI (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On my own behalf and on behalf of the people of West Budama North, we express our heartfelt condolences to the family of the late hon. Oromait.

The late hon. Oromait was related to me by marriage. There is a young girl called Dr Susan Adakun who is married to my young brother, Sebastian Orach. The late Oromait was a paternal uncle to that girl. So I knew him way before we came to this House. As a matter of fact, I first met him at the introduction ceremony of those two children - children because they are much younger than I am.

The late Oromait was an African family man. I emphasise “African” and I will elaborate. The late Oromait was polygamously married. He had two wives and he loved them both. The late Oromait was also born from a polygamous family, his father having had about five wives. 

Hon. Oromait had a lot of respect for both his wives. I remember one day, he told me and hon. Amodoi right here that he was a successful businessman because he involved his wives in the decision-making processes. He told us that every time he travelled out of home, he made sure he left up-to-date instructions on the conduct of his businesses with his wives. I wonder how many of us involve our spouses in even the day to day running of our households, let alone businesses. This was a man who believed in women emancipation and he perfected that art, and it really earned him lots of rewards.

I will not do justice to the memory of the late Oromait if I do not take you back to the granary of his so many humorous exposés. I have two in mind. During the course of last week, hon. Ogwang asked me to pass over some message to hon. Oromait. For a long time, they had been having some dialogue and I was the messenger. So I met him and I passed over the message - and I am not at liberty to indicate what message it was since I have not consulted the hon. Ogwang. 

Hon. Oromait asked me a number of questions. The first one was, “When hon. Ogwang told you this, was he standing or he was seated?” I said - we were in the canteen and he was standing. He then asked me, “How did you know the difference?” I told him, “I certainly know the difference between a person standing and that one sitting.” Then he said, “You know the problem with hon. Ogwang is that he once gave me a standing ovation and I did not recognise it.” He was referring to hon. Ogwang’s challenge in height. (Laughter) -(Member timed out.)

5.44
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, I support the motion that this Parliament pays glowing tribute to the late hon. Oromait because he deserves it. Secondly, I would like to take this opportunity to register my sincere condolences and those of the people of Katakwi District to the bereaved family. Thirdly, I would like to promise that I will make a follow-up on what hon. Oromait asked the President when they were in London 12 days ago. And that is a tractor for the youth of Usuk County. I will ensure that that pledge is delivered on behalf of the late Oromait. 

In addition to that, like I said in Church, hon. Oromait was a person who liked the vulnerable people – the poor, disabled and the like. Against that background, he one day came to my office and asked me to accompany him to meet the Minister of Local Government, hon. Adolf Mwesige. When we reached there, the Minister gave us audience and hon. Oromait asked for three sub-counties for Katakwi District. The sub-counties he requested for are located in areas where the IDPs are returning to and they do not have services. I would like to take this opportunity to remind hon. Mwesige to follow up on the request made by the late. The sub-counties are Angisa in Magoro, Guyaguya in Usuk and Okulonyo in Ongongoja sub-county. 

Besides that, he had told me that he was in touch with hon. Ochwa to establish a health unit in Usuk County with the help of the development partners. I am ready to work with hon. Ochwa to ensure that his plan comes to a logical conclusion. 

I would like to promise the family of the late that I will always be willing and ready to support them within my means whenever they approach me. Hon. Oromait was my genuine friend and brother, and he used to take me as someone extremely younger than him although I used to contest it. He would say, “Your father taught me before you were born.” So, he used to guide me in most cases.

Finally, William Shakespeare said, “The strongest things are those that are said in silence.” I would, therefore, like to mention the rest of what I wanted to say about the late Oromait in silence. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

5.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, my condolences go to the bereaved family and to this Parliament. The late Michael was my OB at Lango College. I was a house captain for Ogwanguci House and the late was house captain for Odora House. In Lango College, two prominent things were taught; one was debating and the other was time management. Members of Parliament are never late, but they are delayed. However, the late Michael was never delayed. He was in my committee of finance and he was always among the first to arrive. And this is the legacy he has left. May we all emulate that. 

The second issue about the late Michael is that he always asked very penetrating questions and some of them were not very easy to answer. I remember in one of the committee meetings when he asked a question which was not answered. He insisted with the chair and I told him, “Yes, OB, that one I answered silently.” Sometimes ministers do not have answers to all questions. So, I appeal to colleagues to give us the opportunity and time, like the late Michael gave us, to write the answers and send them to committees. We are also human beings who can easily collapse as well.

The last issue is that Michael was a uniting factor; he would say, “US from UK are a uniting factor. We are “United States” – uniting factor, and we are “United Kingdom” – uniting factor.” And one of his last contributions in this Parliament was on the issue pertaining to the border between Katakwi and Karamoja. He wanted it resolved in an amicable way. As Ugandans, we should learn to unite. May the soul of my dear OB and colleague in Parliament rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

5.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I cannot claim to have known the late Oromait well. However, 12 days ago, exactly on July 11, we met in London. He arrived with His Excellency the President, and as I welcomed the President at Heathrow Airport, I was not shocked, but rather surprised to see hon. Oromait together with hon. Kabuule walking behind him. 

Of course, the following day, we met at break time and that was the first time I interacted closely with him. In those 30 minutes we talked, he had told me a lot about his constituency and how he became an Independent Member of Parliament – I did not know about that history. He also told me what he was doing for his constituency and the plans he had. He later invited me to visit his constituency. He had a lot of plans pertaining to my sector and I am saddened that he has left before those plans are implemented. 

However, I informed hon. Oromait that hon. Alupo had already invited me to visit Katakwi District. Therefore, I will make sure that I will fulfil this pledge. It is now up to hon. Alupo to do the needful as soon as possible so that we can see how much we can do for the people of Usuk.

Lastly, a colleague from Kyegegwa talked about the need for us to regularly go for medical examination. I would like to re-echo that sentiment and I think it is very important. We should make sure that we go for thorough medical examination at least twice a year so that we know what is happening to our bodies. Most times, we visit health facilities when we feel weak, when we have pain and other symptoms, but by the time these symptoms and signs manifest themselves, it may be too late. So, the advice is, let us get these medical examinations regularly. 

We want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for announcing that the Parliamentary Commission already has a plan to upgrade the clinic and get more facilities for Members of Parliament. This will go a long way in assisting us in our work which is very stressful and not easy. 

I would like to convey my condolences to the family and the bereaved and the people of Usuk and Teso in general. May the soul of the deceased rest in eternal peace.

5.55
MS MABEL BAKEINE (NRM, Bugangaizi County East, Kibaale): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Bugangaizi East, I would like also to convey my condolences to the bereaved family, to the people of Usuk and the Teso region group. When I first met hon. Michael Oromait, it was on the steps of this Parliament, when the Ninth Parliament had just begun. I did not hear his name well. It sounded like the Almighty God so I drew near to him and I asked him, “Honourable, I have heard you are the Almighty God.” He laughed. I said, “How can you slander; how can you blaspheme?” He smiled. He said, “Those are my grandparents.” I found he was such a humble and warm person. So, each time we would meet, we would take off at least one minute to talk. I liked him for that. 

Last Thursday, I met him at Bauman House and we had a lengthy talk about these by-elections and at the end of it, we were in agreement that it was not necessary for one to go that way. We talked a lot. 

What do I want to bring out? On Saturday morning, when I switched on my phone, the first message I got was about his death. I was shocked and it made me realise one thing: that there is a very thin line between life and death. It made me more shocked and it made me think twice. Honourable colleagues, we need to live our lives for real; for the truth before God. We should always prepare for the next eventuality because you do not know when the hour will call. 

Some time back, I talked to him and asked him, “Where do you stay?” He told me he stayed in Jinja. Then I said, “Honourable, Jinja is too far. It is a long stretch and it is a busy road. You are exposing your life to danger.” I asked him why he does not think of relocating and staying closer to Kampala. I am happy to hear that he had shifted to the Seeta suburb. 

And with that, I think as honourable colleagues, we should always, in addition to caring for our lives, be cautious of what stakes that put your life into danger. There are things that you can easily avoid like these long stretches, especially if you have to commute everyday. We are very busy people and we are very stressed. It exposes you more to high risks. (Member timed out.) 

5.59
MS ANN AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you for the opportunity, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Moyo District and on my own behalf, I would like to convey my deepest condolences to the bereaved family of my colleague, the late hon. Oromait, the Members of Parliament, his constituency and the people of Uganda.

It appears that the late Oromait was a person who was really very close to everybody. I knew him from the corridors of Parliament. Whenever I met him, he would be the first to greet. He was a very joyous person. He was really humble. He went to the extent of telling me that I looked like a person from “UK”, his constituency and he had very much wanted to take me to that constituency. 

What has touched me so much is the cause of his death. During the IPU Conference, I think I was going to be the first to die because of hypertension. I was assigned a very busy committee and on the eve of the conference, I collapsed and I was admitted at Mulago Hospital. The whole of April, I was not in this House and when I came back, a number of colleagues learnt of my illness and majority of them told me they were also suffering from hypertension. 

Madam Speaker, you have to know that almost half of the people you lead in this House are sick people -(Interjections)- even more than that. You asked a very pertinent question in Church this morning, whether MPs do go for medical check-ups and whether they attend the clinic here. I know I am one of those who would like to really visit the gym, but the time pressure. At times, we sit here up to 8.30 p.m. and in the mornings, we have sessional committee meetings. Especially the standing committees and the accountability committees; it is as if there is no recess. So, I think it is high time we looked at our programme and saw how we can help Members of Parliament rest more. (Member timed out.)

6.02
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I pass on my condolences to the family, to the people of “UK” and of course to the Members. Almost everything has been said about hon. “Oromaiti” as I used to call him. One thing that I know is that most of us fall on the bad side of the Johari window, where we do not know that we do not know. But hon. Oromait was one person who didn’t know that he knew. Most of the time he would ask even something that would be obvious to the rest of the people, but he would ask to be sure. I travelled with hon. Oromait when he was travelling to the UK, and he was a person who was not embarrassed to ask anything. 

He was a person who really loved his constituency. The little money that he got, he said he was delegating it to the women of Usuk and I asked him, “How many groups do you have?” and he said, “I have 50 women groups that I am going to give this little money.” He had a notion that when you develop a woman, a nation develops. I call upon all the people, all the women and all the men in this House to emulate the example of hon. Oromait. We are all frightened to death, but why are we frightened, since at the end of the day, we are all going there? The most important thing we should do is prepare ourselves for death. 

Unfortunately, our colleague did not prepare himself so well in terms of the future because he did not know that he was going to die. I call upon Members, please, let us live healthy; let us live fit, but most importantly, let us prepare ourselves spiritually so that we do not get frightened of death.

6.04
MS MARGARET IRIAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Moroto and Karamoja, I bring our condolences to the family of hon. Oromait Michael. I say on behalf of Karamoja because the people of Teso and Karamoja have been one people that is why they are able to understand each other’s languages. 

I knew the late from two conversations that I had with him. One day, I met him and asked him if he knew of some of my relatives in Teso and he told me he was going to find out and come and tell me where they live. After one month, he came back and told me that, “Yes, I got some of the people who know you.” 

The other occasion when I met him was when we were discussing about how to support our people at the community level. He told me he could connect me to some financial people who would support us. In those two incidences, I realised hon. Michael Oromait had rare qualities. He had the heart of being patient. He had the heart of humility and he was down to earth. It is hard to find people of such rare qualities. 

As I stand here this evening, there are some things that we need to take into account as some of my colleagues mentioned. Members of Parliament have got so many issues to attend to and that affects their health. Recently, when I was going to the gym down here at Parliament, I went to pick some tablets from the clinic. When I had a conversation with the nurse, she told me, “Honourable, we do not have enough drugs. Why can’t you speak to the Speaker about this?” I said, “Yes, I will speak to the Speaker so that our clinic can be improved.”

Hon. Oromait has inspired all of us. He has taught us the spirit of reconciliation. Now that he has gone, what do we do as leaders of Karamoja and Teso to bring back peace to our region and to bring back the unity that our people had before they had these small problems? He was talking about the border issue. He was talking about cattle rustling. How many of us can come up and say something that is pertaining to their communities? Why don’t we the leaders of Teso and Karamoja come up and ensure our people continue living harmoniously as before? 

With these few remarks, I wish the family to stand firm. I would wish the relatives and the people of Usuk to stand firm in the loss of their loved one. I know his spirit will live. I know his spirit will still give the family and relatives wisdom in handling the family affairs. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

6.08
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to join the rest of my colleagues to send a word of condolence to the family. On behalf of the people of Agago, we are sorry for the death of our friend who has now left the family. But I want to start with you, the family members. Normally, when death occurs like this, sometimes interference and divisions start to come amidst you, but it needs you to stand firm. It needs you to have the love and the courage to have the unity. Without that, you will not go far.

You have heard many things people have spoken about hon. Oromait and we do not have to keep repeating them. It is my appeal to you, the family members - God gives and he takes away. The Bible tells us that the Lord is the father of the orphans and he is the husband to the widows. 

If you have the word of God with you, then you will stand and you will grow. With these little kids that you have, they will grow up and see light. I also want to tell you that the Bible tells us that when Christ is in you, although the body is dead, the spirit lives. And at the present time, when we have a lot of problems gathering among us and trying to oppress us, just live by faith. Wherever we go, we may have problems now, but the glory will come at the time when God has already planned for us. I want to encourage you to be strong and know the Lord because through that, you are going to manage life under this earth.

I knew hon. Oromait as one of the fun makers. I remember when new Members of Parliament like myself came in this august House, we started identifying ourselves, but for him, he was used to making fun. He once made fun that he had all the money and he was going to die a rich man. What he wanted was his name to appear and to enter in the Hansard. At that, he could laugh. There was a way he laughed and eventually you would come close to him. He had a kind of push and pull factor. Such are the people who can stand to nourish the art; even though there are troubles, he can encourage you. He was a determined man; he was a focused man -(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, about 40 Members have contributed. I know that hon. Oromait was a friend to all of us, and all of us would want to speak, but the children are tired. They have been sitting here since morning; they have to drive to Jinja. So, I would want to close the session now. Members who have not spoken today can either speak in Jinja or in Katakwi, but I think we need to let them move before it gets dark. Thank you very much.

So, honourable members, there is a condolence message from hon. Mukula, NRM Chairman of the eastern region. There is also a condolence message from Bunyoro Parliamentary Group. I just want to read two sentences.

“To the late hon. Oromait: You lived for the Lord and in death, you died for the lord. So, whether you live or die, you are for the Lord. That is Romans 14:8.

To the children, let your father’s legacy be a symbol of love and unity in the Lord. Though you loved him very much, he has gone to a far better place to be with his creator, for his citizenship was in heaven”. 

That is from Bunyoro Parliamentary Group, they contribute Shs 1 million. It is signed by hon. Ernest Kiiza Apuuli. West Nile Parliamentary Group has contributed Shs 1 million. Busoga Parliamentary Group has also contributed Shs 1 million. 

I want to propose that money should be saved and given to them after the funeral so that it is not taken to buy rice and meat and other things. Really, it would help for it to be secured somewhere for the children so that when they come back, they can use it.

I also want to inform the family that you are entitled to an equivalent of 12 months’ salary as pension, which has been contributed. You will get that from the Pension’s Office. That is part of your entitlement out of his estate.

I also direct the Clerk to transcribe the records and pass on the Hansard to the family so that they can keep it for the future. [MR OKOT: “I want some clarification from the communication which you have made.”]

MR AMOS OKOT: Madam Speaker. When you mention condolence contribution; as Acholi Parliamentary Group, we had already organised ourselves and are prepared that if we are in Soroti, we shall give it from there. In your communication, it appears – maybe if you can give that clarification.

THE SPEAKER: I just want to share what Busoga Parliamentary Group did when hon. Balikoowa died. Let hon. Muwuma explain what we did. 

6.14
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Just like you have guided, I and a powerful lady in this House have been managing the estate of the late Henry Balikoowa. Up to now, we are in charge of the children. We appeal to colleagues who are in charge of this coordination to do the same, such that this money is not put to waste or consumed by the funeral arrangements. If this money is spared to take care of those who are still studying, the better. 

THE SPEAKER: We have a special account for Balikoowa’s estate. So, whatever was contributed after, we put on that account. Now the eldest girl is going to university. Even the small ones are all in school. That is my prayer. Can we go to adjournment?  

Honourable members, I put the question that this House pays condolences to the late hon. Oromait and commend him for the work done.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

National Anthem (One Verse)

(Exit of the late Michael Oromait.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for this session. We started a bit late because the death having occurred during the weekend, there were things we were still doing. But I want to thank you for supporting the family and hope some of you will go and see him off in Jinja and in Katakwi where burial will take place on Thursday. In the meantime, we adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 6.20 p.m. and was adjourned until Tuesday, 24 July 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
