Thursday, 9 July 2015

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Today is private members’ time mostly for the first hours of the sitting. I will alter the Order Paper to accommodate an item on designation of a Member to a committee. The Clerk will call it at an appropriate time.

Honourable members, you are all invited to a joint sector meeting of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and its agencies which has been organised by the chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. This meeting should have taken place last week, but due to unavoidable circumstances it was postponed to take place tomorrow in the Parliamentary Conference Hall A, South Wing, Parliamentary Building. You are all invited to come and attend this meeting. It will start at 8.30 a.m. and go on for half a day. Chairman, would you like to say something more on this?

2.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Mathias Kasamba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to request honourable colleagues that for purposes of pre-planning for the coming season as a committee we have institutionalised and with time shall request the Parliament to make it a formal approach where all the agencies come and report and we share experiences in terms of mobilising and sharing experiences. 

Kindly be there tomorrow to make sure that we have the half-day meeting so that we can prepare for what we can do together as Members of Parliament, the agencies of agriculture and the ministry to make sure that we prepare the population for increased food and income security. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members that is my communication; it stops there for now.

2.09
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. In the Monitor of yesterday, which I am holding, Civil Aviation Authority advertised the job of General Manager. As far as I know, the substantive general manager, Mr John Okalany, is still alive and kicking. It is true he is a bit unwell, but he is still alive. I am wondering the rule they are using to advertise someone’s job -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, was that the matter you brought to my attention that you would be raising?

MR MAJEGERE: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That does not qualify. Please, handle it administratively using the right channels.

2.10
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I stand to raise a matter of national importance regarding the conduct of police and the general tension that is rising in the country as a result of police actions who by and large are acting outside the law in my own understanding.

As we speak right now, Mr Speaker, Col (Rtd) Dr Kizza Besigye, a presidential hopeful for Forum for Democratic Change was arrested early in the morning on the understanding that he was supposed to hold two rallies which rallies were dully communicated by the Forum for Democratic Change. One rally was supposed to take place in Kasangati and the other in Kawempe. Dr Kizza Besigye is a dully nominated candidate for flag-bearership for Forum for Democratic Change. The Electoral Commission -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Dully nominated candidate?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Yes; he is dully nominated as the candidate for flag-bearer of FDC; he was nominated with Gen. Mugisha Muntu. The party rolled out a nation-wide programme to allow their members consult their voters. The Police and Electoral Commission were dully notified about this programme. In his own capacity, he dully did the needful under the Public Order Management Law and notified the police accordingly.

Early in the morning, he was arrested by police as he went out of his home. Alongside Dr Kizza Besigye, hon. Nzoghu who is a Member of this Parliament and hon. Roland Kaginda, Member of Parliament for Rukungiri Municipality, are also under arrest at Kira Police Station. 

The women leader for Forum for Democratic Change, Ingrid Turinawe, is under arrest. Fifteen other members of FDC have also been arrested; five were arrested at Kasangati and 10 others were arrested at Kawempe. As we are speaking now, a situation is developing along Wampewo as the crowd that does not see a justification for the arrest of their leader is heavily engaging the police.

Mr Speaker, this morning the former Prime Minister, hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi, was also arrested at Njeru. The daughter of the former Prime Minister is also under arrest and I have been told that he was arrested together with five other members. 

As I speak now, the police is dully quoting the Public Order Management Act. This is the law this Parliament has just passed. To the best of my knowledge, it does not in any way give police power to prohibit; it is not by any stretch of the imagination of that law that the police enjoy any power to do so. In any case, those powers were declared to be unconstitutional in my case  Muwanga Kivumbi vs the Attorney-General; Section 32(2) was declared null and void. 

The continued behaviour of police as we head towards elections begs a lot of answers. I have stood before this Parliament and urged Parliament to dully debate the role of security apparatus as we go towards the next elections.

The story we have been having is that the party to which the former Prime Minister belongs has not cleared him. That is a matter of the party; it cannot be a law for police to enforce. 

The police of Uganda do not monitor what goes on in FDC, DP or NRM. It is abuse of state apparatus for NRM, by any stretch of imagination, to pretend they can commandeer a national police into internal personal affair of the party. If a member of the party is indiscipline, there are internal mechanisms in the party that can deal with him, including expulsion; but, not to infringe on his freedom of association, assemble and to demonstrate.

To make matters worse, yesterday a whole yellow brigade led by senior Members of Parliament and ministers had a dully demonstration on the street of Mbale, expressing their –(Interjections)- for me, it is okay to express their support for their sole candidate; that is a matter for the yellow brigade. However, hon. Patrick Amama Mbabazi was not even going on a street or to have a rally; he was going to have a meeting in a hotel hall. Therefore- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why do you not raise the matter and if there is a debate, you can debate? Please, raise the matter.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Therefore, Mr Speaker, this is a big issue concerning all of us who are already participating in elections. 

The country would like to know, as the police goes out of its way to implement the Public Order Management Act, what is it that they are implementing? My simple understanding of the law is: all that Ugandans have got to do is to notify police within three days to a meeting. If the police have a question mark on my proposed venue or date, they should invite me in writing within 24 hours for a meeting. The police cannot turn down a notification unless on only three grounds: one, If a venue has been earlier booked. Two, if the venue will interfere with traffic. Three, if there will be problem of crowd control. All the police is mandated to do is to invite me to identify another venue and date, but not in any way to pretend they can prohibit. 

Therefore, the big national concern now across the country is the rights of people and abuse of powers of police as we move towards elections. It can happen to Besigye; the next day it may be my friend, hon. Byandala or hon. Bahati, depending on where you are standing on a good day; you are a human being.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, our concern as a country is, should we have all these unnecessary tensions because one aspires to be a President, and is it a crime anyway? The country would like to have assurance that as we go to the elections, the police is above those as it is not its own duty to monitor what goes on in our political parties and that political parties should be left free; that no single political party should commandeer organs of the state into their own internal affairs.

Secondly, on regard to Besigye; we would like to know in concrete term, why is he under arrest? Even his political party cleared him - if people are giving an excuse of lack of clearance from his political party. We would like to know why Dr Kizza Besigye is under arrest and the manner of his arrest was despicable. A driver and Besigye got beaten as if he is not a senior citizen of this country.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, as a country; we cannot just sit on a as Parliament seeing things go the way they are. Our big concern is that we want to know the role of the security apparatus and which law they are implementing. To the best of my knowledge, it is not the Public Management Act. We want to be assured that as we go towards elections; I will be freely to go to my constituency. You never know, by the end of this month, I may also declare to stand for Presidency and I will be free to go around this country to campaign. I beg to move.
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.20
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my brother, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, for bringing up this very important issue that really requires some urgent attention. However, in my own opinion, the police now has uphill task to ensure that as the political temperature heats up, there has to be law and order.

In my opinion, I believe, every political party has a schedule of activities and a calendar. As for the arrest of Dr Kizza Besigye, we are yet to find out what could have happened. However, for hon. Amama Mbabazi, there are reports that he had notified the Electoral Commission about his consultation - by the way, sometimes, I find the distinction between consultations and campaigns have a very narrow margin for one to microscopically distinguish between the two.

That said, we are told that the NRM political organisation wrote to the IGP, making an objection about that consultation. I think the best that could have happened for my brother, hon. Amama Mbabazi, was to sort out with the- (Interruption)

MR MUSINGUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As we talk today, there is someone in Ntungamo who assaulted a friend and he has been arrested. In Kampala, I have seen people being arrested for their own offences, even in his constituency and none of you has felt concern for those people who have been arrested, but you are bringing Mbabazi as if he is the only Ugandan who has been arrested. Therefore, is it in order for us to really keep on talking about the arrest of Mbabazi when they have arrested a thousand people on different charges? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The matter has been brought to the attention of the House, and so it is right for the House to receive it. If it had not been brought, it would have stayed there. Those other arrests you are citing have not been brought to the House. (Laughter)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. Ideally, I think all political parties and organisations must keep their houses in order. If there is a complaint from any one party against anyone member that may require help of Police - You know we all run to police; In fact for Mr Amama Mbabazi, I sympathise with his situation. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, you rightly observed that we had this Public Order Management Act. I remember how passionately my brother Amama Mbabazi defended and urged members to rally behind the Bill then. Now, it is like he passionately and meticulously made his bed - (Laughter) - he made his bed and he must lie on it. 

I think there is a problem. If there is any problem to do with the law and its interpretation, I think it will be a mandate of the court- The way I see it now, the bed was laid. Hon. Amama Mbabazi at that time thought that perhaps the law would catch others. It is unfortunate – (Interjections) - I am not jubilating, but we say that the law is blind. The police has turned it against him - he has been swallowed by the bed. That is how I look at it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are debating - make short contributions. 

2.25
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think my concern is the situation which the arrests are now causing. The Bible says that you reap what you sow. Let us assume that hon. Amama Mbabazi is now reaping what he sowed on the Floor of this House.  

This morning I have been getting correspondences and concerns from Mbale. I have been told that very many people were ferried from the mountains right from Budadiri, Bulambuli and the whole of Bududa. They were given t-shirts to come and protest. They were each paid Shs 10,000 to go to the streets of Mbale, dance Kadodi and protest against the visit of hon. Amama Mbabazi.

That notwithstanding, they have done so. After them being organized to that extent, I heard news this morning that Amama has been arrested. Even some of the organizers who are ministers here who did the mobilization have abandoned the people in Mbale. They have gone to their vehicles and disappeared out of Mbale, saying that the game has been done.  

The people who have been brought from the mountains and dumped in the streets of Mbale have not been given transport to go back. They have used them to achieve what they wanted. What is going to be the situation concerning the security of Mbale from the time hon. Amama Mbabazi has been arrested up to date? 

Mr Speaker, the situation is not good. People are saying that if that is the rule of the game, they can also start walking one by one; they are saying that as long as they were ferried and dumped in Mbale, they are willing to starve – they are going without food if nothing is done about it. 

I do not know what Government is doing now to make sure that the situation in Mbale is contained. You know very well what the Bagisu are; they are people who cannot easily be intimidated and they stick to their word.  We do not want this to degenerate into a situation of fighting and insecurity, where mothers and children are kicked out on the streets of Mbale. That is my biggest concern. 

2.28
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): What goes round comes round. In 2005, I expressed interest in my NRM Party to contest as a Presidential candidate. I picked the nomination forms, and I was duly nominated as a Presidential candidate flag bearer for NRM. 

During that time, hon. Amama Mbabazi was a very powerful super minister and Secretary General of the party. As my name was forwarded to the Central Executive Committee, my brother hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi said that I had jumped the queue. He said that was indiscipline, I was not up to the task and the party had not mandated me to do the same. With that put into consideration, my nomination was dropped. 

Today, I am surprised that my same brother has already jumped the queue and is also behaving in an indiscipline manner. He is not following the party principles and doctrines.  I would like to state that what goes round comes round. If hon. Amama Mbabazi is being faced by the law, let the law reach him. 

As I said before, he was a powerful man in our Government and still is. I remember during that time, most members of other parties especially Kizza Besigye and members of the Opposition were also being haunted by the law and the police. My brother never made any statement. I am now just hearing it from the other side that my brother should be helped. I wonder how the law will help him. 

Honourable members, you are aware that we passed our Public Management Order Bill here in Parliament. It is now an Act. I stood here and told you that let us pass the law as it is. This is because the law has no face, eyes, nose or brain. The law will catch up with you. 

Honourable members, I understand the law is now in total operation - (Laughter) - the police is duly doing their duty as commanded by the law that we passed here in Parliament.  

I would therefore like to urge all of you to support the law we passed then. Whoever goes against the law must face its wrath. I am not saying that – (Interjections) - because I read a book-  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of order. Is this now a matter for Dokolo? 

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, hon. Kivumbi has just briefed us on how Dr Kizza Besigye was arrested without breaking any law. As a matter of fact, the details are that Dr Kizza Besigye was supposed to have breakfast in one of the embassies on official duty. He was not caught breaking any law. The two Members of Parliament hon. William Nzoghu and Roland Mugume have also not been caught breaking any law. 

The Member for Dokolo who was holding the Floor before I ordered him to sit down has also told his own story. He has said that when he filled the form, he signed it and was duly nominated; the police did not arrest him. They disciplined him within the party in a civilian manner. They just told him to sit down claiming that he was still young and he listened. 

Is this honourable member in order to confuse two issues?  If he wants to come and appeal to this Parliament to help him or to resubmit his application, we are willing to listen to him. After all he comes from Dokolo, we also want -(Laughter)

We are telling Parliament that innocent persons have been arrested; they were not breaking any law. They are very much aware of the Public Order Management Act. 

It is important that Parliament be made aware that on Monday, the two candidates teamed up together. They met and worked out their own programme on how to obey the law within the party and outside there. They are therefore very conscious and very well briefed on how to act within the law-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the point of order? 

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Is it therefore in order for the honourable member from Dokolo District which I represent, whom I mentored and brought up, he was a very good boy - (Laughter)–  is it in order for him to confuse this Parliament? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Dokolo County, take advice from your mother. (Laughter) 

MR OKOT-OGONG: Mr Speaker, I know hon. Cecilia Ogwal is the Woman Member of Parliament for Dokolo District and I know her as “Atat”, also my very good sister - (Interjection) – oh my good mother. (Laughter) 

I take advice from her that I should not confuse matters and indeed hon. “Imat”, I am not confusing matters. I am exactly talking about the same thing I have said; I am talking about hon. Amama Mbabazi.

I have not mixed it with hon. Kiiza Besigye - hon. Cecilia “Imat”, I am also informing you that when you people were being harassed, hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi was in the Chair. That time hon. “Imat”, I would like to inform you that he never supported you; he just said that the law was taking its course; the police should do their job.

I am wondering why you are pleading for the same person who harassed you. Mr Speaker, notwithstanding what I said, I read a book by Civic Leader in America that, “Injustice anywhere is injustice everywhere” and therefore honourable members, as we do our political duty, as stewards of this country, we must know that it is our duty to ensure that there is justice in this country.

When you do not do it – I remember in the same statement, when they were harassing traders, nobody supported them. When they came for the women, nobody supported them. They were just beaten up.  There was no one left to plead for them. Therefore they were left and suffered alone.
 
Honourable members, I think today as members of Parliament, we need to rise above our political divide. (Applause) We need to ensure that there is justice, peace and love in our country. We must cultivate the spirit of love in our country.

I remember my sister hon. Cecilia Ogwal – (Interjection) - my mother Cecilia Ogwal, when we were campaigning in Dokolo, we are in two top political ends. I am NRM concentrated, she is FDC concentrated –(Interjection) - I do not know, maybe she is not FDC concentrated. (Laughter)  I do not know that one now.

When it comes to doing our jobs as leaders in Dokolo District, we are always together. We make statements that make our people live in peace so that they do not carry the burden of the leaders who present them.

I therefore would like to appeal to Members of Parliament here today, that the future is bright for all of us. At the same time, the future is also very dark. It can only be bright when we brighten it by doing good things and it is dark when you also do bad things that will catch up with us.

Therefore Mr Speaker, I think as Movement, our role is to provide stability in this country. Any member that makes us think that they are above the law and those who compromise our stability, becomes an enemy to our organisation. Therefore, we as a party, we are strong and moving in the right direction and we shall lead the country to the right direction. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In fact this one should open the eyes of the public and even some members of the Opposition. If they have never seen democracy, at least for this time, you have seen democracy – (Interjection) - Yes. The laws we pass here ourselves are not selective.

Amama Mbabazi, a member of NRM, the ruling party but is in custody. Although he is out of the cells, the law has caught up with him. Hon. Amama, former Prime Minister was in the frontline when we were trying to pass the Public Order Management Act – (Interjections)   protect me from hon. Nambooze.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed honourable

MR OKOT-OGONG: I do not know why people forget very easily. May be he thought that this could not catch up with him. We really need to clap for ourselves Members of Parliament that our laws are not selective. Mr Speaker, you reap what you sow; what he fought for is what he is passing through. Each party has got its own road map and program.

If hon. Amama Mbabazi was jumping the queue and even disobeying the road map of NRM, then it is really bad –

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have heard my honourable colleague standing before this august House stating that the offences hon. Amama Mbabazi committed was against his party. I hear it is called “jumping of the queue” – whatever it means. While raising this as a matter of national importance, my able Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs condemned the idea of political parties using the Uganda Police Force to solve their internal problems.

By re-stating the same thing that hon. Amama Mbabazi committed an offence in his party, he is confirming our claim. So is it  in order for police to go and apprehend him? Is the honourable colleague in order, to stand before this august House and preach that police can be used to solve internal party problems? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the only thing we are not allowed to do in the House is to speculate. We do not know why the person was arrested. We have not heard a statement from the police stating the grounds under which the arrests were carried out.

We therefore cannot engage in speculations, creating crimes we do not know, imposing charges yet we have not seen the charge sheet. I think it is unfair for us to proceed that way. Conclude.

MR KWIZERA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We know that under Article 79; the functions of Parliament, they say that: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.” If these laws are made for good governance and in the event that they do not qualify under this article, they are subjects to nullification under the Constitutional Court and none of these members here went to court. 

Another issue is that we are debating on hearsay because we do not know if these three Members of Parliament were arrested. It would be appropriate for Government to bring a statement and we debate the statement from an informed point of view. Would it be procedurally right for you to direct Government to come with a statement? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we just wanted the honourable members to make short contribution on this matter. We have taken almost an hour on this matter and it is fairly a long time on this subject – (Interjections) - honourable member, when the Speaker is speaking, you keep your seat - that is the only authority I have - (Laughter) - that when I open my mouth, you sit properly. (Applause) 

I think we are not going to come to any reasonable conclusion on this debate because there is no motion. It is just a matter of urgent public importance that has been raised and the House has noticed that something happened in the country that needs to be explained better so that if there is necessity for further engagement in a debate, then we can proceed with a proper debate on the subject. 

Since the matter has been raised and the concern has been felt by the members and the contributions have been made. I have noted the members that I have picked on this subject and I will allow only those ones to speak that is the Member for Bukoli Islands, Rukiga, Obongi, Kilak and then the Leader of the Opposition and the government side to close. Then we shall move to the Order Paper?

2.48
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Keep it brief Honourable.

MR OKEYOH: I would like to say that it is unfortunate for my colleagues from Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) - as a member of the Committee On Defence And Internal Affairs, I would first of all request that police should appear before the committee or the Minister to explain why members who were dually nominated in their parties have been prevented from conduction consultations.

Secondly, I would like to say that we should not mix those two people: Hon. Amama Mbabazi and Dr Kizza Besigye. Dr Kizza Besigye is dually nominated in his party while Hon John Patrick Amama Mbabazi is not dually nominated or cleared by the party. The two are very distinct and different. I would like to particularly state that we passed the law and the law as my colleague Hon. Kivumbi stated does not empower the police to give permission. The law only gives police powers to make sure that there is public order. What is clear is that what happened today may happen to you another day. I did stand here and stated that those who are this way will find themselves the other way and those who are there may come this way.

Therefore, when we are making laws, we should make sure that we make a democratic law that will enforce peace, justice and democracy in our country. I thank you.

2.49
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from you whether this country is under one party system.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You would like to know from the Speaker?

MR SABIITI: Yes, to guide this Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to raise a procedural matter on that so that I can guide because I will be contributing to your debate if you paraphrase it that way.

MR SABIITI: I would like to be guided by you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, are you rising on a procedural point?

MR SABIITI: No, I am debating the issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you are debating, I cannot guide you.

MR SABIITI: Chapter five of our Constitution and particularly Article 71 states that Uganda is under a multi-party political system. I do not see any reason why an institution of state can stop one political party from enjoying what the Constitution has assigned to the country. Each party follows the laws of the country and FDC has consistently followed the laws of this country. We have already nominated our aspiring Presidential candidates. The delegate’s conference was convened and two candidates were nominated. They have come up with a road map to go around and campaign. 

Is it fair for this country to be forced by one party – The Movement party to stop other parties from enjoying their constitutional rights that they are supposed to enjoy? I would like the Attorney-General or the responsible Minister or the Prime Minister to come out clearly and inform us as to why our candidates have been arrested. Have they violated any law – (Interruption)

DR BARYAOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable Jack Sabiiti for giving way. I heard Hon. Jack Sabiiti my brother saying that one party namely, NRM is stopping other parties from doing their work and he said some party leaders from the opposition have been arrested. 

I would like to seek clarification from you, which official of NRM has arrested senior leaders of the Opposition? Am I getting you correctly that you are insinuating that some of the leaders within NRM have caused the arrest of other opposition political leaders?

MR SABIITI: I said one institution of Government and that is the police; that is what I stated. Police has arrested Rt. Col. Kizza Besigye who is a candidate and he is now with the police. I would like to know from Government, how should we conduct our elections? Are we under a one-party state or a multi-party political system? May I have that explanation?

2.53
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me first do this. I thought I would do it before they live. In the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers of St Michael High School Mukono represented by Hon. Betty Nambooze and Hon. Peace Kusasira - (Applause). They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers of Kasoso Day and Boarding Primary School represented by Hon.  Mpuuga Mathias and Hon. Nakabira Gertrude, Member of Parliament for Masaka District. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. Thank you.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. About the arrest of Dr Kizza Besigye; what is increasingly happening is the brutality of the police especially the manner in which they arrested the people who were with Dr Besigye, the driver and other associated people. That should be condemned; that brutality is not called for and we would like the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and explain why the police is getting extensively militarised. Even the weapons they carry; if you see what is happening in Mbale, the type of the police force and the armament they carried suggests that there is a battle: machine guns, RPGs, for civil police! What about the Army?

Secondly, Mr Speaker, every one of us who is a Member of Parliament elected by the people knows that there are candidates running in the constituency preparing for primary elections. When I was passing through Adjumani, I saw some people running against Gen Moses Ali my beloved brother and neighbour. Were those authorised by the party to contest against Gen Moses Ali?

Even the Speaker is a candidate but there are people who have been running up and down without authorisation? What authorisation are you talking about in the NRM when it comes to Amama Mbabazi? You are saying he was not authorised, what about the candidates running against you Hon. Muwuma? When I was there, I saw somebody pinning up poster against you.

Mr Speaker, we who are on this side, speak for the voiceless. If we see anyone being mistreated on the other side, we speak for them; there is no one on the other side defending Amama Mbabazi right now. As I sit down, I would like to say – (Interruption)-

MS NABBANJA: Thank you, so much, Mr Speaker. I have stood up on a point of order. When you see a person moving alone and leaving his colleagues behind, that means that person is going to suffer alone. All of us are here as members of NRM, why did he leave us behind?

Mr Speaker, is it in order for hon. Fungaroo to say that hon. Amama Mbabazi is suffering when in actual sense he is reaping what he sowed? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable members have expressed a very serious opinion on that subject.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural point I am rising before this august House is on the precedent set to this House. This matter came as an issue of national importance, what has always happened is that you normally call upon or refer the matter to the relevant sector minister or ministry to come up with a response, instead of talking to ourselves, debating a response from the – (Interjection)- Mr speaker, this is a procedural matter because I would have thought or loved that we get a response from the minister responsible for Internal Affairs to come and explain the circumstances under which these arrests were effected. Then that would constitute a clear way of debating, because we are all speculating, like you said. We are not certain of what arrangements led to these arrests.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I thought it would be procedurally right for us, like you have done before to ask the minister responsible to come and give us information then we discuss from an informed point of view, because for now we are not certain of what really happened. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see honourable member, there is a big difference when a matter of national importance is raised about floods in Omoro County and when a matter of arrest of political leaders is raised; they are very different. The Speaker sits here to gauge and see how to release the tension so that people can go back to normal. That is exactly what the Speaker has done.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you. As I wind up, I would like to appeal to honourable members, every one of us who passed through the passage of the ballot has the same risk. There are candidates running against us even without being authorised – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, are you winding up?

MR FUNGAROO: I would like to appeal that we respect each other and make sure that everybody is comfortable. I rest my case.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am aware that the issue has been raised as an issue of national importance. However, you are aware that we have plenary this afternoon and all Members of Parliament are supposed to be here in this House.

Mr Speaker, I am wondering because when we are absent, we are supposed to write to you, notifying you and also seek permission to be away from this Parliament. Did Rt hon. Amama Mbabazi Prime Minister emeritus ask for permission to be away from this sitting today? (Laughter) If he did not, is it procedurally right for us to proceed to discuss a matter when he was supposed to be in this plenary?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, when this matter was raised, the person who raised it said that the arrest was done in the morning. Plenary was supposed to start at 2.00 p.m. –(Applause)

3.02
MR ONGALO OBOTE (NRM, Kalaki county Kaberamaido): Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker for according me this opportunity. I would like to thank my brother the Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs for bringing to the attention of this House, a very important matter.

Mr Speaker, I wish to disagree however with my brother - when he says that this was purely an internal matter for NRM and that the police should not be involved in it - the laws are made for the systematic functioning of society. To say therefore that this was purely an internal matter is to create a new law. Are you saying that if you are breaking the law while carrying out party activities then you are above the law and you can go untouched? This is not how the law is supposed to be interpreted. 

The former Prime Minister is a learned person. He knows the law very well; he has been one of the law makers in this country right from the constitutional process and he was instrumental in writing the constitution that governs NRM. There is barely any law in this House that he has not been part of. He knew what recourse he had if the police denied him the opportunity to go to Mbale before resorting to breaking the law.

I therefore think that what has happened today, should be a clear demonstration to everybody in this country that when it comes to enforcing the law, the police are blind and it does not matter whether you sit on this side or the other side. When you break the law, you have broken the law and you should be arrested. Thank you, very much.

3.05
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula-Oguttu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and thank you very much honourable and former colleague in FDC.I am very surprised by the manner in which we are debating this very serious matter. The members have surprised me on how they are belittling in a matter of human rights of citizens who are leaders; it is a serious matter. Members, we have to care about the stability of our country, and we should.

The Rt hon. Amama Mbabazi was arrested at Njeru; he had not even crossed the Nile. He had been warned a week earlier that he would be arrested in Mbale which should have been the scene of crime but he had not reached there. So, where did he break the law from?

Dr Kizza Besigye has been arrested over a hundred times in the last 15 years but no case has ever been proved against him. The law has been used to harass and persecute him and we are concerned. 

The Rt hon. Amama Mbabazi used to sit there and he did not say anything, but now it is his rights being violated and we must defend him because he is now a weak person. Do not imagine that it will not happen to you, it could happen to you too. Dr Besigye has been harassed using the law. The same law is now being used to harass the Rt hon. Amama Mbabazi.

Mr Speaker, we are at a crossroad. The economy is deteriorating, instability is being brewed by Government either knowingly or unknowingly, investors are getting scared and there is capital flight with the shilling deteriorating. All these things should bother us as citizens of this country.
We are here intituling a colleague and citizen yet the economy is in shambles. 

Mr Speaker, sometimes we arrest citizens over unnecessary and excessive force. A leader should be invited to the police. Why should you bundle up a leader to a police station? Why not  invite him or her because that is how descent societies operate?

A country is democratic if it protects and respects the rights of the minorities and the weak. But in our country, when you are weak, you are the victim and the villain. You have double standards - yesterday I asked the Prime Minister why Government is practicing double standards in the application of the law? Why? You find NRM people wearing T-shirts for NRM, go to Gulu and “kill” Amama Mbabazi, purportedly putting him in a coffin before beating it. What culture is that? And you think that law is fine with police not allow other people - (Interruption)

MS AMUGE: Mr Speaker, this must go on record. The meeting, which was in Gulu was led by the hon. Odonga-Otto, who is a Member of the FDC in this House. But now you are saying the T-shirts were for NRM and so forth, but the leader, who has accepted was hon. Odonga-Otto and that must go on record. So, is he in order to say it was NRM?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the thing that I heard and for which I needed the record to be corrected was about the statement that they killed the Rt hon. Mbabazi in Gulu - (Laughter) - and I was wondering who was arrested this morning. That is the one against which I needed the record to -

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, it was figurative, but there was a coffin of purportedly with the body of the Rt hon. Amama Mbabazi, which was being beaten by people wearing yellow T-shirts bearing the portrait of the President. 

On hon. Odonga-Otto, I did not see him carrying the coffin or being near it. I only saw him wearing a black T-shirt with some writing JPAM but we do not condone that. If hon. Odonga-Otto was associated, in whatever way to the coffin, we condemn that. Even the idea of stopping citizens from moving freely to other areas is not good. Who are you to say that so and so cannot go to Gulu, Kitgum or Kisoro? Who are you? As a citizen I should enjoy that freedom; it is in our Constitution.

Mr Speaker, what options are you leaving with us, as people in the government? If you push us so much against the wall, what options are you leaving with us? If we cannot organise what option are leaving with us? 

About 30 or 35 years ago, some people saw no option of dialogue and Court and they went to the bush to fight. They came back after walking over 500,000 bodies - we do not want that path and that is why we are asking Government to let us dialogue about our country. Let us use the path of dialogue not the path of violence and confrontation because we are all in it together and we shall collapse with it together. Whether you like it or not, you will not escape; that is our appeal. You have been managing our country for 30 years, please leave it intact; do not turn it into tatters and burning.

Finally, Mr Speaker, we would like to appeal to the Minister of Internal Affairs to start a dialogue. First, he can come and explain to us here why this is happening but he should start a dialogue on the process of campaigns. Do not suffocate people because you will suffer for it as well. Thank you very much.

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. As everybody knows and appreciates, every Ugandan has a freedom of speech and expression, but that has to be within the law. As we exercise these freedoms we must do it within the law. So, nobody, whether it is the Rt hon. Amama Mbabazi or myself is above the law and that is very important for us to understand.

We would like to comment to the effect that it is true the Rt hon. Amama Mbabazi was cautioned about this meeting but he decided – actually in one of the meetings he said he would jump over the mambas if they are arranged. Today there were no mambas and the police just did its work. 

The Leader of Opposition made a statement that the situation in the country is deteriorating and that the investors are getting scared. Far from the truth the figures we have from the Uganda Investment Authority and from within the Ministry of Finance, indicate that the investment is going up.

MS EKWAU: Mr Speaker, how can the Minister of Finance tell the House that no investors are scared when the dollar is trading at almost Shs 4000? Is he in order? (Laughter)


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is information. (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Thank you, my sister, hon. Florence Ibi Ekwau for the information. Yes, it is true that the Leader of the Opposition has a point that we are experiencing problems in the economy, especially with the foreign exchange rates. The rates are fluctuating because of two reasons: First, the American economy is growing strong and so the dollar is growing strong everywhere in the world. 

Secondly, Uganda continues to import – actually – three times more than we do export. That is the reason we passed here the National Development Plan in June – to ensure that we invest in those areas that will grow our exports and value addition. That is why we passed a loan here to make sure that we empower the economy through building Karuma and Isimba dams to support industrialisation.

So, thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving the House this opportunity to reflect on the events that are happening in the country. And I think every Ugandan should be assured that the country is stable and we shall continue to do what we can to maintain that stability.

          DESIGNATION OF AN HONOURABLE MEMBER TO A COMMITTEE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it has come to the notice of the Speaker that there are some changes in the membership of the committees. I received a letter from the Opposition Chief Whip in respect to the following:“Designation of hon. Beatrice Atim Anywar to the Committee on Natural Resources: This is to inform you that there was an error with regard to the designation of hon. Beatrice Atim Anywar to the finance sectoral committee. I write to confirm that she had expressed desire to remain in the Committee on Natural Resources, where she had served in the last session.”

Honourable members, hon. Beatrice Anywar has now been designated to the Committee on Natural Resources.I now put the question to the approval of this designation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, yesterday, hon. Jesca Ababiku raised the issue of non-payment of pension arrears to the former employees of Uganda Railways Corporation and you and the House directed that the Ministry of Finance brings in a statement to this House. I now take the opportunity to go through it.

The members also wanted to know the status of the Tier-Four Microfinance Regulatory Framework. I wish, therefore, to make the following clarification.

Pension and Gratuity Arrears for the URC

Honourable members, payment of pension for the former staff of Uganda Railways Corporation is governed by its own regulations derived from the then East African Railways Corporation Pensions Regulations, 1970. However, it has been established that while Uganda Railways Corporation had previously been paying the former staff, the process was later affected by financial constraints. We are currently consulting and at a very fast speed with different organs of Government to establish the possibility of transferring the payment of the former staff of URC to the Public Service Pension Scheme for purposes of paying the affected staff from the Government Treasury. We hope that within one or two months, we shall have finished the consultations so that the affected pensioners are sorted.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I also wish to brief you on the status of settling pension and gratuity arrears of other public servants as follows: one, on the advice of the Minister of Public Service, a total of Shs 286.74 billion was provided for in the financial year 2014/15 for payment of pensions and gratuity. 

However, during the course of implementing the budget, the Ministry of Public Service submitted pension and gratuity arrears to a tune of Shs 233.8 billion. Given that the pension and gratuity arrears were not submitted at the time of finalising the Budget for financial year 2014/2015, they were not budgeted for and could only be paid through the statutory revision supplementary funding to the budget for the financial year 2014/2015.

Aware of the numerous challenges faced in the payment of Government pension and gratuity, our ministry together with the Ministry of Public Service agreed that all outstanding pension and gratuity arrears should first be submitted and must be confirmed by the accounting officers of the institutions where the staff retired from before payment. 

To date, a total of Shs 155.6 billion has been verified by accounting officers while a total of Shs 76.2 billion is still under verification by the accounting officers. Therefore, out of the verified pension and gratuity arrears amounting to Shs 155.6 billion, a total of Shs 47.2 billion was released to the Ministry of Public Service to facilitate the payment.

In order to address the challenges existing in the budgeting and payment of government pension and gratuity, we have fully decentralised the responsibility for final approval of the pension payroll and payment from the Ministry of Public Service to the respective accounting officers, starting with this month of July, 2015. All pensioners, including the verified arrears shall be paid under the institutions where they retired from.

Mr Speaker, arrangements have been made to clear the verified arrears for pension and gratuity in a phased manner but within the available resources.

Status of the Microfinance Tier-Four Regulatory Framework

Mr Speaker, Government is aware of this gap, existing in the microfinance sector, especially regarding the regulation, licensing and supervision of microfinance players, who are currently not under the regulatory ambit of the central bank.

Indeed, the biggest section of this sector continues to operate without appropriate legal framework and where it exists, it is insufficient to provide for the effective supervision of activities of these institutions.

As a result of this, rampant cases of theft, fraud of depositors’ and savers’ funds have been reported in some of the institutions. Use of inappropriate loan-recovery methods has diminished the confidence and the trust of the public in these institutions. 

It is for this reason that Government commenced the process of designing a framework to put in place a mechanism to protect savers and depositors who entrust their hard-earned money with these institutions.

Regrettably, the process has been lengthy because of the need to take on board, the varied interests of stakeholders, including the public as well as the providers of these financial services. And for that matter, we do apologise for the delay in coming up with this Bill.

Mr Speaker, I confirm that a policy framework outlining the principles for the comprehensive legislation of tier-four institutions was approved by Cabinet. This paved way for drafting of the Tier-Four Bill for the regulation, licensing, supervision of these institutions. And the Attorney-General’s office is finalising the draft Bill and we undertake to present the Bill to Parliament for consideration within one month. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you remember this arose from a matter that was raised by the member for Adjuman district on the pension that had not been paid for four months. We thank the minister for his statement.

Honourable members, this usually attracts debate. However, looking at the general pension situation, honourable minister, don’t you think this House needs a better brief on the general picture of this whole pension thing for us to be in the know? That is important because this is only for the former workers of Uganda Railways Corporation yet there are complaints in other sectors?

I do not know whether I should not refer this particular statement to the committee so that the minister can go back to the committee and they process something, so that this House can debate this general issue of pension. With that, I am going to refer this statement to the committee responsible for this sector. Clerk, extract the minutes and forward this to the committee so that they can interact with the ministers and look at the general picture so that we can have a good debate on the general pension situation in the country. It is so directed. 

STATEMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we receive the statement, in the public gallery this afternoon we have two women groups from Mukono Municipality represented by the hon. Betty Nambooze and hon. Kusasira. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

3.27
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I stand to present a statement from the Uganda Parliamentarians Forum on Food Security, Population and Development in commemoration of the World Population Day 2015.

On 11 July 1987, the world population reached the five billion mark. This was a landmark in the demographic history of the world. As such, the United Nations designated the day World Population Day, to be observed annually by all member states. The occasion is an opportunity to focus attention on the urgency and importance of population issues and also take stock of the achievements so far made by each member state towards improving the quality of life and standard of living of their populations. 

The World Population Day 2015 will be observed on Saturday, 11 July. National celebrations will be held in Sembabule District under the theme, “Prioritising Community Transformation: Addressing the needs of vulnerable populations.” 

The vulnerable populations include the economically disadvantaged, ethnic minorities, low-income families, the elderly, the refugees, the adolescents and the youth, the displaced, people living with HIV/AIDS, and those with other chronic health conditions including severe mental illness. The vulnerability of these individuals is enhanced by race, ethnicity, age, sex and factors such as income, healthcare, and social factors including housing, poverty and inadequate education.

In a world where the population is growing every day, there are challenges and opportunities that relate to sustainability, urbanisation, access to health services, and youth empowerment. In marking this day, the Uganda Parliamentarians Forum on Food Security, Population and Development would like to draw the attention of honourable members to the following issues:

We appreciate the efforts by the Government of Uganda in improving service delivery despite the inadequacies manifested in the resources we allocate to the services for the vulnerable groups. Despite the progress made in reducing poverty levels from 56 per cent in 1992 to 19.7 per cent in 2013, poverty inequality remains a big challenge. Many people are still struggling with poverty, food inadequacies, inequality and human rights violations that prevent them from fulfilling their potential both personally and collectively.

The world today has its largest generation of youth in history – 1.8 billion young people, mostly in developing countries – with enormous potential to help tackle the major challenges facing humanity. However, too many are denied their rightful opportunities to get a quality education, find decent work and participate in the political life of their societies. That is why the country is struggling to cater for the needs of Ugandans below 18 years who are at 69 per cent of the population. 

The majority of these youth are not educated, are semi-skilled, not imaginative, not entrepreneurial and not inspired. Knowing that the youth are key agents of social change, economic development and technological innovation, they present the opportunity with the realisation of their rights and their full participation in national development initiatives, as laid out in NDP II. 

This World Population Day is an opportunity to renew commitments to help people in their vulnerability by unleashing progress across society. The forum would like to propose the following quick wins as possible interventions by Government to improve prospects for the lives of the vulnerable populations and the country’s economic future:

As Mr Ban Ki-Moon, the UN Secretary-General, highlights in his statement for this years’ World Population Day, the solution lies in investments in health, education, training and employment for young people as they undergo the critical transition to adulthood. This will improve prospects for their lives and our common future. 

Ensuring adequate and sustainable mechanisms for people to have enough food and food varieties to avoid acute malnutrition and stunting in food-insecure districts will have profound impact on the ability of children to grow, participate in the workforce and rise out of poverty.

Since investment in education is critical, supporting the school feeding scheme is a safety net to restore attendance and learning and to reduce drop-outs among primary school children and provide quality education for all.

The high unmet need for family planning is a wonderful opportunity for Uganda. If all the 34 per cent of men, women and young people in need of family planning services would be served, most of the unintended pregnancies would be prevented, leading to fewer births per woman and eventually reducing the number of young dependents. 

This year, the world is undergoing the post-MDG era (transforming into SDGs). There is a great need to enhance the demographic dividend where youth issues are brought to the limelight. 

We also need to address the rights and needs of women and girls, helping them maintain their dignity, securing their safety and restoring their access to sexual and reproductive health information and care. 

Finally, good governance practices such as rule of law, stability, security, efficiency, service delivery and accountability are vital ingredients for transforming communities towards national development. 

Mr Speaker, before I conclude, as a forum we take this opportunity to congratulate our very own – the forum is chaired by Dr Chris Baryomunsi who was elevated to the Frontbench. We formally congratulate him as a forum – (Applause) - and also appeal to him not to forget the aspirations of the forum. While you are at the front bench, always remember what the forum stands for. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much. Honourable members, when we come to review the rules, this is one of the areas that we will need to look at. This is because we have difficulties housing these kinds of statements that come from the different fora or the different groups. We only have statements from Members under rule 45, and these relate to matters of public importance relating to the functions of the House and the other one is personal statements. 

Therefore, housing this becomes a bit tricky. However, we use the prerogative of the Speaker to allow this and I will allow debate just based on that. So, we shall have a short debate on this and I will start with the members from Sembabule, Ntungamo and Iganga districts and Mukono Municipality. 

3.35
MS HANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the forum for the good statement and to associate myself to what the forum has come up with.

I would like to add my voice to that of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development together with the President of the UN General Assembly, H.E Sam Kutesa, and extend an invitation to you, Mr Speaker and Members of Parliament, to attend this event in Sembabule to commemorate the World Population Day. I want to thank the Government for choosing Sembabule District. It is not that it is over populated but because it is among the vulnerable districts. It is one of the districts that is hard to reach because it is prone to drought that - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the debate is on the population issue.

MS KAWOOYA: Mr Speaker, that is where I am going because the theme says -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are going very slowly, honourable. (Laughter)

MS KAWOOYA: I was first giving a preamble. The theme is, “Prioritising community transformation: addressing the needs of the vulnerable population” and I am in line with that. 

I want to thank Government because they looked at Sembabule in that line and chose it to host this important celebration. The people of Sembabule will be very happy and will gain out of hosting this occasion. We will remain highly indebted to you for your presence and the presence of all of you, honourable colleagues. I look forward to welcoming you and making all of you very comfortable. You are welcome. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have members of the tobacco industry representing farmers, growers, traders, partners, workers and landlords supported by the 90-year-old tobacco industry sector in Uganda. They have come to observe the proceedings in Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

3.37
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Milton Muwuma for this statement.

We are going to celebrate the World Population Day but there are so many other days that we have celebrated in different districts and I want to address myself to these celebrations in terms of what we get out of them. National celebrations for the World Population Day are going to be held in Sembabule. People are going to come and dance because the President will be there and because they expect something to be given, but what do we get out of that as the population?

Mr Speaker, I get scared about the way the population in Uganda is rising. When we talk of controlling the population, people think of family planning and concentrate on methods of family planning. However, I think it is high time our people, Government and us, the leaders, thought about how to tell these peasants that they are producing many children who they cannot manage.

We are going for elections but the way people are demanding for money because of poverty is worrying. You find someone with five children but with no house and they expect a Member of Parliament to construct one for them. I think we need to go further and look at how to control population growth in this country. Otherwise, if it continues like this, then in a few – (Interruptions)

MS OPENDI: Thank you, honourable colleague. Mr Speaker, the Member has said that it is the peasants who give birth to many children. I just want to inform her that it is not only the peasants. Even those who are not peasants are busy producing left, right and centre including Members of Parliament. We are also adding onto the population growth by marrying more than one wife and in the process we are producing more children than even the peasants. That is the information that I wanted to give you.

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you so much, hon. Sarah Opendi, but I think this is different because these Members of Parliament produce children whom they can take to school and feed. People need to be told to produce the number of children they can manage. They do not have land or even food but they continue sleeping and producing children. 

I do not know which policy we can put in place to control birth rates. In China, it is a policy that you must produce one child. If you produce two, you get a big punishment. We better start that in Uganda because these methods of controlling birth are not helping us. People will continue producing as much as they can. We need to put something in place that can really be forcefully implemented. If we just leave it at that we are going to occupy the country to a point where we shall even have nowhere to sit. 

You can see even here in Parliament, we are creating more constituencies because of the high population and yet we have nowhere to sit. We are 380 Members and we have no seats but we are creating more constituencies. Mr Speaker, I feel concerned; we need to think about this country and its population. I thank you.

3.39
MS KABAALE KWAGALA (NRM, Woman representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the hon. Milton Muwuma for presenting that report. 

I would like to note that many people assume that family planning is just about accessing services from the hospitals. I would like the people listening to revise that perception in regard to family planning. Some people think that by going for pills or telling your husband, “please, stop it at that”, that is family planning. It is wider than that. You can be at home and decide to produce three children or chose not produce; that is family planning. 

I would like to thank hon. Milton Muwuma; commemorating World Population Day is good but we should also plan because Uganda is one of the five countries with the highest population of youth. When we are providing education, are we providing education so that people go to Saudi Arabia to work as house girls? We should provide quality education. 

How about funding? How many youth access funds? We say the population of our youth is around 69 per cent; this in fact creates another multiplier effect because teenage pregnancies are creating another population problem. We would like to also verify these reports as we commemorate this day. What is the life expectancy of Ugandans? Do we just celebrate this day without knowing how long we are expected to live? 

Another issue is food security. Some people in the rural areas may have food but is it nutritious food?  I would also like to request Government, in the process of maintaining a quality population, to raise the immunisation levels in order to reduce on infant mortality. We would like to call upon Government to encourage more mothers to deliver in hospitals. If they deliver in hospitals, it means the family planning element would be engineered from there. 

Lastly, most people think that getting university education is the best thing. However, countries like China, Malaysia and Japan have developed - we are using their products – and not many of their people get university education. Therefore, as we commemorate World Population Day, let us also re-strategize what we are planning for our country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.43
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank hon. Milton Muwuma and the forum for bringing this statement. This brings me to the question: where is Government? We have five ministers at the Ministry of Finance and we are all aware that this matter falls under their docket. 

Mr Speaker, if it was not for your mercy, we would not be discussing this matter here. You even told us that you had difficulties in finding where to accommodate such a statement. However, we have been forced to come up with statements of this kind as private Members because our ministers are busy sleeping –(Interjections)– Yes, they are sleeping - (Interruption)

MS KABASHARIRA: Mr Speaker, the member holding the Floor has just told us that the ministers are busy sleeping. However, I see hon. Chris Baryomunsi and the hon. Abraham Byandala awake. Is she in order to say that the ministers are sleeping? She is actually misleading this House by saying that the ministers are busy sleeping when they are actually facing her. Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, out the 76 ministers we have four. We do not know what the others are doing at the moment. (Laughter)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. What I want to say is that it should be at occasions like these where the responsible ministers would come and expound on issues of policy and also point out areas where they would like to seek parliamentary intervention. It is very bad that they do not utilise such occasions.  

Mr Speaker, we have also been talking about the issue of population - (Interjection) – No, I will take the information later because I have a few minutes. It is bad that we are here lamenting that Uganda is heavily populated. I hear that Britain is the size like Uganda but they now have a population of 68 million people. So, the issue is about the quality of people not the quantity. 

We would not be lamenting that 69 per cent of our people are youth. I was in Malaysia and the problem they are facing now is having an old population. They said that that their economy could collapse in the next 20 years because they have very old people as the biggest part of their population.

Mr Speaker, it all goes back to the issue of planning. The fact that the ministers are not here to brief us about this important day is in itself an indication that we are not planning for our population. What do we do on such occasions? Are we going to Sembabule to dress ourselves in dry banana leaves and dance for the President? What activities are going to take place in Sembabule? Apart from Sembabule, what will be happening in Mukono, for example? Are we going to herd everybody to Sembabule? Why don’t we have similar occasions in districts or maybe at regional level so that those people who cannot be able to go to Sembabule can also receive such important information?

I want to end, Mr Speaker, by calling upon these ministers - They are so many as you ably stated, Mr Speaker; they are over 70, like a primary school full of ministers, but they cannot come out to plan for the country and to guide us on what we should do. On such an occasion, even Parliament has not been briefed on what we are supposed to do to assist the ministry in order to plan for our population. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.51
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Milton Muwuma for presenting a statement as we commemorate this year’s World Population Day.

Mr Speaker, last year the theme was about investing in the youth or the young people and I know that this year’s theme was derived from that. The question for us to ask is: how much have we done as a country towards the theme of the day? That is only seen in the various ministerial policy statements because population is a multi-sectoral issue; whatever we do in health, education, agriculture and so on has an impact directly or indirectly on the quality of life of our people.

Mr Speaker, I am the Shadow Minister for Youth and Children Affairs. According to last year’s population census, 78 per cent of our population is below the age of 30 years and half of that is below the age of 24 years. Recently, it was also noted that the population that is below the age of 24 years is now sexually active. That can give you a projection of what is coming a head of us as a country. Therefore, as we go to Sembabule to commemorate this day, I would like to remind the chief guest about his commitment as the chief executive of this country in regard to investing in the youth. 

In all sectors, whatever we do must focus on the youth because that is the area. Ultimately, Mr Speaker, it is education because education provides very good checks and balances in terms of limiting the entry age into procreation and in terms of productivity output.

I would like to appeal to the relevant minister in absentia - I am sure the Prime Minister sitting in now as Leader of Government Business will take this message ably - to emphasise on this point as we join the people of Sembabule in commemorating this day. I thank you.

3.54
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to first of all begin by thanking hon. Milton Muwuma for representing us, the members of the forum, by presenting this wonderful statement to the House.

Mr Speaker, I would like to call upon the honourable members to really join hands with the forum and make sure we reach our communities to sensitise them on issues of population growth. Last year, as it was mentioned, members of the forum went out and talked ably about the issue of girl-child education, especially about the dropout rate of girls. We got a lot of information and we interacted so well with the people. The communities that we visited realised a lot of change. This is why I am calling upon my honourable colleagues to join hands with us and talk to the people that we represent so that we move forward as a country.


Secondly, it is true that our population is growing at a very fast rate. Even if we say that we have a policy that each couple produces only two children, we shall still have a very high population. Therefore, the Government should look at a way of investing in the population we have. What does this mean, Mr Speaker? It means we need a quality population. The majority of our population are youth; what are we doing for these youth in the country? Some of them are not educated while some of them are dropping out of school. I think that is where we need to focus our efforts so that we reap from this high population in the country.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like to say that we need to also improve on the issue of information dissemination and bring all stakeholders on board. We have 34 per cent of unmet needs in family planning. Some of these people want family planning but they do not know where to get those services. This means that the stakeholders – the religious leaders, cultural leaders and others - must be brought on board so that these people who are yearning for family planning services can be directed and given advice on where and how to get them.

I thank you very much and I call upon Members to really support the forum by going to Sembabule District for this very important day.

3.57
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to also join my colleagues in thanking the hon. Milton Muwuma for presenting this good report as well as the statistical provisions therein.

Mr Speaker, I just have two issues. One, I would like to relate a scenario I saw last year when I travelled to Kasese and other parts of western Uganda to play netball. We went to Bundibugyo, Kasese and we passed through many districts of western Uganda. I was very perturbed when I saw people every morning trekking from Kasese, crossing the border looking for land to cultivate. That is when I realised that the population of this country is overwhelming, especially in the western part of this country.

Therefore, as we commemorate this day, I would like this Government to plan on how we are going to develop this country given the rate of our population growth. We have to give advice depending on how heavily or lightly populated the various parts of the country are. Much as the Uganda is highly populated, some parts of this country are still very sparsely populated. 

What I saw in Kasese is a serious case. People in western Uganda no longer have land to cultivate. Every small piece of land is already either cultivated or occupied. They are left with no more land. That is why I am very worried. If Government does not stop the people of western Uganda from producing – (Laughter) - as we instruct people of northern Uganda to start producing – (Interruption)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Speaker, it was difficult for me to put my colleague to order. However, she is insinuating that every piece of land in western Uganda is cultivated. This is because people from western Uganda are hard working. They cannot leave any land un-tilled. So, is it in order for her to associate utilisation of land to over producing?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, now you have the correct information. (Laughter)

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. I am sure hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro, who comes from western Uganda, knows that the people there go across the border. That is why I said I was very perturbed when I saw quite a number of them with hoes on their backs crossing the borders of Uganda looking for land to cultivate. That is already a clear indication that the land is either over-cultivated or whichever other part remaining is occupied. It is also an indication that they must stop producing children as we tell the people in the north and eastern parts of Uganda, who still have a lot of unoccupied land, to produce the number that can fill that land.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, two days ago we had a women’s Parliament in this very Parliament Chamber. Women of this country cried out to this Government about their failure to access family planning services even when they want to. Secondly, they have cried to this Government to help prevail over men of this country. It is very disturbing for a woman who already has 11 children, for example, to get a 12th child and die while giving birth when that woman could have had access to family planning in a health facility. However, the women fear that if they go for family planning, their men could chase them away and marry other women. 

We must find a way of prevailing over such men. Of course, some of those men are in this Parliament too, I am sorry to say, but I will not mention names. I would also request that as leaders we act responsibly -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, members of this House are responsible people.

MS AKELLO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I was saying that cultural institutions in this country must also be brought on board in as far as embracing family planning is concerned. Those are some of the key institutions in this country that have been left behind. 

In Acholi, for example, we have clan systems and the different clans have their different rules and regulations. My clan, for example, the Auu clan, usually hold annual general meetings. During the meetings, women are instructed in strong terms. There are cases where women who have not produced after two years have been lined up and checked to find out whether they have implants or not. Whoever is found with implants, they are removed. Such kinds of traditional and cultural institutions should also be advised and sensitised so that they understand the importance of family planning. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.04
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Member who has brought this statement. 

My concern is on harnessing the demographic dividends. The youth in Uganda are very many and unemployment has become a very big concern. As we go to celebrate the World Population Day in Sembabule, we are transiting from MDGs to SDGs but I am not sure whether that concern is going to be taken as one of the major goals to address youth unemployment.

Mr Speaker, Uganda came up with a new programme – the Youth Livelihood Fund – to support the youth in order to create employment opportunities. However, it has not reached out to many youth, particularly the educated ones. What Uganda has done is educate its population. We have a lot of human resource that is highly educated and transiting from the white collar job conception to the kind of skills we are talking about remains a big challenge.

Mr Speaker, even those who have benefitted from the Youth Livelihood Fund are running small enterprises. One of the challenges that I have encountered as a Member of Parliament, and I do not know whether you have encountered it too, is that they expect Members of Parliament to look for market for the things they are producing. They are stuck. It is as if they are given skills to produce and create market. If Government does not come up to provide market for what they are producing, it is going to remain a problem to the youth and it is going to discourage more youth from applying for the Youth Livelihood Fund.

Mr Speaker, I think we also need to engage the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs and I am glad the minister here. There were so many issues that the youth raised in regard to that fund. First of all, they want them to have a current account and yet this requires deduction of money and other requirements. It took them a lot of time and that meant that their money was being reduced. They are getting discouraged and that is why some other groups feared to join and apply for the livelihood funds. They are paying an interest rate that has not even matured because it was deducted by the banks. So, it is a big problem.

The youth need to be handled carefully. Look at the political trend that we are seeing in the media; people are using the youth because they are not fully engaged and utilised - (Interjection) - No, they are not idle but they are not fully engaged. They are energetic and they have all the time. We need to come up strongly, as we think about the population issues, on how we are going to handle the youth in this country, particularly providing them with alternative jobs. 

I do not know how we are going to do it but it is a big problem. It is an issue that every Member of Parliament is being tasked with. In my office, I have a huge file of people who are looking for employment opportunities and I wonder where I will get the jobs from. This is an issue that Government should seriously take up and provide - (Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro, for giving way. The information I would like to give this House is that most of the youth have not accessed the Youth Livelihood Programme. They did everything necessary; they organised themselves into groups and submitted whatever they were asked to but they have not accessed the funding and we are wondering what the problem is. Is it that the resources are not available? Why can’t these youth access the Youth Livelihood Programme? Thank you.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you. I think it was a hectic exercise where many youth thought they were going to be involved and get the benefits of accessing that funding. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs needs to come out and sensitise our youth because there is total confusion. I thank you.

4.09
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Milton Muwuma for presenting this statement that has allowed us an opportunity for reflection.

Mr Speaker, I think that when we discuss matters of population, and with the fear that we are bordering on an explosion, I keep imagining that the rest of the world looks at us in dismay. Most importantly, I think God looks at us with consternation. He must be wondering from up there what we do with all the potential that this country has. I do not think that a country like Uganda with great potential in agriculture, tourism, human resource and the youth as our capital together with the young population should actually cry that they have trouble with population issues and therefore major on family planning as the solution. 

Even if you planned until nobody has a child in this country, if you do not address yourselves to the issues of improving the quality of our education, the opportunities in our health sector and industrialising the economy so you can take away the people from the land - We have such a huge tourist potential. If we do not exploit the potential that this country has, I think it will amount to nothing. 

However, most importantly, tonight I want to address this House as a prolife activist. Every time I hear about family planning I have also heard our ministers on various occasions talking about the possibility of legalising abortion in this country, the so called pro-choice activists.  Mr Speaker, I want to address this matter, first of all from the fact that it is illegal in Uganda anyway; the Constitution forbids that. 

However, what annoys me most is that people who have already been born, whose mothers did not abort them, are the ones moving around this country insinuating that abortion be legalised, that we legalise murder of our unborn children. This is wickedness and the Bible in Deuteronomy 5:17 tells us, “Thou shall not kill”. Therefore, even as we worry about population increase, let it not be heard among the leaders that we are proposing a mechanism of killing of our unborn children as the solution. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from the Uganda National Users Consumers Organisation. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers of Kiddawalime Preparatory School in Namungoona. They are represented by hon. Moses Kasibante and hon. Nabila Sempala, the woman representative. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

4.13
MR MARTIN MUGABI (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to join my colleagues in thanking hon. Muwuma for the statement. 

It is good that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here. My concern is about Busoga region. In the Busoga region as we speak, most of the families are living on close to half an acre of land. You find about eight to 10 members in a family and they depend on this land for food, school fees, health and other related issues. I imagine after 10 years, these children will be grown up people who will also need to take a share of the same piece of land. 

We, the members from Busoga region, for a long time have demanded for affirmative action for Busoga region. We have not had a statement from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in regard to this matter. I would like to know from the minister as to what plan they have for Busoga as a region. It is because it is seated on a time bomb. If we do not plan ahead, Mr Speaker, we do not know where these children will go in 10 years to come.

With regard to the function, I would even propose that the celebrations be shifted to Busoga region - (Laughter) - if it is possible. This is because I have been to Sembabule and the people have at least big pieces of land and a small population. I do not know what the criterion was for selecting Sembabule, if I can be informed. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.16
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to join my colleagues in thanking hon. Muwuma for the wonderful statement. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to tell this House that producing very many children by any mother is not healthy. This is because there is a condition called maternal depreciation syndrome. In this situation, a woman produces children year after year and the mother is not even given time to heal psychologically or morphologically. This means that this mother is going to completely look like a very old person, when in actual fact she is still very young.  

We must address the issue of family planning. People must plan for the number of children they want to have at the time they want to have them, depending on how much property they have. As Members of Parliament, if you go home to your constituency, at your gate there must be some people looking for school fees from you. These are struggling women. Men do not come, by the way. You find women camped at the gates of Members of Parliament looking for school fees for their children. 

It is a pity in this country to find a population of more than 35 million people and the majority are less than 30 years of age. I do not know where we shall put these people. Whether we want it or not, family planning is the way to go. The ministers of health are here - Dr Chris Baryomunsi and hon. Sarah Opendi; go and get money and make sure everybody gets family planning services. We must sensitise our people. 

Secondly, the Ministry of Finance should inject money into family planning. We must have a quality population. We cannot have only voters when they cannot even - It is very important. 

If we want to have quality population in this country, we must educate the girl child. The women are the ones who look after children at home. They are the same people who feed babies with a balanced diet. The men are always drinking in bars; they are never at home. Therefore, if we can improve the education of the girl children in this country, I can tell you the population is going to be of quality. 

Mr Speaker, the hospitals are already squeezed because there are so many people falling sick each day. If we do not reduce on the number of people we are producing per day, these young people that are coming out are going to fight us; there is no way you can stop things from happening. There is going to be scramble for property and everything. In the end, the youths are going to turn against us. 

Where is the Youth Livelihood Fund? If 78 per cent of the population is not accessing money to do business, they are going to fight us. Take a look at what is happening here in Kampala; they are using the youth to burn roads and make all the mistakes they can. It is because these people are redundant. Can we put money in teaching these youths? I thank you very much. 

4.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the honourable members for their contributions and also hon. Muwuma for bringing the statement. 

Let me start by clarifying that Government agreed with the forum on this statement. We had consultations and we did agree, like we have done before, that the parliamentarian’s forum raises the statement and we shall be here to make comments. Therefore, it is not true that the Government was asleep or that the ministers responsible were asleep as alleged by hon. Nambooze.

It is important that such days are celebrated or marked. This helps us raise awareness, inform the country and raise the debate like we are doing here this afternoon. If we had not planned to mark this day on Saturday, this statement may not have come and this kind of debate would not have taken place. Therefore, marking the World Population Day is not in vain; it helps all of us to reflect on this important issue of population and development. It also challenges us to look for answers to some of these issues which are being raised.  

Mr Speaker, the question of population growth and development is extremely important. As Government, we are aware of this. We have the National Population Policy that drives all the programmes to do with integration or population in national development. We have put in place institutions like the National Planning Authority, the Population Secretariat and population offices in districts. All these are supposed to ensure that population programming is mainstreamed across sectors in Uganda. 

Indeed, a number of interventions being raised are being implemented in the country. The Ministry of Health will later on ask for space for us to state the details of some of the interventions we are pursuing as a sector to address the population challenge which we have in the country. 

Let me add that we have a challenge of high population growth in Uganda. We have just carried out a national housing and population census, which puts the total population to about 35 million Ugandans as of today. Hon. Nambooze is arguing that it is too small. The concern is not necessarily about the size or the numbers but rather about how we can ensure that we have a sustainable population growth rate. 

We have one of the highest population growth rates, which we estimate at 3.2 per cent per annum. Usually, we compare the population growth with the economic growth. For us to have a sustainable population growth, we should have an economic growth which is at least three times the population growth. That is a challenge we have because right now our economic growth is around six per cent. When you compare it with the population growth of 3.2 per cent, we are not yet at a sustainable population growth. 

The growth of the population is driven largely by three factors: fertility, which is reproduction; mortality, which is death; and mobility migration, which could be in migration or out migration. In a nutshell, the population growth of Uganda is largely being driven by fertility. Our women in Uganda are extremely fertile. 

It is not necessarily true that the women of western Uganda are more fertile than the others. To the contrary, even the women in northern Uganda post a fertility rate which is higher than the national average according to the demographic and health survey. The national average is about 6.2 children per woman. The women we have here produce about six children in their lifetime. In the rural communities, this goes up to eight or nine children per woman. 

This is what is driving the growth rate. Mortality has come down courtesy of some of the programmes like immunisation and the others. Migration has been checked because there is peace; we are not getting many people migrating out of the country. Therefore, it is fertility which is driving the population growth in Uganda and we have a number of programmes to address this. 

As I wind up, I want to say that the policy in Uganda is non-prescriptive. We have two types of population policies. We have the prescriptive policies where the country prescribes the number of children a couple should have, for example in China, India and other countries, but those have issues to do with rights. 

The policy which we pursue in this country is a non-prescriptive policy, where we encourage couples to produce by choice and not by chance. Therefore, the Government and partners provide services and information to empower and enable couples and partners to make a choice on the number of children they should have. 

We are promoting a manageable family size. We are therefore not bothered whether you produce nine or two or one children; what we want is that the couple should discuss and weigh their economic capacity and be able to have the number of children they can manage. Of course, the fact is that in our rural communities, most of our people are poor and therefore we encourage them to have fewer children that they can manage.

Finally, as it has been said, because of this high fertility rate we have what we call a population momentum where the majority of the population in the country are young. The statistics show that up to 52 per cent of Ugandans are below the age of 15 years and up to 78 per cent are below the age of 30 years. We therefore have an extremely young population.

What we need to do as a country, one, is to arrest this momentum by providing family planning services and other reproductive health services. This will ensure that we check this population growth so that grow in tandem with the pace at which we are developing. Two, we also have to invest in this youthful population in order to turn this huge segment of the population into a productive force. That is what the members are referring to as reaping the demographic dividends. We have reduced the fertility rate but that is not enough. We also have to invest in this population of young people. 

There are countries like Tunisia that have invested heavily in reducing fertility rates. Actually, within a period of a generation, they have reduced their fertility rate from about six children to two. They have attained the fertility transition. However, they did not make the right policies and the right investment in the young people. Even when the fertility rate came down, because the youth are not employed, they are not productive and economically empowered and you have seen what has happened in Tunisia and the Arab countries.

Therefore, what we need to do as a country is to promote these health programmes and also invest in the young people. Our urge and request to Parliament is that you should support us as government. When we come with proposals to intervene to address the conditions of young people, we request for your support. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for that brief report that he presented to this House regarding population.
	
A lot of issues have been talked about and I do not want to repeat them. However, I would like to mention something that has not been talked about - the challenge of teenage pregnancy. We are forgetting that this is partially responsible for increasing the number of Ugandans. We have so many children as young as nine years old getting pregnant and producing children in this country. We, therefore, have to work tirelessly to ensure that we stop these teenage pregnancies from occurring.

Secondly, the issue of child marriages is also with us. It is very unfortunate that in some of our communities, – most of you who have seen what has been airing in the last week on NTV; yesterday, there was something about Karamoja - young girls are being married off even when they have not yet started their monthly periods. This is very unfortunate and it is happening in communities as some of us look on and do nothing about it.

I, therefore, would like to appeal to colleagues to join hands with us to fight teenage pregnancies and early marriages. I am happy that a good number of districts have come up with ordinances to stop this vice from happening in their districts. Without this, we shall not solve the problem that that my sister, hon. Alaso, has talked about.

These abortions are majorly happening amongst our young girls. For as long as we do not promote the use of contraceptives, for as long as we do not deal with this challenge, we are going to see these abortions continuing every day in this country. As we speak, in this country every day there are close to 830 abortions conducted and of course this is happening. It is very unfortunate that Government also loses; Government spends close to Shs 30 billion on post-abortion care. Therefore, we need to find ways of solving this challenge other than hiding out heads in the sand. 

When you hear about abortions, these are from unwanted pregnancies. As my senior colleague has said, people should be getting children by choice and not by chance. If these challenges of unwanted pregnancies, teenage pregnancies and early marriages are resolved, we shall be able to deal with the challenge of abortions and most importantly, the issue of population growth. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity.

4.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I would like to join colleagues in thanking hon. Muwuma for presenting this statement, as agreed with the Ministry of Finance. It has been our practice that the forum in Parliament presents this as part of their involvement in this programme. We therefore thank him.

Secondly, I would like to thank colleagues for passing the National Population Council, and I would like to inform you that we have started implementation. We are going to strengthen the Population Secretariat and strengthen the offices at the districts, so that we can address the issues that are being raised here.

I would also like to inform colleagues that actually, when we passed the National Development Plan here, we addressed a number of issues in that plan including issues to do with Busoga region. It is our hope that all of us work together to make sure that we implement the National Development Plan. Think about the roads and the airports; they are in that plan. What remains is to make sure that what we budget for is what is planned and what we implement is what we have budgeted for.

I would like to agree with hon. Alice Alaso that the issue of legalising abortion should not come in our generation. I, therefore, would like to pledge that as long as I am on the front bench, you will not count me on that kind of Bill. (Laughter)

I have two points to make. One is on the issue of young people. It is true that we have a bulge of young people now in our country. We should take advantage of this energetic population force. We are putting in place programmes to address these problems and one is the Youth Livelihood Programme. I am very surprised that some Members of Parliament have not seen this in their districts. We shall be asking the Minister of Gender to come up and update the Members on this issue.

We also have been lacking data in planning for young people. This August, we will be launching the first manpower survey to see what skills we need in the market and see whether we are matching them with skills acquired in the education system that we have.

In August, we will launch the manpower survey and it will take close to six months. We will know the skills acquired in education and match them with the skills required in the market place. At the end of the day, we shall have data-led planning for the young people – (Interjection) – Yes, the budget has been passed and we are grateful.

We should all congratulate our country because we have been able to reduce the poverty levels from 56 per cent to 19.5 per cent in just a space of less than 25 years. This is the first country in South Sahara to bypass the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). While it is true that in absolute numbers we still have a challenge, I think this is progress that we should celebrate.

Finally, I would like to invite all of you, honourable colleagues, to come on Saturday to Sembabule and join the people of Sembabule and the people of Uganda and the rest of the world in celebrating this day. His Excellency the President, Mr Museveni, will be the guest of honour and will also have an opportunity to make a powerful statement on that day. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much and thank you, hon. Muwuma and Members for this debate. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.36
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (IN-CHARGE OF POLITICAL MOBILIZATION) (Mr Abraham Byandala): Mr Speaker and honourable members – (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Rubaga South, I am reluctant to let the minister lay these papers before he answers the following questions -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this item is on laying of papers. Please proceed, honourable minister.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a statutory instrument on Kampala Capital City Commercial Road Users Regulations, 2015 in accordance with section –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just lay the paper.

MR BYANDALA: I lay the paper.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. I remember very well that you promised this House that while you are presiding over this House, you will never handle anything from Kampala Capital City Authority either directly or indirectly and you were on record for that. Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right, because we raised this matter while you were away –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the time this matter came and the clarifications were made, you were not in the House; you would not be raising that point. (Applause) 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table statutory instrument 2015 No. 3 on the – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there are two items to be laid on the Table; there is the Kampala Capital City Commercial Road Users Regulations, 2010. Have you laid that?

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the Inspectorate of Government report to Parliament for the period of July to December 2014. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let the records capture that. I do not know the implication of the regulations. I do not know whether they should be sent to the committee but let the Clerk extract the minutes and the committee should take note of these particular regulations and look at the law and see what the implications are. The report of the Inspectorate of Government is duly referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to look at and respond on those issues.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Reports of the Auditor–General are normally laid on the Table by either a Member of this Parliament or a Commissioner, who should be a back bencher. However, today I am surprised that we have a report from the Inspectorate of Government being laid on the Table by the Executive. My procedural question is: is it in accordance with our Rules of Procedure that instead of members from the back bench or a commissioner laying papers, it is now the Executive to lay these documents on the Table?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that document has been laid on the Table and it can be re-laid; there is no problem with that. However, the document has already been captured in the record. You can come and lay it again on the Table. When the item was called, you should have moved forward to lay it. Please move and lay it again on the Table so that the records capture it twice.

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.41
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity. Honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table, in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Inspectorate of Government report to Parliament, July to December 2014. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is again referred to the legal and parliamentary affairs committee. (Laughter).

MS KABARAITSYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. I would like to know whether we have received two different documents. I thought that the procedure was that the minister would first withdraw what he had laid on the Table and then the Commissioner lays what is supposed to be laid procedurally right. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is the same document laid twice, honourable member for Kamwenge. (Laughter)

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not see the member for West Budama South to move this motion. Let us go to the next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO MISS TOURISM AMBASSADORS WHO DIED ON 4 JULY 2015 IN A MOTOR ACCIDENT ON MASAKA ROAD

4.43
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In accordance with rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the Miss Tourism ambassadors who died in a road accident last week.

“WHEREAS Parliament has with regret learnt of the death of three young ladies, Norah Atim, the Miss Tourism Northern Uganda 2014/2015; Barbara Nakiwolo, Miss Tourism Buganda region; and Resty Namawejje, a journalist working with NTV Uganda which occurred on 4 July 2015 at Nsimbe, Mpigi District along the Masaka-Kampala Highway;

AND WHEREAS the late Norah Atim and the late Barbara Nakiwolo were tourism ambassadors from their respective regions and were travelling to Mbarara to attend the western Uganda event of Miss Tourism;

RECOGNISING the role played by the tourism ambassadors in promoting the tourism industry in Uganda and the world over;

APPRECIATING THAT the development of the tourism industry is an engine of economic growth for this country and the death of these tourism ambassadors is a great loss to the tourism industry and the country at large;

COGNISANT that the deceased were young hard working ladies who lost their lives while on duty trying to promote the tourism industry for the good of this country;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:
That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the families of the deceased, friends and the people of Uganda upon the demise of these distinguished daughters of the country.

That it takes note of the services that the late Norah Atim, Resty Namawejje and Barbara Nakiwolo rendered and the contribution they made towards the promotion of tourism in Uganda in their different capacities.”

I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by Member for Rubaga South, Member from Mawokota, Member for Koboko District. Would you like to speak to your motion in five minutes? 

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, for the record, Norah Atim was Miss Tourism Northern Uganda and the second runner up of Miss Tourism 2014/2015. She was yet to graduate with a Bachelor of Information Technology from Makerere University.

Atim was born on 8 December 1992. She started school at Mawanda Road Kindergarten in 1995 and then went to Kitante Primary School in 1998. She joined Namugongo Primary School and passed in first grade after her Primary Leaving Education (PLE). From Namugongo she joined Rubaga Girls’ Secondary School for both her “O” and “A” levels. She later joined Makerere University for a course in Information Technology on Government sponsorship.

Norah competed for the Miss Tourism crown for Northern Uganda and emerged the victor before going for the nationals where she settled for the second runner-up position.

Fast forward, she died on Saturday, 4 July 2015 on her way to Mbarara for the Miss Tourism event. She was aged 22. She was daughter to Mr George Okello and Ms Emily Apuu who described their daughter as a “down to earth girl.” Besides being Miss Tourism Northern Uganda, she hailed from Ludala Koboko District, represented by my honourable sister Baba Diri.

Mr Speaker, allow me to brief this august House about Resty Namawejje who was born on 31 July 1991. She attended Cardinal Nsubuga Primary School. She held a diploma in television and radio production from the Uganda Television and Film Academy.  By the time of her death, she was working for NTV as a co-producer for the popular Login show, a weekly entertainment programme. She was a daughter of Mr Rogers Ssebaduka and Ms Ramula Birungi.

Mr Speaker, the third person is Barbara Nakiwolo who died at the age of 22.  She was a finalist in the Buganda Region finals of the Miss Tourism event. Nakiwolo’s mother, Lillian Birungi, had only this one daughter and she was going to graduate from Makerere University next January. Barbara Nakiwolo died at Mulago Hospital. 

We shall remember her in Mukono as the person who launched the Kyagwe Tourism Information Centre and led queens in the footsteps of Ham Mukasa and invited them to Ssezibwa Falls for an evening tour. She was buried in Namilyango-Seeta Mukono District and she was my constituent.

The Vehicle had about eight occupants in total; the other five victims were rushed to Mulago Hospital in very critical condition. These are Patrick Muhaire, an official working with the Uganda Tourism Board; David Gumisiriza, an NTV cameraman; Julian Kyomuhendo, a journalist with ABC TV and Betty Kyakwo and Rehema Najjengo both students at Makerere University and a one Ivan Ssebuuma.

Mr Speaker, the Miss Tourism contest was revived in 2013 after six years absence as a key social event. The tourism ministry says that they are taking a leading role in organising this event, working in collaboration with other sectors in the private sector. The overall Miss Uganda Tourism winner represents Uganda at the Annual Miss Tourism International event held in Malaysia every 31st day of December each year.

The objective of Miss Tourism is to identify individuals who will support national efforts to build the domestic tourism portfolio through motivating fellow citizens to act in the interest of promoting tourism culture. According to the economic and statistical analysis of tourism in Uganda, cultural tourism has been 30 to 100 per cent more per every visit than other tourists.

Police attributed the cause of the accident to over speeding. According to the police spokesperson, Phillip Mukasa, the driver of the car lost control as he tried to overtake another car and that caused the accident in which our girls lost their lives. It will be noted that much as we could blame over speeding, there has been several other accidents at this very spot at Nsimbe. The most recent one claimed 56 lives.

There is therefore an urgent need to inquire if the newly renovated Kampala-Masaka Road passed the safety test because it is quite sad that we are getting so many accidents on this road soon after it has been renovated.

Finally, the aspect and relevancy of beauty in relation to tourism is not farfetched. For instance, before the days of guide books and tourist sites, tourist travellers for pleasure and site seeing would always cite those points where they would meet beautiful women. We would always hear that such and such a country has more beautiful women than the other. In fact, we do not need to emphasise this but beauty and tourism are related. It is therefore sad that these ladies who came up to offer their beauty for the promotion of our tourism industry died in so short a period.

Mr Speaker, I would like to end by asking Government that once we identify these ambassadors and we appoint them to be our ambassadors for different causes, we should also consider ensuring their safety. We should also consider offering them guidance especially in the place of their newly acquired celebrity status. It is high time we consider according such achievers recognition they deserve as a matter of policy, with a view to such things as remuneration and facilitation as they carry out their duties among others.

I beg to rest my case by thanking you, Mr Speaker, for according me this time and to request my honourable colleagues to support this motion. Thank you.

4.55
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion for Parliament to pay tribute to our beloved young ladies who perished along Masaka-Kampala Road.

It is really very sad to learn that these three young ladies died along in a road accident. Indeed it is very shocking to Uganda and to the families of these young ladies who perished. These were young, beautiful, intelligent, vibrant and outgoing young ladies. They sacrificed their youthful beauty for the sake of our tourism industry; they participated and won the contest and in this one year, they were ambassadors and have been promoting Uganda within and abroad to the extent that they died on their way to select new ambassadors.

This means these were ladies who loved their country and they would go a long way to develop Uganda. These were very young ladies and they died prematurely; they had just finished their university and were to graduate next year. They were still looking at life in front of them which they had started very well and would progress to the highest but we have lost them along this road!

Mr Speaker, accidents are claiming too many lives of our useful citizens in Uganda. We tried our best to improve on the roads but I think we need to look at the type of drivers we have and the vehicles we use. Quite often, it is a mechanical condition of our vehicles and also the human error of the drivers. Therefore, we need to educate and sensitise our drivers to save our lives. Very often, it is the carelessness of the drivers. 

Look at these young girls; unfortunately one was the only daughter. Norah Atim was from Koboko and her remains were laid in Koboko. Although her name bears Acholi origin, she was brought up singlehandedly by the mother and with the help of the grandmother and she grew up as a very beautiful intelligent young girl. She has been supporting both the mother and grandmother and she has been a pride to us in Koboko, to see her as the beauty of Uganda. After all it is clear that in Koboko we have beautiful girls and ladies but unfortunately, we have lost her. 

We shall continue to remember her for what she has worked for Uganda, for the family and especially for the mother. She belongs to the family of Mathew Opulet and he was the first judge in West Nile. A very intelligent man who died about five years ago and the mother, Emily Opuu, is a nurse in Mulago Hospital.

Atim was the first born and has been very supportive to the family and the mother looked forward to seeing that she would support her in future but now she is gone.

Mr Speaker, now that these young girls have died on duty, I hope the government, especially the Ministry of Tourism, will remember the parents. Barbara was the only child and the mother is left without any help and even Emily Opuu is a widow and has no help. I hope the government will think of supporting these families because these girls would have been the ones to support them.

I would like to urge the parents to pray for their souls. I know it is very painful to lose such young brilliant children, but with God’s support they should bear with it in God’s name. I would like to pray that the Good Lord rests their souls in peace. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the Miss Tourism ambassadors who died in a road accident: Ms Norah Atim, Barbara Nakiwolo and Resty Namawejje. That is the motion I propose for your debate.

5.01
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to support the motion moved by hon. Nambooze and I would like to thank her in person for the trouble she has taken to remember the glory of the daughters of Uganda. In my capacity as Shadow Minister in charge of Tourism and Wildlife, I would like to pray before God that the souls of the deceased rest in eternal peace.

A prominent literature writer by the name of William Shakespeare once said that death will come when it will. You cannot of course direct such a statement to those that have lost those dear girls but it is an open fact that death has to come and we must all prepare for it. 

I incidentally knew the lady called Barbara Nakiwolo after seeing her at Makerere University in one of the functions in the Main Hall and someone introduced her to me in my capacity as Shadow Minister and student of the Law School at Makerere.

She was such a quiet lady and very charming in outlook, dignified by image with an innocent complexion. We will all miss her and those in her company.

There is a problem of driving - this road which runs to Mbarara from Kampala-Masaka is a newly constructed road but a number of points on the same road lack signals. Many sites require indications of humps so that drivers can exercise self-control. I would like to call upon the Government of Uganda and I hope it has a strong representation here so that the John Ken-Lukyamuzi message can be passed on to those responsible for the Ministry of Works.

There is a problem on that road and there are many heavy vehicles like buses which run at very fast speed; the trailers and lorries that ferry cattle everyday have no mercy upon fellow drivers on the road. If we have a government in action, I urge the Government of Uganda to employ some research assistants and report on those vehicles I have tried to describe. They are the cause of major accidents but let us not keep quiet while our generation is disintegrating.

I would like to thank all those who - (Member timed out_)

5.04
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I too would like to  support the motion as moved by hon. Nambooze, paying tribute to our departed daughters and sisters: Norah Atim, Barbara Nakiwolo and Resty Namawejje who unfortunately perished in a road accident when they had decided to make a start of their productive lives as ambassadors of tourism in Uganda. 

These young industrious ladies who were beautiful and full of talent, died at the start of their productive lives while trying to serve their country through the tourism industry. They had seen the potential of the tourism industry in this country and the world and decided to tap into this industry.

What is the role of tourism ambassadors? As I pointed out, there is potential in the tourism industry but if there is nobody to publicize and market this potential, it remains untapped. These young ladies had seen this potential and decided to commit their lives to serving the tourism industry. 

I would like to commend them for this role just like I would like to commend the Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife for opening up internal and domestic tourism to all Ugandans. This is because at the time they died, these ambassadors were moving from one region to another, trying to interact and share experiences and market what the different parts of the country have to offer.

Mr Speaker, as we speak, tourism contributes over $1 billion annually to the national coffers. Tourism essentially contributes about 5.5 per cent of our GDP. Tourism is a major foreign exchange earner for the country. At a time when our shilling is depreciating, efforts that can help to bring into the country the badly-needed foreign exchange must be supported. These ladies had seen this need and had decided to move out and make a contribution through their talent, intellect and beauty.  

Mr Speaker, we share the pain and grief caused by such a tragic loss. We, therefore, would like to register our condolences to the families of the deceased, to the tourism industry in the country, to the NRM government and to the Government of Uganda. May their souls rest in eternal peace. I thank you.

5.08
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of West Moyo County and on my own behalf, I would like to express my sincere condolences to the bereaved family members, relatives, friends and in-laws and all the people of Uganda for the demise of Norah Atim, Barbara Nakiwolo and Resty Namawejje. I wish to pay tribute to them. These were young and enterprising ladies and two of them were about to graduate from university.

As said before, they were ambassadors for the socio-economic and political development of Uganda through tourism. As you are all aware, tourism is one of the earners of foreign currency for Uganda. Now that they have left, what do we do? My advice to the rest of the young girls out there is that they should not give up. Go to school and study tourism courses. The three ladies who died were role models to the rest of the girl-children. Through them, we were able to get tourists in Uganda who brought foreign exchange. 

I would like to encourage more of our girls, and boys of course, to go for tourism courses as well as journalism so that we can have more of such people. My request to Government is, now that the three have died, Government should come in to aid the bereaved family members so that it fills the gap that has been left by the deceased. May their souls rest in peace. Thank you.

5.11
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank hon. Nambooze for this thoughtful motion at this particular time and I would like to join her in paying tribute to these young people who died while doing a commendable job.

The lives lived by the late Resty Namawejje, Barbara Nakiwolo and Norah Atim is testimony to this country of the contribution of young people. In fact, it is common in Uganda for young people to be dismissed as useless, irrelevant to the economy and a lot of times, problematic. However when I hear the story of these young people, at 22, 23 and 24 years, they have been able to achieve this great contribution. They were ambassadors of a great cause in our country and, therefore, this is testimony to the role that young people can play in contributing to this nation’s development, especially given the opportunity.

Mr Speaker, I heard the mover and seconder of the motion testify about the lives of these young ladies and how they contributed to their families by supporting their mothers, relatives and friends and I think that this is commendable. Therefore, I would like to say this is a great loss to their families and I stand to empathize with them, to pay tribute to their families and also to pray for them that the Good Lord will support them at such a difficult time. 

I would like to thank the Minister of Tourism for this thoughtful pageant that she put in place. Many times we hold pageants, which are almost meaningless but the Miss Tourism pageant is one of a kind that is important in terms of its contribution to our nation. (Applause) As a youth MP, these are the kind of things we need to see. I thank the minister for this development and I encourage her to continue in this cause.

I also appeal to the minister to concentrate more on the tourism cause since it is one of the biggest and the third engine-mover in our nation. When one sees the type of investment, care and programmes put into it, you do not seem to pay sufficient attention to this sector. When you travel to our neighbouring countries like Rwanda, they are taking over in terms of their contribution and planning towards this sector. 

Mr Speaker, I think – (Member timed out_)

5.14
MR KENNETH KIYINGI (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for this opportunity. I also rise to support the motion as moved by hon. Betty Nambooze to pay tribute to the late tourism ambassadors.

What happened on that fateful day is truly sad and unfortunate. I share my grief with the honourable colleagues and I express the pain I have in my heart. I have lost over 50 people who have died as a result of accidents along Kampala-Masaka Road, mainly due to the same problem of driver errors. Some drivers seem to forget that they are not the only users of the roads.

Mr Speaker, Kampala-Masaka-Mbarara highway is one of the busiest routes with over five major tourism destinations. Very many tourists travel along this road on a daily basis accompanied by thousands of people that move from home to work and vice versa.

I have been pushed off this road by buses or heavy trucks as I drive from my constituency. At one point, I recall a truck that did not have its lights on and it was late in the night. My co-driver is the one that actually asked me if I had seen the truck coming towards us and that is when I realised that the truck was overtaking in my lane and I had to get off the road. 

Therefore, I sympathise with the road users on this road and call upon Government to awaken the Road and Safety Department to come out and brief road users about road safety.

Mr Speaker, I respect the fact that the accident was blamed on human error but I still believe that there is a lot to be desired regarding the status of the Kampala-Masaka road including the slippery nature of the road and the heavy trucks that ferry sand while dripping with water. In the event of a slight downpour, cars are bound to slide off the road and accidents are bound to happen.

I implore our Committee on Physical Infrastructure to come and investigate the status of this road. I believe that something can be done to save the lives of the innocent people moving along this road. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.17
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): I thank you, Mr Speaker and I would also like to support my colleagues.

I wish to mention that the fallen young people were not only promoting tourism but also raising awareness as far as cultural heritage is concerned. In that spirit, I wish to appreciate two points: One, when we talk about matters of our fallen colleagues, our young sisters and brothers, there are two points for the attention of Government and the youth fraternity.

I wish to appreciate that the Masaka-Kampala highway is one of the famously talked about road that the NRM Government has done and I congratulate the Ugandan taxpayers. However, the question that we would wish to ask in this particular case when we have lost our dear ones is whether the road was done to the right standards. Much as we may talk of human error, one would still wish to ask about the circumstances surrounding the human beings that commit those human errors that I talked about.

Like my colleagues are saying, I also join and support the argument that the Ministry of Works and the committee should invest more so that we do not see any more of these accidents occurring again. 

I would also like to appreciate that young people at 22 years can do a lot. As such, we should appreciate that age is a factor of production. As long as they get cooperation and support from elders and other players, the young people can do a lot for this country. May their souls rest in peace.  

5.20
MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (DP, Woman Representative, Luweero): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to take this opportunity to thank hon. Nambooze for the motion and also pay tribute to the fallen tourism ambassadors. 

Mr Speaker, you will realise that much of the work done by beauty pageants is voluntary as no one pays them. These young ladies choose to serve their country and move around to promote it, which is nationalistic and patriotic. 

My proposal, therefore, is that the government should also look at appreciating the families with a small token to thank the young ladies for the work that they did in promoting our country. It is not very easy to choose to work for free and promote your country when you do not benefit from it that much. We can think about it.

I would also like to say that from an early age, I have been using the Masaka Road. Today, you realise that we have more traffic compared to the 1990s. This means that we must borrow from other countries. If you have a major road, you must think of constructing a dual carriage to cater for those who will be speeding at beyond 200 kilometres. This has been provided for in developed countries.

I think that this incident, however bad it was, must be used to plan for our country and also provide for those who will be moving at high speed.

Mr Speaker, hon. Amoding also raised the issue that this incident has also brought out a clear indication that young people have been central in the tourism industry. I think that as a country, we should try to see that our country is highly promoted because the young people have tried to bring it out. 

We should also think about including more money in the Budget to promote our country so that we encourage more people to come into Uganda because we have areas like cultural sites, lakes, islands and birds, which can also be of value and bring in income. 

Therefore, while we pay tribute and remember the beautiful, nationalistic and patriotic young ladies, we should also use this moment to plan for this country and – (Member timed out_)

5.23
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, PWD Representative, Western): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the mover of this motion to pay tribute to our young girls who perished in the road accident.

For some time now, there have been complaints that accidents on this Masaka-Kampala highway are normally rampant during the rainy season, implying that the quality of work on that road was wanting. I wish to support a colleague who suggested that there should be a proper investigation by UNRA to see whether the quality of that road can guarantee the safety of road users.

Secondly, this is a very important road if we are to promote tourism because it leads to Queen Elizabeth National Park and the Mgahinga mountains where the famous gorilla is tracked. It also leads to Lake Mburo National Park and Mountain Rwenzori, which is at the border with DRC. Therefore, this is a very important road for which we must ensure that there is safety for road users.

Promoting tourism involves a lot of components including among others, good hotels and roads. It would be counterproductive for our struggle, as Government, to have tourism promoted if we cannot improve on the infrastructure. 

It is therefore absolutely necessary that the Ministry of Works and Transport goes and revisits already constructed roads and those under construction to see whether they adhere to the specifications and standards as required. Otherwise, if the carnage on these roads increases, it will threaten tourists, both local and foreign, because their lives would be in jeopardy.

The country has lost and the families of the deceased have lost these young girls in whose education they had invested. This is very sad but we know that accidents are a natural phenomenon and what is important is to put methods of minimising them. I would suggest that since we are in the final processes of East African Community integration and the Kampala-Masaka road is a very important road for our integration because it goes as far as Rwanda, DRC and Burundi, it is therefore not strategic - (Member timed out_)

2.27
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I thank you. I send my condolences and pay my tribute to the families of the deceased.

Mr Speaker, it so happened that on that day, hon. Medard Sseggona and I were travelling on the same road and we were at the scene of the accident four or five minutes after it had occurred. It was a horrible scene and this tells a story that can befall any of us, especially as we travel during this period and at high speed.

I was told that the actual cause of the accident was a truck driver trying to overtake. Since the driver of this car was trying to avoid a head-on collision with the incoming car, he swerved into the swamp.

What makes it so terrible is the capacity of our Police to respond. They hardly have any equipment whatsoever to help in such a situation. The wananchi were virtually using their bare hands to get these young ladies out of the swamp. This accident happened about eight to 10 kilometres from Mpigi Police Post, which is a major regional police headquarters. However, they hardly had a vehicle to help in these circumstances and there was no ambulance. It was terrible to see naked young people - It was a terrible sight to witness.

In every ministerial statement, we have been making calls to equip our police with facilities to handle bodies decently like body bags but to no avail. People are loaded onto these pick-ups as if they are logs. It is terrible and it is a scene that I do not want to ever see again. My plea is, in our next Budget, those who will be lucky to be here should ensure that we equip Police with facilities to help.

In addition, sometimes we condemn the traffic Police but this vehicle was carrying more people than it was supposed to carry. We are also not sure whether this driver was well trained. There are all these other issues on our roads. 

Masaka road is a very narrow road and one finds it hard to drive on it. The bend where these children died is at the point where you are coming from a steep slope and going into a very narrow bend. This is not the first accident that I have seen on that spot; it is a dangerous spot. This is the same road where we have lost so many people. Therefore, those who are working on the road design should think again. There is also a section of the road that borders a swamp but does not have the necessary protection. 

I normally use the Northern by-pass, which is a poorly constructed road and there have been similar accidents. When you come off the fly-over at Bwaise, you go down without any protection    - (Interruption) 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable member. Mr Speaker, I use that road more often than some members here. We have the Katonga Bridge and before this road was repaired, Katonga Bridge had only one way and they put a division in the middle of the bridge. Hon. Ssempijja is my fellow Member from Kalungu. However, there is no sign to show that you are nearing Katonga Bridge and that there is a division. Vehicles bump each other there yet initially, it was a good idea. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, there is also a problem with advertisers who have become a menace because they are obstructing all the signs on our roads. You will find billboards all over the place as if there is nobody to manage where to put an advert. You find that where there is supposed to be a speed limit, there is a huge advert. 

I have ever been in marketing and those spots are designed in such a way that they can attract everybody. That is why advertisers are also putting their billboards there. Can we have all those billboards pulled off our roads so that those that are replaced are in accordance with the rules and regulations that govern traffic? Otherwise, all of us are potential causalities – (Interruption) 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, honourable member. I just want to give you information that, that very spot where the journalists had an accident is the same spot where I had an accident. When I got that accident, many people were saying that it is a black spot, including the boda boda men and the Police officers who rescued me. However, up to now, that place has never been in the limelight. I think UNRA needs to come up and clearly put up road signs to show that it is a black spot. Many people have lost their lives on that specific place. Thank you.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, as I conclude, how does the ministry take care of these people once they become ambassadors? They become national assets and you must ensure that they travel safely and that the vehicles are road worthy. Many of these second-hand vehicles we buy from Japan without adequate road tests are a menace. To put national assets in such vehicles causes problems. Therefore, can the concerned ministry use this accident to do the needful on all those issues I have raised including advertising, road signs and those bad spots? Thank you.

5.34
MS RONAH NINSIIMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I also take this opportunity to support the motion and to thank Parliament that found it fit to take off time to pay tribute to these young girls.

On 27 June this year, these girls were in Kabale to look for Miss Kigezi 2015 and I would like to add the following observations: The minister revealed that she was not getting a lot of support and that she was using her personal resources in this activity because this is an activity recognised by the world. The young girls were looking forward to that moment when we would host the Miss World competitions that are due this year. I realised that they were depending on good Samaritans for support because I remember that even the Shs 1.5 million that was given to the best and the Shs 500,000 that was given to the two girls who were runners up was fundraised at the venue.

This shows how much these girls had been sacrificing for this activity. I think that if Government had been giving a lot of support to it and possibly given a minimum of a car with fuel for such people whenever they were coming for these competitions, perhaps they would not have congested themselves in this Prado that took their lives.

I therefore wish to pray that Government thinks about this activity as a serious one and tries to support it. Since tourism is benefiting this country, Government should try to support this competition because it is meant to boost tourism so that the minister does not have to break or keep kneeling for people to always support such events. 

I pray that Government also makes an effort, since these girls earn peanuts for this activity, to stand with the families and give something small so that maybe it can console them because it is really unfortunate.

Mr Speaker, I would like to talk about the issue of road accidents again and say that as Parliament, we need to boost the budget of the health sector, specifically for hospitals that are along - (Member timed out_)

5.37
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kyegegwa and on behalf of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and industry, I would like to condole with the bereaved families and communities and this honourable Parliament. I would like also to pray that those who are still in hospital get well very soon because much as we lost the three, the others are still ailing and some of them are in hospital.

Mr Speaker, the Miss Tourism event, in principle, had no harm and it has no harm. I would like to really appreciate the honourable members who appreciate that it is intended to vibrate people tourism because among the products of tourism that we usually market in this country, we even market the people of Uganda. They look so different from those of other countries and we always want to market them as a product and to also interest the younger generation into knowing, understanding and appreciating this so that they can market the other tourism products.

The one we experienced last year was fun and we really attracted a lot of tourists following that Miss Tourism pageant and this is intended to grow the tourism industry.

Mr Speaker, when we orient the younger generation into marketing and appreciating tourism products, we actually want to inculcate tourism as a culture and not necessarily as a sermon. This is because it is through domestic tourism that all of us will speak when we are not guilty. I wonder how many of us really take off time to know what products of tourism we have to offer so that we market them. Much as most of us go out of this country, we never carry any tourism product to sell the tourism in our country.

Mr Speaker, I have heard a lot of questions that we are asking ourselves - all of us in the House who have spoken - about the infrastructure, about why there were eight people in the car, about why there was no lead car and about all that could have happened. 

Mr Speaker, we budgeted that the Uganda Wildlife Authority and the Uganda Tourism Board should procure tourism cars that are spacious, strong and that are going to be managed by the Ministry of Tourism. However, the Uganda Tourism Association was up in arms thinking that these cars were meant to compete with them in the tourism industry. Mr Speaker, this comes to assure them that we really need these cars so that the ministry manages them to transport people more safely than before. 

About the Budget support, it is time that we, as Government, really look at this third biggest - (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we have a Bill that is coming next and there are people who have come from afar to listen to the debate on the general principles of the Bill. We will bring this matter to a close to allow the Bill to be brought.

Honourable members, I now put the question to this motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to Miss Tourism ambassadors who died in a road accident. The names are: Norah Atim, Resty Namawejje and Barbra Nakiwolo. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and greed to.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE TOBACCO CONTROL BILL, 2014

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is a private members’ Bill and I have received notification that the honourable member for Sheema District will be the one steering this Bill.

5.42
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Tobacco Control Bill, 2014” be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Seconded by Iganga, Moyo West, Buikwe, Ayivu, Ibanda and Nakasongola. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Uganda signed and ratified the World Health Organisation Framework and Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC) in 2005 and 2007 respectively and is obliged to have domesticated the treaty by the end of 2012, five years after the ratification.

The World Health Organisation (FCTC) is an evidence based treaty that reaffirms the right of all people to the highest standards of health. It is a legally binding global treaty that provides the foundation for countries to implement and manage tobacco control to address the growing tobacco epidemic.

In the 1995 Constitution, the Republic of Uganda guarantees the right to health, a clean environment and life. According to World Health Organisation, a comprehensive tobacco control legislation is known to protect and promote public health. 

Mr Speaker, the Government of Uganda has an obligation to protect its citizens and there is no Government that is interested in seeing her people die. Hence, it is the responsibility of Government to come up with laws and policies that protect its citizens.

Mr Speaker, scientific evidence of public health problems associated with tobacco use are not contested even by the tobacco industry itself. Tobacco use is the single most preventable cause of death among adults. It is a significant risk factor for several diseases and a major contributor to global mortality.

Tobacco epidemic kills nearly six million people worldwide each year, of whom 600,000 are non-smokers exposed to second hand smoking.

Mr Speaker, the tobacco related impact is very enormous. As we speak, its related non-communicable diseases includes: cancer, diabetes and hypertension. Therefore, when you look at the cost that the country injects in treating these cancers and generally the non-communicable diseases, it is costing the health sector a lot and yet the investment is very low in tobacco.

Mr Speaker, all smokers start as children or young adults and these groups are heavily targeted by the tobacco industry. When young people start smoking early, it means that by the time they reach adulthood, the impact of these diseases that I have talked about, especially cancer, is more likely to happen to them. That means that the government is likely to lose the young people who are supposed to be contributing to the development of the country.

Secondly, treating cancers at that age means that the country will spend more income on treating cancers, diabetes and hypertension rather than investing that money in other development-related issues.

Mr Speaker, tobacco is harmful and is a risk factor to many diseases, especially non-communicable diseases. The money earned from tobacco is far less than what is needed to treat its victims, leave alone the social costs and premature deaths. The time is now for comprehensive legislation to regulate and control the consumption of tobacco to protect both current and future generations from the devastating effects of tobacco.

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform Parliament that we are talking about tobacco control. Many people outside have been alleging that the Bill is intended to ban tobacco growing. I would like to salute the Government of Uganda for going an extra mile to consider other crops to be grown in the regions that have been concentrating on tobacco growing. 

As we speak, through “Operation Wealth Creation”, many alternative crops have been extended even to areas that have been growing tobacco in order to reduce on the dangers that are associated with tobacco consumption.

When we look at the social factors, children are engaged in child labour, especially during tobacco growing. It engages all of them throughout the year, of course without mentioning the women.

Therefore, it is upon us, as Parliament, to look at the health issues that are affecting our generation; the children and other Ugandans in general that are within our mandate to control. Tobacco smoking, especially cigarettes in public places, does not actually only affect the smoker himself or herself but also the person who is in the neighbourhood. This means that the non-intended smoker is likely to get those diseases not knowing that he/she is being killed by the tobacco smoker.

Mr Speaker, we are talking about cigarettes but there are new products that have come on board in our country Uganda that are actually killing our young generation like Shisha. You all know Shisha, which is steamed in pipes. Young girls and boys take it thinking that one is cool to inhale that kind of smoke that they enjoy. However, it kills more than the tobacco that we are talking about.

Mr Speaker, as a country, if we do not legislate to protect our young children and country, we are likely to see more cancers wiping out our nation; our people and children and more so, our young girls and boys getting addicted to those so-called tobacco products.

The packaging is so smart that you do not even realise that other chemicals are put within those products and they are more dangerous than tobacco and research has shown this. Therefore, I would like to call upon Parliament to unanimously support the Tobacco Control Bill, 2014. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when this Bill was brought, it was referred to the Committee on Health. It has examined the Bill and is ready to report on the general principles of the Bill at this stage of the motion for second reading.

Honourable members, I would propose the question for debate so that we can receive the report. The motion is that the Tobacco Control Bill, 2014 be read for the second time. Can we receive the report from the chairperson? You have 10 minutes.

5.51
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Medard Bitekyerezo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Tobacco Control Bill, 2014 was read for the first time on 6 March, 2015 and referred to our Committee on Health in accordance with Rules 117 and 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament for scrutiny.

Mr Speaker, in scrutinising the Bill, the committee was guided by Rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and hereby presents its findings and recommendations.

However, before I go any further, let me salute my colleague, hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi who was our active member but is now a very wonderful minister in the Ministry of Health, for bringing this Bill.

Before I present, Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the proceedings of the meetings we had with people in West Nile, western Uganda and northern Uganda who grow tobacco extensively.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, for purposes of exciting you and Members of Parliament, let me lay on the Table one of the samples of an electronic cigarette that we got on the market in Uganda, which you can put in a car as if you are going to charge a phone. You fix your e-cigarette, smoke seriously and die properly. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table one of the samples of an e-cigarette.

We had a variety of public hearings in the precincts of the Parliament and in the field, especially tobacco growing areas. 

The committee received views from the following stakeholders: We got the views of hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi, who is the mover of the Bill. We had meetings with the Minister of State for Health in charge of Primary Healthcare who is seated behind me. We had meetings with the Minister of State for Trade and Investments and the Commissioner in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

We also had meetings with the Civil Society Coalition on Tobacco Control; the Director, Uganda Cancer Institute; Centre for Tobacco Control in Africa; Uganda National Academy for Sciences; tobacco industry players including BAT, Mastermind, Green Leaf Tobacco Company (U) Ltd; Uganda Law Society; Kampala City Traders Association (KACITA); National Environment Management Authority; and Family Life Network.

We also met the leadership of tobacco farmers in Kihiihi, Kanungu District where the mover of the Bill comes from as well as leaders of tobacco farmers in Hoima and Kibaale in Bunyoro sub-region plus tobacco farmers in Kole and Arua districts. We even had benchmarking in Kenya and we also scrutinised the Bill clause by clause.

Mr Speaker, I wanted to talk about the concerns raised by very many people about this Bill. Public health advocates are saying that tobacco use remains one of the major health challenges of our time. Tobacco smoke exposure causes disease and death. This is something very strange, Mr Speaker. Those who smoke affect those who do not smoke even more. In other words, if you are staying with a smoker in a house, you are more in danger than the one who is smoking. In other words, smokers are killing those who do not smoke. 

Mr Speaker, there is no safe level of tobacco smoke exposure as reported by the World Health Organisation Agency for Research on Cancer, 2009. That is on page 7 of this report.

Mr Speaker, when we went to the economists, they said that tobacco earns Uganda about $75 million, which was received as export revenue in 2013. However, the cost of treating cancer patients in Mulago Cancer Institute is more than the revenue we get from tobacco.

I would like to go to the general observations of the Committee on Health. Mr Speaker, on page 14, the purpose of the Bill is to introduce public health legislation that aims at protecting citizens from the direct and indirect effects of tobacco use. As such, the Bill contains a number of measures meant to discourage smoking and to make smoking undesirable. 

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that the continuous use of tobacco products increases the risk of various cancers, with up to 75 per cent of lung cancer cases being attributed to it nationally. Other cancers that are linked to tobacco use include: 
Cancer of the mouth 
Cancer of the lips 
Cancer of the Nose and sinuses 
Cancer of the larynx; that is the voice box 
Cancer of the pharynx; that is the throat 
Cancer of the oesophagus; that is the swallowing tube 
Cancer of the stomach 
Cancer of the pancreas 
Cancer of the kidney 
Cancer of the bladder 
Cancer of the cervix and almost even acute mild Leukaemia cancer, which is the cancer of the bone marrow.

Mr Speaker, how do we deal with the current smokers? To deal with the current smokers, the committee observed that the Bill needs to provide for:

Rehabilitation programmes to support cessation of smoking.
Massive education in sensitisation programmes on the dangers of tobacco use in this country.
Providing strict laws and punitive measures to stop active smokers from deliberately affecting non-smokers. 

Specific observations and recommendations:

In the Bill, there was an issue of formulation of the Tobacco Control Committee. The committee observed that the Tobacco Control Committee, as proposed in clause 3, is too large. Some of the organisations to be represented are not directly linked to the activities of the Tobacco Control Committee, which include the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and others.

Mr Speaker, on page 16, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should be responsible for implementation of the law and not the Office of the Prime Minister. Specifically, the Tobacco Control Committee should be headed by the Director General of Health Services.

In addition, the number of members of the Tobacco Control Committee should be reduced to nine members, which is a reasonable number, Mr Speaker.

On page 17: Prohibition of Smoking in Public Places, Work Places and Means of Transport

Mr Speaker, you have visited a variety of hotels and if you just smell the smoke of a cigarette, it means that you are getting affected. The Bill provides that a person shall not smoke in any outdoor space within 100 metres of a public or work place, means of public transport or any other place that provides services primarily to a minor.

The committee also observes that a distance of 100 metres is unrealistic because in most urban places like Kampala, the distance between buildings is less than that. The committee notes that 50 metres is more practical. Therefore, the committee recommends that smoking should be prohibited within 50 metres of public places and work places.

Mr Speaker, I want to go to the issue of water pipe tobacco delivery system, the so-called shisha in Uganda. The committee was concerned about the increasing health effects of a newly engineered flavoured tobacco product through a water pipe that is called shisha that is currently very popular among the youth in Ugandan hotels. The product is scientifically proven to be even more dangerous than cigarette consumption.

The committee recommends a total ban on the importation, manufacture, distribution, possession, use, sale or offer for sale of the water pipe tobacco delivery system and all flavoured tobacco products including kuba, which I had brought in this Parliament, Mr Speaker.

Still on page 17: Comprehensive Ban on Tobacco Advertising, Promotion and Sponsorship

Mr Speaker, Clause 13 of the Bill bans all forms and means of tobacco advertising, promotion or sponsorship. The committee observes that there may be a statutory requirement for companies to make public some information, which could easily be construed to be an advert.

Therefore, the committee recommends that the Bill should leave room to cater for a situation where companies may be required to make public some information- (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, summarise now.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I am almost finishing. 

Packaging and Labelling of Tobacco Products

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that text and pictures comprising of health warnings or measures should occupy not less than 50 per cent of each principle display area of the end package, packet of tobacco products or outside packaging-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, what you are recommending is what is going to be dealt with at Committee Stage. Can you deal with a summary of the principles?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the Bill, under Clause 16, should cover persons below 18 years of age. We want to make sure that this Bill tackles people who are below 18 years of age because the Constitution cannot allow us to stop people who are above 21 years of age.

On the issue of repealing of the Tobacco Control and Marketing Act, the committee is concerned that the Bill proposes that the Control and Marketing Act, Cap 35 be repealed with the coming into force of the Tobacco Control Act yet the latter does not cover the growing and only covers some areas of marketing of tobacco. 

If the Tobacco Control and Marketing Act, Cap 35 is repealed, it would create a vacuum in the area of growing and marketing of tobacco. The committee is recommending that the Tobacco Control and Marketing Act, Cap C(5) be saved in as far as it does not contradict the provisions of the Tobacco Control Bill.

In conclusion, the Committee on Health is kindly requesting this noble Parliament of Uganda to uphold the objects of this Tobacco Control Bill, 2014 to protect present and future generations from the devastating health, social, economic and environmental consequences of tobacco use and exposure in our country.

Secondly, we want you to help us to regulate the manufacture, sale, labelling, promotion, advertising, distribution, public use of tobacco products and sponsorship of tobacco products in order to inter alia, protect the health of the population in light of conclusive scientific evidence demonstrating the debilitating effects of tobacco use and exposure, including disability and death.

Mr Speaker, we are requesting you to ensure that Uganda meets her obligations to promote health and other human rights spelt out in the World Health Organisation Framework on Convention of Tobacco Control, a convention to which Uganda is a signatory.

Mr Speaker, I beg to report and thank you very much. For God and my country. I beg to lay on the Table the actual report with real signatures of Members of the Committee of Health. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you. Honourable members, this Bill has 49 clauses and only six clauses are not amended. All the other 43 clauses have amendments and the amendments are almost bigger than the Bill. Therefore, we are going to take a lot of time at the Committee Stage in processing this Bill and there will be a lot of debate because it is basically rewriting the Bill, from what I have seen.

The motion that I now propose for your debate, which I have done but will do again, is that the Bill entitled, “The Tobacco Control Bill, 2014” be read the second time. That is the motion for your debate and debate starts on Tuesday. (Laughter) House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.04 p.m. and was adjourned until Tuesday, 14 July 2015 at 2.00 p.m.) 

