Friday, 8 July 2011

Parliament met at 10.18 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this morning’s sitting. I have three items of communication. 

One is that in view of the terror threats, we are requesting Members not to park on the pavement around Parliament. From Monday next week, we are making alternative arrangements for where to park because the cars around Parliament can be used to injure Members. 

Secondly, we require the Members to introduce their assistants and drivers to the Public Relations Office so that we know who is accessing you. They will be issued with cards so that we know who is around you, just for your protection. 

The third one is that His Excellency, the President has invited all the Members of Parliament to a three-day retreat that will take place on the 16th, 17th and 18th July. On 16th, you will visit model farmers in Kiruhura District. On the 17th, you will spend the day at the St Jude Rural Training Institute, Masaka. That is the farm of Mrs Kizza at Kabonera. On 18th, you will have a dialogue with him at State House, Entebbe. Other final arrangements will be given to you. I just wanted to tell you in time so that you free that weekend. All Members are invited. 

Hon. Members, 11th July will be World Population Day.  Our population forum of the House would like to make a small presentation so that you know what is happening before you go on Monday.  

10.18
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): In this Parliament, we have a forum on food security, population and development; which was active in the last Parliament. We are yet to have a meeting on the 20th of this month to mobilise all Members on issues of population and fully establish it in the Ninth Parliament. I have been working as the chairperson of that forum.

Every year on July 11th, the world commemorates the World Population Day. Uganda has been one of the countries that take the issue of population, particularly population growth, seriously. We also participate in observing this day. 

As the technicians set the equipment, I will use the opportunity to inform the Members that this year’s celebrations will be held in Kayunga on Monday, 11th July. Parliament has been invited by Government, particularly the Population Secretariat in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which is responsible for coordinating population activities in this country. Our forum has organised transport. Vehicles will be leaving Parliament at 8.00 a.m. We thought that as Parliament, we can show our commitment and support for the issue of population. 

The theme for this year’s World Population Day is “Uganda at 33 million people: Time to act.”  I am going to take you through a very brief presentation on the trends of population in this country and also pose a question for you to reflect on the population growth rate, which is quite alarming, so that we mobilise Parliament to address that question. 

What do we need to do to address the question of population? This presentation will also set the stage for the minister of trade to come up and tell us about the economy.

(A Power Point presentation was made.)

The technician will help me with the slides. My presentation is going to look at Uganda’s population trends, the challenges and the opportunities. 

Particularly, I am going to focus on the population factors and national development because we have objectives, and we have goals. How shall we attain them in light of the population growth, which is quite alarming as I will be showing you in the next slide?

We are saying that despite notable progress, Uganda remains among the poorest countries in the world. We appreciate that progress has been achieved in fighting poverty and transforming the country; but when you rank Uganda with the rest of the countries in the world, we are still among the poorest. When you look at the development plan this country has prepared, we have a vision which says, “A transformed Ugandan society from a peasant to a modern and prosperous country within 30 years.” That is the vision, which all of us share and Parliament is part of that vision. In the next 30 years, we need to transform this country from a peasant to a modern and prosperous country.

The argument I am going to make today is how we shall attain that, given the unsustainable population growth rate we are witnessing in this country.   

When we look at the demographic features of this country; like I said today, we are marking a population of 33 million Ugandans. Our population growth rate is estimated at about 3.4 percent per annum. This is very high by any standards. When you compute, it gives you a doubling time of about 21 years; meaning that at that population growth rate, the population doubles every 20 to 21 years. That is an issue –(Interruption)

MR MUGEMA: The chamber is too cold, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I will ask the Sergeant-at-Arms to adjust the AC just a little.  
 
DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Body temperatures are also a population issue. I was saying that at the current annual population growth rate, we double every 21 years. That should be an issue of concern for all of us.

The HIV prevalence is estimated at 6.4 percent. Although we have achieved a decline over the years; recent data shows that the prevalence rate seems to be going up especially in parts of Northern Uganda and some other parts of central Uganda. Therefore, the achievements in HIV/AIDS need to be rethought. 

Our infant mortality rate, which is the measure of infants who are born alive but do not celebrate their first birthday, is estimated at 76 deaths per 1,000. The under-five mortality is at 157. Maternal mortality ratio, which is a measure of the mothers who die as a result of pregnancy and childbirth related complications, is at 435 per 100,000. This translates to 16 women dying every day because of pregnancy or childbirth related complications in Uganda, and all of us must be concerned.

The life expectancy is about 50 years; meaning that a child whom you give birth to today is expected to live for only 50 years. There are other indicators, which I have not shown but generally the picture is bleak. We have what we call the unmet needs for family planning, which means, the women who would want to use family planning services but are not accessing them, and that is at 41 percent. This shows that we still have a lot of work to do. 

The question which we are posing is: what is the importance of population factors to the ability of Uganda to achieve its national vision in the coming decade? That graph shows you the trend at which the population of Uganda is growing. In 1900, our population was about 2 million. Today, we are 33 million. If we do not do much about this, we are going to see a rise to the extent that in 2050, we estimate to have a population of 130 million Ugandans and yet the size of Uganda is not going to expand. It will be the same Uganda and this population will need services and resources. This trend must worry everybody in this country and something has to be done. 

What is driving this population growth is the fertility rate. There are three factors which are responsible for population change: fertility, which means giving birth; migration, meaning movement of people; and mortality. However, in Uganda, what is driving the high population growth rates is fertility. Recent studies show that Ugandan women produce about 6.7 children in their reproductive lifetime. That means that Ugandan women are extremely fertile. This is a national average. But if you look at rural and urban differentials, in some of your constituencies, the fertility can go as high as nine to ten children. This, however, is a weighted average. It is this fertility rate which the country must deal with.

When you look at the comparative figures, Uganda’s fertility rate is 6.7; Zambia 6.2; Rwanda 6.1; Malawi 6; Tanzania 5.7; Kenya 4.6. Again we take the trophy, in terms of fertility, when you compare with the neighbouring countries. This is not good news for some of us who feel that population growth must be checked. 

The structure of our population is in form of a pyramid, as you can see on that slide. It shows you that the majority of Ugandans are children or young people. About half of the population is under 15 years. And probably, Madam Speaker, you are not surprised that even when you look at the age of parliamentarians, most of us are young people. So, we truly represent the Ugandan population because it is largely young and this poses challenges, which we intend to show you.

We worked with the Population Secretariat and the Population Reference Bureau based in the United States to look at different scenarios. We built two scenarios likely to happen to Uganda. Fertility might remain high with a slight but insignificant decline from 6.7 to 6 or we can take action as a country and the fertility rate declines. We looked at a period of 30 years. If we take the year 2007 up to 2037, and we make serious interventions to reduce fertility, it can reduce from 6.7 to 2.2 but if we do not take action, given the way we are proceeding, fertility might remain high.

We built those two scenarios controlling mortality and migration. I just want to briefly show you what that will mean it terms of what we need to do as a country. 

Like I had earlier on shown, our population is set to increase. There is already a population momentum because our population is young. By 2037, we project the population to rise to about 88 million.

If we take action and the fertility rate declines, the population will still increase but the total population in 30 years will be about 62 million instead of 88 million. What that means is that whether we promote family planning or not; whether we see a fertility decline or not, the population of Uganda is going to increase because there is already a population momentum. Even if each couple decided to produce only one child, still the population will increase because of the huge base of the young people in this country. 

Two major messages that we want to put across are:
1.	A slower population growth rate creates the potential to increase the pace of aggregate economic growth. If we are going to achieve sustainable economic growth, then we must slow down the rate at which the population is growing. And there is evidence from many countries to show this.

2.	Rapid fertility decline helps create a path out of poverty for many families. In other words, we are not going to achieve poverty eradication unless we address the question of population. That is why even when the figures on poverty show that there has been a decline over time, because of the increase in the population, the human population that is in poverty is increasing. When you carry out a head count, those who are poor continue increasing. You cannot, therefore, visibly see the poverty reduction in our communities because of this challenge of population growth.

Some of the countries that we admire are the Asian countries who about 30 to 40 years ago were in the situation that we are now but have been able to transform to middle income status. 

Let me use the example of Thailand. Thailand emerged as a middle income country in a single generation of 30 years. When you look at the statistics of Thailand, in 1960, it was at the level that Uganda is today with a GDP of about US $317 per capita. From 1960 to 1990, its GDP increased to US $1,462 and it was able to make a mark into middle income status within 30 years. 

One of the cardinal features about the population of Thailand was that the fertility rate moved from high to low levels. In other words, it followed the other scenario that I showed you that we can reduce fertility from high to low levels. From 1960 to 1990, the fertility rate in Thailand fell from 6.4 to 2.2 and this is also possible in Uganda. 

In Thailand, there was greater emphasis on the quality of the population rather than sheer numbers. Two, there was investment in the education of the population. Three, there was investment in modern agriculture. Four, there were higher levels of savings and investment with lower dependency ratios. But also most importantly, there was a vigorous campaign to promote family planning in the population of Thailand. 

And like our vision says, as a country, we also aspire to become a strong middle income economy in Africa. But we also know that the population affects education, health, agriculture, the environment, the economy and urbanisation.

When you look at some of the projections, which have been drawn, they show that if the population growth continues rising the way it is doing today, the effect it will have on those sectors and others is actually quite alarming. The number of classrooms we have to construct, the number of doctors we must recruit, the food production that is required to match the population growth is a huge challenge but because of time I will not go into some of those statistics. However, let me use just one element and I conclude. 

Like I have cited, if the fertility continues growing, we are going to be at around 88 million in 30 years. If the fertility declines, the population will rise to 52 million. So, either way the population has to rise. 

However, we have built scenarios looking at the economy and happily we are going to discuss the economy after this. If we assume that the GDP per capita is going to grow at 6 percent per annum for the next 30 years, then we are not going to reach the middle income status as a country. You have heard people saying that by 2015 or 2017 we shall be a middle income country. But at the current population growth rate, if the economy grows at 6 percent then you will not be so in the next 30 years. You can look at this line demonstrating the middle income status. We shall not. Whether fertility declines or not, if the economy is at 6 percent then we shall not transform into a middle income status. 

If the economy grows at 7 percent per annum in the next 30 years, sustained, then it is only if the fertility declines and we follow the scenario of a fertility decline that in 2037 we shall be able to attain the middle income status. If we follow the trend where the fertility is not declining - the red bars - then even by 2037 we shall not be a middle income country. Therefore, our attainment of a middle income status will largely depend on how the economy grows but also on how we address the question of the population.

If you assume that in the next 30 years the economy is going to grow at a GDP per capita of 10 percent sustained across, then we shall be able, whether the fertility declines or not, to transform into a middle income country by 2027. That is if the economy grows at 10 percent. So, whether the fertility declines or not, in 2027 we shall be a middle income country.

We have not factored in issues of oil and others but this shows you that we must be very strong on the issue of economic growth but also address the question of the population if we are going to transform and realise our vision as stated in the National Development Plan.

The last slide is basically asking: what do we need to do? One is that we need sustained commitment of the leadership of this country to the question of population, the question of family planning and the question of sexual and reproductive health. To tame this rising population growth rate we need commitment of leaders including this Parliament - from the President to Parliament - and all the leaders at all levels must be committed to this cause. 

Secondly, we must plan for this increasing population because whether the fertility declines or not, the population is going to increase and, therefore, we must plan for this population. 

Three, we must develop the human capital. What we mean is that already we have a population and we must invest in the skills, the capacity, the competencies of this young population, the many young people in this country, so that they are skilled and able to engage in productive activities for them to turn the population into an asset.

Then also we have to think of infrastructure requirements because as the population increases, you must have hospitals, roads and schools. You must have the infrastructure in order to provide services for this increasing population. You even have to construct prisons because as the population increases especially in urban areas, crime also increases. So, we must plan and put the infrastructure in place in order to accommodate this increasing and surging population in the country.

We must also increase funding to some of these critical areas but also ensure that the funding is efficiently used so that the money that we put to these services is actually invested and spent on the right activities. 

We must also look at improved quality and access to affordable services, including family planning. Like I noted earlier on, Ugandans are not accessing quality services, including family planning. Our figures show that 41 percent of the women who have already made the decision to use family planning are not accessing services and it is also true for other various services, which are required. 

Therefore, I want to request this Parliament to show its commitment to the question of population so that as a Parliament, we are able to do our part in terms of making the right laws, appropriating the budget to the right areas but also providing oversight to the Executive to ensure that these issues are addressed in order for us to attain a sustainable population growth so that our population can be of high quality. 

We invite you to Kayunga on Monday where Uganda will be marking and observing the World Population Day so that you get more information on some of these issues for Parliament to remain committed to do what it should do to address the question of population growth. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Baryomunsi and the population forum. Hon. Members, that information was intended to enlighten you before we go for the World Population Day on Monday. In the Eighth Parliament we had a fully fledged debate on this matter, so I would want that we listen to the message on Monday and then I will appoint a day for debate when you have listened to Government and to the population forum. Thank you very much. 

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

10.46
MRS BEATRICE BARUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this golden opportunity to give a personal explanation. On Tuesday this week, I took my daughter to Entebbe Airport but I could not wait for her to even board the plane. I hurried back because I knew one of the items on the Order Paper concerned me because I was a nominee for the Pan African Parliament. When I arrived here, immediately I entered this building, everybody was concerned, including the staff of Parliament, and the security people. Everybody was asking what was happening to me and that what my colleague had said about me on the Floor of Parliament was terrible. I want to thank God for the courage because when I got the Hansard later, I could have died but I want to thank you for your support and I thank God because He is always there for us.

According to our Rules of Procedure, once the item is no longer on the Floor, you have no opportunity to talk about it. However, I thank you, Madam Speaker for allowing me today to give this explanation.

While this House was in session, hon. Odonga Otto shot up with rage and anger – according to what I saw in the Hansard and started lambasting me and assaulting my person notwithstanding that courtesy would have ordinarily demanded that my person should not have been debated in my absence. Hon. Odonga Otto is not a member of the NRM family in Parliament and as a matter of fact, however much disaffection he has in store for me, he acted in a manner unbefitting of our parliamentary etiquette and practice and constituting himself into a microphone for a section of some colleagues, Members of Parliament, who for one reason or another may have been opposed to my candidature without saying so in the open. 

According to hon. Odonga Otto, my candidature should have been withdrawn in national interest and my political party, NRM, should have got somebody else.

Madam Speaker, permit me to remind hon. Odonga Otto that the business of this House is conducted in ways which include but are not limited to: caucusing, lobbying, committee participation, representation of Parliament in fora abroad and overseas, open debate on the Floor of Parliament, mobilisation of constituents, and others. In all these ways of parliamentary participation, I have been true to my oath of allegiance to the satisfaction of my country, my party, my President and my constituency. No wonder, I was returned to the Ninth Parliament unopposed. I have represented my country in the AU summit, Ghana, Denmark – where I went with you, Madam Speaker, you remember very well. Even though I was an Independent, I stood for my country and defended the 2006 elections when we found a report there which said that elections had been fraudulent. I was not speaking in Runyakitara, I was articulate. Therefore, I think my colleague is mistaken.

If reasonable debate on the Floor of Parliament, according to Hon. Odonga Otto, is measured according to the level of venom one spits, I can sincerely say that I am sorry I have not met hon. Otto’s marking scheme and do not wish to meet such. I want to confirm and assure this august House that I have stood up on several occasions to defend my party, my people and my country and my record on the Hansard is clear. 

That the elections did not take place in the NRM caucus, allow me to say that the caucus of the NRM, my political organisation, convened on 16 June 2011 for purposes of electing commissioners, NRM caucus executive and four NRM representatives to the Pan African Parliament. The NRM Parliamentary Caucus as guided by the culture of this honourable House according to the rules which were made in the first multi-party Parliament – which was the Eighth Parliament - regarding the nomination and election of Members of Parliament to the Pan African Parliament under the chairmanship of the Government Chief Whip and NRM Electoral Commission, called for nominations. I was nominated and seconded by colleague Members of Parliament of NRM. After my nomination and secondment, no other nominations came forth, for which reason I was declared unopposed - a clear indication of the confidence and trust the NRM family has in me. 

Madam Speaker, composure should not be understood by Members as a sign of unfitness; not at all! Hon. Otto has to talk and insult because first of all, he is in the Opposition, but I think even opposing all the time is also wrong. In the Bible, in the book of Numbers, Balak sent Balaam to go and curse the Israelites but God told Balaam to bless them instead. Balaam went back to Balak and told him, “How can I curse a person who is blessed by God?” I want to tell you, hon. Otto, and your sponsors, you better take a different route; I am protected by God because I never scheme for other people’s downfall. And I think my character is very clear in this Parliament. I have been here and this is my sixth year but I have never been happy that somebody has had a problem. We can come here, represent our people, debate, caucus, and lobby for our constituents but I think it is absurd to do what my colleague is doing.

Lastly, as a mother and a Christian, I forgive hon. Otto -(Applause)– for attacking my character and I also forgive – because he acted as a microphone – those who hired him. May God transform our young legislator and make him a better person. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, under our Rules of Procedure, this personal explanation does not attract debate. She was just explaining her sadness. So, let us move to the next item.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

10.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and hon. colleagues, I have four sets of papers I would like to lay on the Table; 
1.	The Cotton Development Organisation financial statement for the year ended 31 October 2010;
2.	The Uganda Nurses and Midwives Council financial statements for years ended 30 June 2006, 30 June 2007, 30n June 2008 and 30 June 2009;
3.	The conservation of  biodiversity in the Albertine rift valley forests of Uganda financial statement for the year ended 31 December, 2010; and
4.	The National Youth Council financial statements for the years ended 30 June 2007, 30 June 2008, 30 June 2009 and 30 June 2010.

Thank you.

DR EPETAIT: First of all, I would like to thank the minister for the timely laying of those four sets of papers. However, I rise in regards to set No. 2, that is, the Uganda Nurses and Midwives Council’ financial statement. I note that some of the financial statements he has laid are up to June, 2010 and others December, 2010 but for the Midwives Council, it is up to 2009.  May we find out from the minister when he hopes to bring the Nurses and Midwives Council also on board up to 2010? 

Secondly, I would like to observe that the issue of the Uganda Human Rights Commission annual report is really what we need very urgently so that we can look into matters that may require intervention of Parliament. I am saddened that whereas we expected it to have come by yesterday, today the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is again not there to do the job. I think we need to cause the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to do the needful and lay that very urgent report on the human rights of Uganda on the Table. I beg to move.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. The issue of human rights is a constitutional mandate under Article 52(2) and it reads: “The Uganda Human Rights Commission shall publish periodic reports on its findings and submit annual reports to Parliament on the state of human rights and freedoms in the country.” This is very cardinal to this Parliament and when it is taken for granted, it raises serious concerns to this House. May you please cause Government to ensure that Parliament is given this report? Matters of human rights are so cardinal that we cannot shy away from them; you can present a report on cotton development and others, but once we leave human rights unattended to, I think it will be a serious omission on the part of this House. I thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think I have done my duty. I have reflected this item for three consecutive days on the Order Paper. So, really it is not a problem of Parliament. I hope that the Attorney-General will find time to come and lay it on the Table. There is no question that it is important; that is why it is on the Order Paper. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. But if my memory serves me right, we actually get those reports from the Uganda Human Rights Commission. I think that the problem has been our own consumption of those reports, which worries me. Maybe we have to adopt an approach like the one that was adopted by the Public Accounts Committee on the backlog of the Auditor-General’s report so that we speed up the consumption of those reports and really move in a way such that we make timely interventions. Otherwise, now you hear of torture issues of 2009 and even you remember the Anti-Torture Bill was in this House and it lapsed with time. So, those matters are not really being followed up in time and we seem to be losing out. Perhaps there should be a way of hastening the process with which our Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs consumes these reports and brings them to the House for adoption on time. 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members. Let us not confuse issues. The Uganda Human Rights Commission brought me their thirtieth report and that is why I put it on the Order Paper so that it is formally committed to this House for debate. So, it is not that we are not doing our work. However, could I remind the Prime Minister that the Attorney-General or the Minister of Justice must come here formally and hand it over? 

11.05
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the problem can only be that today it had not been expected to be a special session of Parliament. As far as I know, the report is ready and I can definitely undertake that at the next sitting of Parliament, it will be presented. Thank you.
  
MR KATUNTU: There is another clarification I would wish to get from the Leader of Government Business. To my recollection, I do not remember the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs being sworn in. So, we may be here when there is no minister. And to my further recollection, actually a minister had been nominated and I think approved by the Appointments Committee but he has consequently not been sworn in. 

Madam Speaker, there is a fundamental problem, I do not have authority to speak on behalf of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs but we have a big backlog, which this House must address. Why? That committee is very busy. We have failed to get time to handle and consider a number of these reports. My view and advice is that when we constitute the rules committee, we need to look into this. We should consider constituting another committee to deal with IGG reports and maybe human rights reports, otherwise, we shall never have time to consider these reports for them to have their day on the Floor of the House. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, I think I have said it twice or thrice in this plenary that one of the first responsibilities of the rules committee would be to split some committees because I have also acknowledged that some of them are overloaded. So, it is not new.  When they start working, we are going to instruct them to look into splitting some of these committees. But can you explain to us whether we have a Minister of Justice? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, this is just to inform my good brother, the hon. Abdu Katuntu that the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the hon. Kahinda Otafiire has been dully sworn in and taken office effectively. When he is not here - first of all, I am here and secondly, the way Government works, even when the substantive minister is not in place, the duty would be performed or assigned to another minister. So, at any given time, there would be a spokesperson of that ministry. The only problem we had today was what I said before and certainly on Tuesday, this report will be presented because it is ready. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the financial statement on the Cotton Development Organisation is committed to the Committee on Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises. 

The financial statements for the Uganda Nurses and Midwives Council are committed to the Committee on Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises.

The financial statement for the conservation of biodiversity in the Albertine Rift Valley forests of Uganda is also committed to the Committee on Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises. 

The financial statement on the National Youth Council is similarly committed to the Committee on Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises. Thank you. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before we proceed, I would like you to join me in welcoming girl students and their teachers from Ibinvaz Secondary School in Iganga District. They are represented by hon. Muwuma and hon. Kabaale. They are up there. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural question although it would have warranted a point of order. I see a Member in this House ready to proceed on item No. 4 yet the hon. Member is not dressed as per our parliamentary code. I realise that hon. Ayena, seated there and ready to participate in the debate, is contravening rule 69 of our dress code which says, “Members shall dress in a dignified manner that is to say a suit, a pair of long trousers, jacket, shirt and a tie, a Kanzu and a jacket or a safari suit for male Members.”

With sadness, I realise that the hon. Member is not properly dressed in the view of Parliament. Is it procedurally right for the Member to be admitted to the House and to contribute to the debate when he is dressed in such an undignified manner not befitting this Parliament? I beg, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can the hon. Member please stand up? I think the hon. Member is dressed in a Kaunda suit. (Laughter)

11.09
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I start by offering our apologies for our inability to attend the finance committee meeting yesterday morning due to other pressing state duties.

This is a statement on the depreciation of the Uganda shilling vis-à-vis the United States dollar exchange rate. Over the past twelve months, the Uganda shilling has depreciated against the US dollar by 16 percent. Most of this depreciation has occurred over the last three months - that is 10.7 percent since March 31st of this year. Additionally, Uganda’s balance of payments has also come under pressure over the course of the last twelve months because of ongoing problems in the global economy.

The main factors driving the depreciation of the exchange rate include: 

Global Factors

At the global level, the industrial economies have suffered a severe recession since the global financial crisis erupted in 2008. Although some advances in emerging market economies are recovering from the effect of the global financial crisis, the health of some of these economies, especially those in Europe, is not good. The recovery is slow and less than desired, facing high unemployment and severe fiscal constraints, including high debt levels. For example, Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain have faced serious socio-economic challenges.

Industrialised countries are the main source of foreign exchange for the Ugandan economy including exports, remittances and foreign direct investment as well as donor inflows to governments and NGOs. The weakness in the industrialised economy has constrained the growth of our exports as well as inflows of remittances from Ugandans abroad and foreign investment.

For example, export of goods is now projected to grow by only 8.6 percent in 2010/2011 to a total of US $2,518 million while workers’ remittances are projected to grow by 8.4 percent to US $923 million.

The slow growth in export receipts is a result of constrained demand for exports since some of Uganda’s major trading partners are still recovering from the global economic crisis as discussed above.

The recent turbulence on global financial markets emanating mainly from the problems in the Euro zone has also affected the value of the Uganda shilling. Market volatility induces international portfolio investors to move out of what are perceived to be more risky assets to fulfill their debt obligations elsewhere. This affects the Ugandan exchange rate through flows of portfolio investment into and out of Uganda’s financial markets.

At a regional level, over the past three months since the end of March 2011, all the major East African currencies have suffered similar rates of depreciation against the US dollar. While the Uganda shilling depreciated as already mentioned, by 10.7 percent in this period, the Kenyan shilling depreciated by 9.5 percent and the Tanzanian shilling by 7.5 percent.

This was in addition to the depreciation that occurred in 2010 and early 2011. Depreciation in the currencies of the East African Community countries, which are our main trading partners, also puts pressure on the Uganda shilling to depreciate. Otherwise, if our shilling becomes overvalued making our exports non- competitive in the region and globally, in a flexible exchange regime like ours and indeed for many of our trading partners in the region, there is, therefore, an automatic adjustment in the exchange rate where currencies of trading partners depreciate or appreciate. This is what prevents creating permanent distortions in the export sector that can hurt the economy for a long time.

Domestic Factors 

In the domestic economy, the Uganda economy is growing fast and has rebounded from low demand in financial year 2009-2010. The Ugandan economy has been very vibrant in 2010-2011 and this has induced strong growth in demand for imports by the private sector. Because our economy depends heavily on imports for manufacturing, as well as other productions such as oil exploration and for the service sector, imports have also been growing at a high rate.

In a normal situation in an open economy like ours, this should result in increased export. However, currently Uganda’s export markets are constrained as already referred to earlier because of problems in our main markets resulting in the import bill far outstripping export receipts.

In each of the four quarters in 2009, the goods trade deficit was less than US $400 million. In the second quarter of 2010, the deficit had widened to US $578 million. In the three months; March to May 2011, the deficit had increased to nearly US $620 million.

Other sources of foreign exchange such as remittances and foreign direct investments have not been strong enough to compensate for this widening gap in the goods trade account resulting in a reduced supply of foreign exchange, including the US dollar.

Because the demand for foreign exchange to finance fast growing private imports is higher than the supply, this has resulted in the shilling depreciating against the US dollar. High international fuel prices have further pushed up Uganda’s import bill. Total oil import bill has increased from US $976 million in the second quarter of 2009, to US $200 million in the quarter ending May 2011. This is an increase of 106 percent in the import bill of all products.

Non projected government imports have also increased significantly over the last two years increasing from only about US $25 million in the second quarter of 2009 to US $137 million in the first quarter of 2011 however, declining to US $112 million in the last three months to May 2011.

Because imports have grown more rapidly than exports in 2010-2011, and what we receive in the form of remittances, FDI and external grafts is lower than what the country pays out, there is an overall shortage in the country’s foreign exchange receipts compared to what is required for the country to meet its external financial obligations.

In other words, our overall balance of payments for financial year 2010-2011 is negative. In the short term, this deficit is financed by utilising international foreign exchange reserves.

In the medium to long term, the exchange rate alignment can facilitate promotion of exports to reduce and eliminate the gap and turn the balance to an ultimately positive status as well as constraining import demand.

The Bank of Uganda’s gross foreign exchange reserves have fallen by US $470 million since the start of the 2010/11 fiscal year and stood at US $1,917 million on 27 June 2011. This is equivalent to 3.7 months worth of imports of goods and services.

This is not unique to Uganda. Many countries, as a result of the global financial crisis, used the international reserves in order to maintain financial stability to prevent a complete meltdown of their economies. The Bank of Uganda has intervened to support the shilling with net sales of US $224 million in the foreign exchange market during 2010/11 in order to minimise volatility in the exchange rate.

Measures to Stabilise the Exchange Rate

Government is fully aware of the impact of exchange rate volatility on the economy and to the cost of living of Ugandans. It is taking measures both short term and medium term to alleviate the situation.

It is important to note, however, that the solution to the structural imbalance in the external sector can only be in the medium to long term and will also depend on the recovery of global export market as well as the rate at which advanced economies overcome the current fiscal constraints.

In the short term, Government will continue to maintain a flexible exchange, which is determined largely by demand and supply market conditions. The Bank of Uganda will also continue to cautiously intervene in the foreign exchange market to deal with temporary sharp fluctuations arising from speculative tendencies. The Bank of Uganda intervened on 30th June and sold dollars in the foreign exchange market along with interventions in the money market to raise short term interest rates. There is an immediate rebound in exchange rate with the shilling strengthening by more than Shs 100. 

Beyond dealing with speculative attacks on the market, Government will be cautious not to unduly deplete its reserves, which will expose the economy to even greater risks. In its actions, the Bank of Uganda will ensure that the Uganda shilling is not overvalued because as noted above, the currencies of our trading partners in the region are also depreciating. If the Uganda shilling becomes overvalued relative to the currencies of our neighbours, Ugandan export producers will lose their competiveness relative to producers in Kenya and Tanzania thus prolonging the structural imbalances in the external sector.

Furthermore, Government will work with development partners to ensure quick disbursement of general budget support resources, which are still pending thus, leading to temporarily increase the supply of foreign exchange in the country while medium term actions are implemented.

The quickest source of this funding is a proposed financial sector development policy credit approved by the World Bank last week and the poverty reduction support credit to be presented to the World Bank board before December this year. 

In the next few months, Government will focus more on facilitating export promotion activities including agricultural productivity, agro processing and tourism thus improving further the business environment to attract more FDI and remittances as investment from Ugandans working abroad.

However, the track to success of these measures calls upon all of us the political actors to remain focused, that is avoiding any behaviour that portrays our country as unsafe or insecure. The media has a major role to play in this regard.

To promote agro-processing for domestic use and export, Government, in partnership with local commercial banks, is implementing agricultural credit facility worth Shs 60 billion.

In the long term, Uganda will expand and diversify its exports to reduce the large trade deficit. Although depreciation has short term costs, it can also generate long term benefits because it gives an incentive to exporters to expand production, which is essential for the long term development of our economy and that is where Government will put great emphasis.

A request has been made for the exchange rate to be fixed Shs 2,000 per dollar for purposes of Uganda Revenue Authority customs tax assessment. Government thinks this is not appropriate for the following reasons:
The rate of Shs 2,000 per dollar was the April 2009 import tax assessment rate. Ideally, this means that the traders would have to sell their imported goods to the public at the price of two years ago. Price manipulation is neither feasible nor possible. 

What URA does is taking the rolling average of the previous three months in updating its tax assessment bases every month. At a rate of Shs 2,000 per dollar, Government will be subsiding traders by about Shs 500 for each dollar and yet this would not be translated into price reduction by the traders.

There is a precedent to this, while in the Budget Speech for financial year 2011/11 the taxes on kerosene of Shs 200 per litre were removed completely and on sugar we removed Shs 50 per kilo. However, there has been no discernable downward revision in the consumer prices of these commodities. Instead, the prices of these commodities have risen. The price of sugar in Kampala is now Shs 3,000 to 3,500 per kilo while kerosene is at Shs 2,720 per litre. This will cause a significant gap in finances of the national budget, which would mean cutting some expenditure in the current budget without benefitting ordinary households.

Government will continue to work with this Parliament, the business community and all other stakeholders to ensure improved economic growth through job creation and improved service delivery in Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Minister. Hon. Members, the traders were affected by the issues that the Minister has just mentioned. So, I request the minister for trade to also give a statement before we debate.

12.57
THE MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Amelia Kyambande): Madam Speaker, hon. colleagues allow me to apologise for not turning up yesterday. This was because I was still making further consultations. 

The purpose of this statement is to inform Parliament that there has been a sit down strike by the traders and that KACITA presented to my ministry the challenges affecting their business and the economy of Uganda.

There have been some efforts made by Government to address the traders’ issues. As we all know, the global economy has been experiencing turbulent times manifested in the financial crisis, which has affected the country’s major export market, as well as our export earnings. 

However, due to Government initiative of regional integration, the regional markets cushioned the economy from the first round effects of the financial crisis. 

In the medium term, the economy was bound to experience some second round effects. The current exchange rate movements we are experiencing are some of those stipulated by the minister of finance. I need not go into that.

Despite all these global challenges that we have experienced above like insecurity in all major oil producing countries, insecurity in the high seas, the Ugandan economy has continued to perform well. In 2010/11, exports grew by 18.6 percent, a recovery from a contraction of 25.1 percent the previous year. However, there are still some gaps, which have led to the scenario below.

On 4th July, KACITA submitted to my ministry a memorandum on the major issues affecting their business, the Ugandan community and the Ugandan economy in general.

These issues included high foreign exchange rates, volatile exchange rate, payment of taxes to URA based on the dollar market rate, waiver of taxes on diesel, trading licenses and fees, illegal immigrants engaging in trade and the COMESA free trade area.

The ministry of trade has held several meetings and the following ministers attended: the Minister of State for Trade, the Minister of State for Economic Monitoring and some officials from the finance, justice and internal affairs ministries.

In addition, we have held two consultative public dialogues with a cross section of traders who were given an opportunity to raise their issues of concern. The public dialogue held in Diamond Hotel on Luwum Street was organised by KACITA and was attended by some of my colleagues as stipulated in the paper.

At the end of the dialogue, resolutions arising from the meeting were signed by KACITA and my ministry. It was also agreed that KACITA informs its members of what had been agreed upon and calls off the strike.

Furthermore, it was agreed that KACITA organises another consultative dialogue with traders on 6th July. The second consultative public dialogue with a cross section of traders was to be attended by KACITA members and, therefore, an appropriate venue to accommodate as many people as possible was Nakivubo Memorial Stadium. A number of them attended. 

I addressed the traders who turned up there. Despite having agreed with KACITA that we address the second dialogue jointly, they did not turn up for this dialogue. I have also had other meetings with other traders, including Uganda Motor Spares Traders Association. 

What are the issues raised by KACITA and other traders? Madam Speaker and hon. Members, at all these meetings and consultative dialogue, the following issues were raised and fortunately, they have been addressed by the minister of finance: 

The issues include high foreign exchange rates, the central bank – I need not get into those again. Some are on fiscal policy, investment pattern, illegal immigrants and others.

What efforts have we made as a ministry and government? We appreciate the issues raised by the business community and indeed, through consultative dialogue, we are making efforts to find mutually acceptable solutions. 

Despite this progress, Government has noted with concern that the leadership of KACITA and other traders in Kampala, Masaka and Mukono went ahead with the sit down strike. 

I would like to reiterate Government’s commitment to addressing those issues directly affecting the business community. In this regard, my ministry has prioritised the following interventions to be carried out in the short and medium term:

(i)		Promotion of SMEs through setting up a Directorate of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in our ministry. In Uganda, the industrial sector predominately consists of MSMEs, which accounts for 94 percent of the entire sector and employs more than 2.5 million people. 

The MSMEs constitute 90 percent of the private sector, they contribute 20 percent of GDP and are very dynamic with 80 percent being located in urban and peri-urban areas countrywide and are largely involved in trade, agro-processing and small scale manufacturing. With the majority focusing on low level services, it is unlikely that if left alone, they will be a platform for significant transformation of the economy as the case is in the rest of the world. 

Therefore, promotion of MSMEs through setting a directorate is a key government priority. This will facilitate and support the micro-small and medium entrepreneurs to access important information that will enable them to develop the businesses as well as addressing critical issues affecting them instead of them running around in the media without any support. We are preparing a Cabinet memorandum to this effect.

(ii)	Uganda is a member of the East African Community Common Market and the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA). These regional integration blocks have opened up the markets and have promoted the free movement of goods and services. 

My ministry will continue to sensitise the business community on EAC common market, COMESA and other preferential markets. I have prepared a Cabinet memo on Uganda’s joining COMESA FTA, which will be presented to cabinet in the next two weeks.

(iii)	We will facilitate the Arbitration Committee for Southern Sudan to expedite its work. We 	have noted that the business community doing business in Southern Sudan has had various difficulties that need to be attended to. As a matter of urgency, I am scheduling a meeting with the authorities of Southern Sudan in liaison with the Ministry of Foreign 	Affairs to address this issue.

(iv)	Illegal immigrants; this is a critical issue that has been raised in all fora we have held with the traders. The illegal immigrants are engaged in trading that poses unfair competition with the Uganda traders.

I have taken up this issue with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the review process has started. In addition, the Minister of Internal Affairs will take an inventory of work permits in order to address the issue of illegal immigrants according to the law, including reconciliation of immigration information from the border posts with the one at the ministry headquarters.

In the meantime, I would appeal to all the Ugandan traders to work closely with Government officials in addressing this problem. We will also be meeting the ambassadors of the affected countries to assure them of Government support in the promotion of trade and investment.

(v)	Foreign Exchange rates; the depreciation of the Uganda shilling against the dollar has been unfavourable to the Ugandan business community especially those engaged in import trade as it has tended to decimate the working capital of the business community.

Government would wish to note on the other hand that the current exchange movements are a boost to the country’s export performance. Therefore, we need to strike a balance between export and import performance in managing exchange rate movements. 

Furthermore, it is important for Bank of Uganda to create a desk that will sensitise the business community on a regular basis as well as the general public on the exchange rate and its impact on the economy.

We intend to have regular meetings with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Planning, and the Bank of Uganda to monitor foreign exchange fluctuations that impact on trade.

(vi)   Government expenditure; the resource envelope for the next financial year  presented by the minister of finance amounts to Shs 9,840 billion. This comprises of Shs 6,330 billion finance from domestic revenues of which Shs 6.170 billion is from tax revenues, Shs 121 from non-tax revenues and Shs 39 billion from domestic loan repayments.

Resources from both tax and non-tax revenues will contribute Shs 6,290 billion. Domestic Revenues are projected to finance about 71 percent of the budget in the coming financial year. External financing from development partners will amount to Shs 2,900 billion contributing 29 percent of the budget.

Parliament recently passed a Vote-on-Account and the ministry of finance will soon release the money which eventually will stimulate the economy and will achieve the desired growth and national development. 

(vii)	Trading licenses; it is true the objective of a trading license is to regulate and not to raise revenue. Government will undertake a review of the trade licensing regime to address issues raised by the business community so that the fees are commensurate with the services they 	expect in their business premises.

Government will continue to consult the stakeholders in driving the revenue exercise. I wish to clarify that a review of the trade license regime will be undertaken and not suspended. The other day, I said suspended because as we realised that some of them had already paid. So, it is not something you can handle immediately. I apologise for that.

(viii)	On local consent, I would like to say that 	 my ministry will work with the Capital Markets Authority and private sector organizations to sensitise the public 	especially the business community to  take advantage of the capital market.

(ix)	On promotion of production, I would like 	to say that the above are short and medium term measures. For the long term measures, Government will focus on production and value addition for exports. It is, therefore, important that Government encourages traders or importers to adopt a paradigm shift towards production for export.

Madam Speaker, allow me to conclude by reiterating the NRM Government’s (commitment) to address all issues that have been raised above. With our membership in the East African Community Common Market and the COMESA, Uganda has become a regional trading hub. It is also important to know that the regional market offers an increasing destination for our goods and services. It is, therefore, in the interest of all of us to ensure there is increased harmony and stability in Uganda.

Government has been on the right track beginning with the creation of a conducive environment for the private sector to operate, stimulate investment inflows, promotion of the tourism industry and, therefore, it is the commitment of Government that we maintain, at all costs, the benefits that have accrued to our economy. The foundation and strength of our economy will be anchored on the enhancement of SMEs as the vanguard of our economic development.

I would like to appeal to the business community to remain calm and continue with their businesses while Government continues to engage the parties involved in an effort to find a lasting solution.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the world economy is driven by trade. In every part of Uganda, there is a trading and economic activity that takes place. It is, therefore, important that as Members of Parliament, we play a central role in ensuring that harmony and stability and the growth of the trade and economic activities in our respective areas prevail.

Let us harmoniously work together in ensuring that we promote the growth and national development of our country. I thank you very much for listening to me. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Where is the shadow minister of finance? Maybe as we wait for the shadow finance minister to come, let me inform the House that His Excellency the Vice President is in the House. You are welcome. (Applause)

I also wish to announce that we have more children in the public gallery from the Rainbow Miracle Christian Primary School, Entebbe, represented by hon. Muhamed Kawuma of Entebbe Municipality. 

We also have God’s Gift Primary School pupils, represented by hon. Abraham Byandala, of Katikamu North, and hon. Lukwago. (Applause) 

11.41
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geofrey Ekanya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also thank hon. Maria Kiwanuka, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the minister of trade whose statement I may not comment on much. It is important that Government keeps the people of Uganda informed in a timely manner instead of waiting until the fire has engulfed part of the House. 

I remember that under stewardship during the Vote-on-Account and before the traders went on strike, you directed the minister of finance to respond to this matter. However, despite the ministry having quite a substantial number of ministers, it seems to me that the principal minister is more engaged in dealing with external matters and ignoring this House.

I hope that from today, she has realised that this Parliament is very serious and different from any other parliaments in its own peculiar, modus operandi in handling business. That is why we are sitting on a Friday handling this matter.

So, hon. Minister of Finance, I would like to implore you to note that whereas our calendar is usually from Tuesdays to Thursdays, Parliament realised that the issues that the population of this country is complaining about are very serious. So, we had to sit today. I would like to thank hon. Ssekikubo and other honourable members including you, Madam Speaker, for paying attention to this issue.

I would like to say that the statement by the minister of finance has a lot of gaps. In the first case, she talks about global factors as having contributed to the fluctuations in exchange rates. But she needs to bear in mind that His Excellency the President, about two years ago, informed the country that Uganda is a stable economy and that we are not like Europeans who live on the dollar and they cannot survive without it. This means the global problems that are affecting the Western world should not be affecting us. Ugandans can go to their gardens and can walk their children to the nearest primary school. This was Government position just two years ago.

But some of us argued that much as we are a bit different in lifestyle, we have linkages with the Western world. In that respect, we advised Government to focus on the regional advantage that Uganda has.

Therefore, when the minister of finance talks about global factors, she needs to inform this Parliament about the volume of trade between Uganda and other regional countries like Southern Sudan, DRC, Rwanda – generally COMESA and IGAD. Before you tell us about Greece, how many Ugandans are living in that country? How many of them annually repatriate remittances to this country? What do we get? Isn’t it almost zero? What volume of trade do we have between Uganda and Greece and Portugal? This is basic senior four commerce – basic elementary knowledge. You just log onto the internet at Bluebag/Uganda/trade/globally and you will know the percentage of Uganda’s trade with Greece, Portugal, Ireland and other countries. 

Our major trading partners today are just within the region: Kenya, DRC, Southern Sudan, Rwanda, and the United Kingdom and to some extent, the United States of America. So, how much trade, what volume of revenue have we been getting in trading with this country in terms of exports?

Of recent Ugandans are beginning to trade with countries in Eastern Europe, like Turkey. Most of the suits and other garments that we wear come from Turkey. They are very good tailors in that part of the world. So, hon. Minister, you need to go back to the technical person that prepared this statement for you and have it redone. Our trading and our budget support talks of Sweden, Denmark - you should at least have raised those fundamental countries that give us budget support. We have so many Ugandans out there. There is even a Ugandan who is a mayor in one of the cities in a Scandinavian country. 

The minister talked about industrialised countries and source of foreign exchange for the Ugandan economy, including export and so forth, and the weaknesses in foreign direct investment. Let me put it on record that to the best of my knowledge, I am a board member of an NGO in this country but the inflow of money to NGOs has not lowered the inflow the way the minister wants us to believe. This NGO where I am a board member is one of the key NGOs in this country and we continue to get financial support –(Interjections)- yes, this is the Uganda Debt Network -(Interruption)

MR REMEGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker, I have failed to follow what hon. Ekanya is up to. Is he telling us about NGOs or is he replying to this statement? 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. I would like to inform my colleague that he needs to look at page 2 of the statement from the minister of finance. The minister is talking about industrialised countries as a major source of foreign exchange for Uganda’s economy, including exports, remittances and foreign direct investment, as well as donor inflow to Government and NGOs. 

Regional Factors

If  you compare the Uganda shilling in the last four months to that of Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda and Burundi, you will realise that the value of the shilling has been low. I live at the border and the value of the Kenya Shilling is higher than the Uganda Shilling in terms of exchange and the economy of Kenya is much stronger than that of Uganda. Therefore, hon. Minister of Finance, if you are making comparisons to the regional factors and talking about the East African currency suffering in the same way, what interventions has Government made? The Government of Kenya intervened in the last three months and the Government of Tanzania intervened. To the best of my knowledge, the Government of Kenya lowered taxes on oil and petroleum products among others. The Government of Kenya has not expanded its huge cost of public administration like you have done. Here in Uganda, with all due respect to my colleagues, this Parliament used to be about 320 Members but we are now 378. We have over 78 ministers and we have got jet fighters at US $740 million. So, all these huge costs of public administration have not been experienced in Tanzania and Kenya and when making your comparisons, look at how much revenue is invested in consumption and how much is ingested in productive development. 

From our budget of Shs 1.9 trillion that goes to local governments, it is only Shs 360 billion which goes for development. The Shs 1.6 billion is wages, salaries and other recurrent expenditure. How will you stimulate growth with this kind of budget allocation? In your speech, you said in the US, the American Government decided to intervene and did what they called a “bail out”. They borrowed money by selling bonds from China and other countries and resources were directed to the productive sector of the economy. What actions do you have to direct resources to the productive sectors of the economy? 

Export Market Domestic Factors

Yesterday, I got information from somebody who works with Madhvani that Madhvani produces about 10,000 bags of sugar a day and out of these, 60 percent is exported to Southern Sudan and Congo. It is only 40 percent that is left to the people of Uganda and for you to have the opportunity to procure sugar directly from the Madhvani factory you have to go through a second person with a chit. Yes, there are people trading with procurement notes. That is what used to happen in the 1980s. I cannot go to Tororo Cement factory and ask for cement; you cannot go to Mukwano Industries and say you want soap. There are dealers, middlemen who have no distribution chain –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: The information I am giving you is that those dealers through whom Ugandans have to deal in order to access those bags of sugar are Indians, Chinese or Pakistanis and not Ugandans. Actually, from the immediate wholesaler who gets directly from Madhvani or those cement factories up to the second last wholesaler is where you will find a Ugandan. 

MR EKANYA: That is the situation that we are in. Dealers have no distribution chain and are majorly foreigners. When they make profits, they repatriate. The Uganda export market is constrained as already referred to above, resulting into the import bill and most of the companies that deal in exports are subsidiaries. They make profits out of exporting the cement, the sugar and the soap and the profit is repatriated. So, the dollar does not stay here to help the economy. We really need to rethink - when you are complaining about import bills out-sweeping exports – (Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, hon. Ekanya, for giving way. Furthermore, on the issue of remittances and capital flight, you will realise that domestically, here we are praising the big number of foreign investors but hon. Members, address yourselves to all these investors ranging from the banking sector and look at how many banks are natively owned by Ugandans and how much capital outflow is being realised. Look at the multi-million telecom companies and how much they remit outside this economy, be it tourism or anything else. Provided the dollar is not retained in this economy, then we shall never realise the stability of the dollar.
 
All we are talking about will remain a myth. Hon. Members, address your minds to 1995 when we got these multi-million dollar phone companies in. On average, if we say we are 14 million subscribers and every Ugandan spends about US $20 on average from the highest users to the lowest users; that is US $280 million in the telecom sector being repatriated. Ten months in a year minus all costs, US $2.8 billion is being lost from this economy, apart from the sugar and others. 

We have failed to assent to protocols like the COMESA and the free trade areas. What are we protecting in form of sugar? A total of 35 million people going without sugar yet sugar is very cheap in Mauritius. Even if someone paid all the 10 percent duties in this COMESA area, we are protecting nothing. That is why the market price of sugar is very high in Uganda compared to all other East African nations. With this rate of capital flight from this country and repatriation of profits that is measured at about US $5 billion which is not reinvested, I wanted to inform –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you have a smuggled in a contribution.

MR EKANYA: On page 5, the minister of finance says that, “The high international fuel prices have further pushed up Uganda’s import bill. The total oil import bill has increased from US $97 million in the second quarter of 2009 to US $200 million in the quarter ending May. This is an increase of 106 percent in import bill of oil products.”  

Madam Speaker, I would like to find out whether the honourable minister knows who represents Uganda on the OTS System in Kenya – do you know who represents Uganda on the Open Tender System of procurement of oil imports for this country? Do you know the transactions? Do you know the level of transparency? Are those companies registered in Uganda? What is their capacity? What is their distribution chain?

Hon. Members, I can tell you that there is huge corruption in the Open Tender System of oil imports for this country. The President, by the way, we thought was very serious - if you read the State of the Nation Address, the President said Uganda received only 42 percent of oil imports for this quarter, where did the other percentage go? Who took it and who are the people involved in importing oil for this country? 

In the past, they have been telling us that there is a problem with the pipeline, there is a problem with the refinery in Mombasa. These are scapegoats! There are middlemen, there are networks, they do not have distribution chains but they have the licences to procure all the oil for Uganda. There are two major companies. They do not even have offices in this country; they are not even registered, they are not even paying taxes but they take a profit out of Shs 1,000 on every litre! We could make huge savings. The minister of energy is aware because we have Ugandans who are represented. The minister of finance is aware. We have Ugandans who sit on the board for the East African Community. These are serious issues. It is corruption at its best for the system to survive and nobody can speak about it because these are mafia networks. They intimidate people, they threaten people’s lives but some of us have put our lives at the forefront. 

There is Gulf Oil Petroleum Company. Where is its office? And many others! The MD of Total has complained very bitterly. These guys do not have offices. This matter is public and Government is aware. The minister of finance is aware of the Ugandan representing us on the OTS in Nairobi. The minister of trade is aware, the minister of energy is aware; they should tell us.

As a result, this company repatriates all the profits -(Interjections)- What happens Madam Speaker, let me expound –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Ekanya has raised very serious issues which border on corruption and connivance. He has named the minister of finance, minister of trade as aware of illicit transactions that affect the economy. The Government side has kept quiet. Is this a sign of concession or are they preparing a response? These are serious issues. If we do not deal with them, we are going to be wasting a lot of time. I am seeking clarification from the Government side whether the silence is a concession. 

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, there is an element of truth in what the honourable member has said. (Interjections) I used to deal in oil. I had a petrol station. We used to complain to the management of Engen about fuel that comes into the country with very little tax. We complained to the management to a point where it became unprofitable for me as a dealer to continue with the business. I had to give it up. There is a problem we need to resolve in this country. It is a serious issue which requires Government attention. What the honourable colleague is raising is true. It needs an investigation and requires the attention of Government.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, so when the minister of finance comes to the Floor of this House with a statement to Parliament on depreciation of the Ugandan shilling vis-à-vis the United States dollar and one of the justifications she makes is that the higher international fuel prices have further pushed up the Uganda, total import bill – for the minister to justify the current situation we are facing and say that the total import bill has increased from about US $100 million to US $200 million when she is aware of the factor that has led to it; she should withdraw this clause at the end of the day and we sort out the major problem we are facing. 

If we –(Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for hon. Betty Amongi to come dressed in yellow when she belongs to UPC? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am very happy to announce that hon. Betty Amongi was yesterday voted overwhelmingly as the Chairperson of UWOPA. So, I am not surprised -(Applause and Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I think the issue raised by the hon. Ekanya about corruption, in specific reference to companies and what has been happening in the import of oil for Uganda, is obviously a very serious matter. I agree with hon. Dombo that it is something that we should not keep quiet about. 

However, from what he said, I really would not expect a response instantaneously. What I would like to request of hon. Ekanya and this House is that hon. Ekanya gives us further and better particulars of the information he has; and secondly, for the relevant ministers to respond to that so that come next Tuesday, if we have had this information, we will respond to it effectively. That is all I wish to ask.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister has advised the line minister to give a statement. The concern of  hon. Ekanya was on allegations of corruption, but I do not know whether it is just corruption or perhaps some bilateral matter that we need to handle with the Government of Kenya.

There are two terminals where we receive petroleum imports, that is, Kipevu and Shimanzi. The premium charges of petroleum dealers at Kipevu, because its bigger and large petroleum products come in – the Minister of Energy knows these details. The premium pay at Kipevu is between US $6 to US $15 while at Shimanzi, it goes up to US $30. Now, the Open Tender System (OTS) you see in Kenya - first of all, no private company, without going through the OTS, can import petroleum products through Kenya; the Ministry of Energy is aware of that. 

When you read the State of the Nation Address, His Excellency acknowledges that while PMS requirements for the month of March 2011 were 32 million litres, only 22 million litres were supplied; leaving a deficit of 32 percent. What does that tell you? That means under the OTS, we, the other countries, have been allocated a quota of 30 percent. We don’t even get that 30 percent of the fuel we should be getting under the OTS. So, our market is underfed. We only get 40 percent of the actual. If we got 30 percent of that allocation under the OTS, our market would be fed up to 80 percent and that would tremendously reduce the prices without even cutting taxes that our friends have been clamouring for.

So, the information the ministry of energy should give us - but also on a positive note, Uganda did not have a representative under the OTS. They would determine what’s ours without us knowing. The good news now is that with the intervention of the ministry of energy, we have a representative under the OTS. The OTS and the supply coordination committee appoint those companies and give them tenders. So, the concern perhaps of Ekanya and all of us is: is that process transparent? Is it Kenyan led or East African led? Thank you so much.

MR EKANYA: Thank you, hon. Tumwebaze. It is public knowledge that the companies that have the contracts to import Ugandan oil do not have distribution chains; they are middle men companies who make huge profits. They don’t pay taxes to the economy of this country. These are matters that need to be sorted out. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I want to tell the Prime Minister that he should ask the Ugandan representative appointed by the ministry of energy and the ministry of finance about what is happening and why they allowed companies that are not registered, and do not have distribution chains to make huge profits?

Measures to stabilise the exchange rate –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, this is very interesting. Can you tell us what type of person we are supposed to have in that place? What is the caliber of person you want to represent Uganda, in case the ones who are there are not working well? What is the caliber of person you have in mind?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, any Ugandan can represent us in the system. What the Government needs to do is to ensure that they receive reports from our representative, and to ensure that there is transparency; and that the companies that have been allocated to import Ugandan oil are registered, pay taxes and have a distribution chain. We need to have those standards. But the companies, who are involved in this trade, do not have distribution chains and do not pay taxes to this country. So, these are the major problems. Nobody is receiving reports or monitoring what is happening. 

The minister proposed measures to stabilise the exchange rate. I have given you one of the proposals: sort out the OTS. I would like to give you another proposal for the short run. We need to put more money into agriculture. As we speak today, a kilo of cassava flour in Tororo, where I come from, rose from Shs 400 to Shs 1,200. The demand for food – by the way Uganda is blessed. May God bless this country! We are the food basket of east and central Africa. The food in this country goes to Somalia, Kenya, Congo, and Southern Sudan. If we do not put enough money into agriculture – last year NAADS got Shs 100 billion! This year NAADS got Shs 130 billion. Agriculture did not get any money for disease control. Our cattle have died. I said last week that a company from Saudi Arabia wrote a letter to the ministry of trade asking to import 2,000 live animals every week but we could not support it so that we earn more foreign exchange. 

You are not going to stabilise foreign exchange by increasing interest rates; the intervention that the Governor, Bank of Uganda is proposing. You are not going to stabilise the exchange rate by buying the dollar because you only have a reserve for three months. Your reserve will be wiped out. It is not sustainable at all. Put more money into agriculture; let us have disease control so that you can export year in and year out. Just look at the budget allocation for agriculture, it is very minimal! Last week, cattle were dying in your constituency, Madam Speaker. These are serious matters. There is no disease control in this country. The House has to complain. 

I am a poultry farmer; I have been exporting poultry products to Kenya and some products to Congo but I have had to close business. Many poultry farmers have also closed business. So, we are not bringing foreign exchange into this country because the cost of feeds is very high. 

Two years ago, His Excellency, the President made a proposal and in his letter he said Uganda should stop exporting grain but that we should export processed grain, for example posho so that the brand is used to feed our cows, birds, pigs and goats. But as we speak today, the World Food Programme - and even here by the way; some big companies are now dealing in grain. They buy maize grain direct from the farmers and export it to be milled in Sudan, Congo, Rwanda and Kenya. So, at the end of the day, we farmers will have to close shop. These are serious issues and the President directed the minister of trade and the minister of finance to ensure that export of grain stops but nobody bothered. 

On the issue of tourism, if you want to support tourism, how much of this year’s and last year’s budget have we invested in tourism? This goes to the Minister of the East African Community; the tour operators of this country cannot transport Ugandan tourists up to Serengeti with a Ugandan registered vehicle. When they reach the border they tell them, “End here. Hire a vehicle from Kenya.” When they are going to Tanzania it is the same. “End here; hire a vehicle from Tanzania.” But for us we allow Kenyan registered vehicles to bring tourists straight to any part of this country. What is this East African Community? Why are we sacrificing too much? You find that the revenue that the Ugandans would have got in the tourism sector to boost us, they cannot get it and a foreign tourist does not want to come and  enter one car and when they reach the border, change to another car. It is insecure!

The Uganda Government should peg transactions in the tourism sector to the dollar. You go to Sheraton, they give you a bill in US dollars; you go to Serena, you are given a bill in US dollars. The tax payment is pegged to the dollar but if you go to –(Interruption)

MS NANTABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Tourism earns Uganda foreign exchange and it is the second foreign exchange earner in this country, but this is a sector that has been neglected for a long time. Tourism contributes 2.8 percent to the employment of this country. The honourable minister of trade emphasised that she will revitalise this sector. It is unfortunate that in the COMESA region, Uganda cannot compete favourably with the other countries. Uganda cannot compete with regional and international markets where national governments have taken investment in tourism as a priority, as opposed to Uganda where the sector has been neglected. 

The tourist board has been suffocated for a long time. It has cried to the Government to make sure that they recommend additional funding to the sector as a whole. Tourism needs to be supported by implementing a development levy as an alternative and more sustainable source of funding. This was earlier approved by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but it was neglected.

You will also note that in the State of the Nation Address, tourism does not surface anywhere. We hope that the Government will put emphasis on this through the Ministry of Trade and Industry to promote the sector so that we earn more foreign exchange. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. As my colleague has stated, the tourism sector is very wide. I really want to say - and I want the Opposition side not to misunderstand me - that the President has been very emphatic in supporting this sector. But sometimes I do not know whether he speaks to two different constituencies. Publicly, he says something different and in private he does something different because he is the minister of finance according to the Constitution of Uganda. 

The airline industry; what are we doing, Madam Speaker? You have ever got stranded because we do not have a carrier in this country! So, our tourists come from Europe and the United States to Kenya. I have seen letters written by the President talking about developing and promoting a carrier for this country. So, what are we doing? If we can buy jet fighters and special presidential planes, what is so hard about us buying commercial planes that can fly the flag of this country? What is hard? Why don’t we put resources where our mouth is and walk the talk? 

That is why I am wondering because my President, whom I love and respect, speaks and writes letters and says, “I want this sector supported.” He even creates a ministry in charge of tourism, but when you look at the budget allocation, defence and other sectors take the lion’s share. So, if you really want to support the tourism sector you should sort out the issue of having a carrier for this country. 

When did you ever hear that our hotels are being standardised and that there is regular inspection? The productivity of the Ugandan labour force, in this sector, is very low. Most of the people working in our hotels are not from here. This Government decided to remove part of the Eastern University, that is, the Crested Crane Hotel in Jinja and we even approved resources here and it was passed on to the private sector for training hoteliers to boost the tourism sector. We passed money and it was eaten and there is no action on the ground to this day.

So, I really want to urge Government that if you want to stabilise the foreign exchange, put money in agriculture, put money in tourism, and cut costs of public expenditure and the situation will improve.  Also talk to the Opposition. We need national dialogue because the recent walk-to-walk demonstrations in this country painted the image of this country very negatively and Uganda now, because of the more than 25-year rule of one person, President Museveni, is considered to be under dictatorship. So, tourists fear to come to Uganda, and so we need national dialogue to solve the governance question. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I will be inviting the Shadow Minister of Trade, hon. Taaka, but before I do that there are just two small things. 

One, I do not want anyone to take credit for today’s sitting. Today’s sitting was the Speaker’s programme. What has happened is that this has dislocated my State of the Nation Address debate but it was my programme. So, neither you nor hon. Ssekikubo should take credit for today’s meeting. It is mine. (Laughter)

Secondly, today the children of Uganda are really many. We have Wisdom Primary School of Lugala represented by hon. Katongole Singh, Rubaga North and hon. Nabilah Sempala. You are welcome. (Applause)

12.27
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Kevinah Taaka): I want to take this opportunity to thank the minister of trade and the minister of finance for their statements. I also thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving us this session; you take credit for it because of the importance of what is happening in the country. I just want to inform you that whereas my shadow minister for finance was looking at outside areas, I will base on the domestic fiscal and monetary policies.

We represent the people of Uganda in this august House and, therefore, I will talk on behalf of the people. I will be very simple so that people understand what is happening in our country. I agree with the minister of trade, when she says there is a financial crisis in this country. It is on page 1; both ministers mentioned it and it is affecting us also. As much as I agree with them, I am holding other factors constant.

Looking at what is happening in Uganda – (Interruption)

MR MULONGO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The hon. Member holding the Floor introduces a big subject of talking about fiscal and monetary policies internally, but she does not even make a point. She is just flipping papers left, right and centre. Is it in order, therefore, for her to hold our attention for that long?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, although she is the shadow trade minister, I think this is her maiden speech. So allow her to operate the way she knows.

MS TAAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Both statements by the two ministers are talking about the monetary and fiscal policies in this country. To cut the long story short, the minister of trade is talking about licenses but the traders are saying the license fee for retailers has been increased from Shs 35,000 to Shs 280,000. That is an 800 percent increase. For the wholesalers, it was increased from Shs 100,000 to Shs 665,000. That is an increase of 665 percent. As a person representing Busia Municipality, the rates of licenses vary according to the street you are operating on, which is unfair. 

The issues raised by traders – according to the minister of trade – include foreigners who they call illegal immigrants. As a country, we would encourage foreigners to invest in Uganda but the illegal immigrants should be handled by security agencies. Now that we are facing insecurity in this country – even today you must have gone through a lot of checking – as July 11 approaches, are we safe? The foreigners are unfairly pricing their goods hence denying the local traders a chance. The ministry of trade should look at that. While investing, the foreign investors should have a component of the locals having shares in their businesses.

About taxes, traders pay them to URA in dollars which is problematic as a result of the fluctuating dollar rates. We are in Uganda and traders sell their goods in Uganda currency then why pay taxes in dollars?

On inflation, the rate is 16 percent and is causing the prices of goods and services to rise. The fuel prices have gone up from -(Interruption)

MS BOONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for this House to listen to incorrect information? There is no trader in Uganda who is paying URA taxes in US dollars. I do business and at no single occasion have I been requested to pay money to URA in dollars. Is the shadow minister of trade in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members. Let us just ask the shadow minister of trade to explain that issue.

MS TAAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I took the order but if she had waited and listened to my complete speech, she would have got it correct. All these taxes are fixed at a dollar rate and later computed.

As I was saying, fuel prices have gone up with petrol climbing from Shs 3,550 to Shs 3,700 per litre; diesel from Shs 3,300 to Shs 3,350 per litre. Madam Speaker, you know that fuel drives everything from transport to thermo power generation. Of late, we have been getting messages from Umeme announcing 24-hour load shedding from 6.00 a.m. to 6.00 p.m. and from 6.00 p.m. to 6.00 a.m. This is terrible and the place I represent, Busia Municipality, being at the border of Uganda and Kenya and thus the gateway to Uganda, we should not be having load shedding for security reasons. 

MR SSEMMULI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would wish to thank the speaker holding the Floor for such a presentation. I was informed that the load shedding has now caused a shortage of water, which has affected the performance of hospitals and schools. And today I was reading in the newspapers that the thermal plant based at Kiira in Jinja - Electromaxx (U) Ltd - have switched off the generators demanding Shs 2.0 billion. So, I am calling upon the Government to pay up immediately because our people are suffering. Thank you very much. 

MS TAAKA: Madam Speaker, thank you. Both ministers did not tell the people what exactly happened. Why is the shilling depreciating? I am telling you that the shilling is depreciating very highly and I would agree with the minister of finance and the Governor, Bank of Uganda that it should be regulated according to the demand and supply.
  
If we say demand and supply it means the supply is low and demand is high. But why is the supply low? It is because of shortage of foreign exchange. But why is there a shortage in supply of foreign exchange? According to the minister of finance, she was expecting donors to bring in their inflow. The donor inflow in our budget is 20 percent and if we are moving from donor dependence to self sustenance, then why should we peg ourselves to the donor inflow? 

On the other side of the demand -(Interruption)

MR MUJUNI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would think that we are here for a purpose and a cause, which cause is Uganda. Now that we are hon. Members of Parliament, is it in order for the hon. Shadow Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry to continuously feed us on lies? First of all, when you begin to say that 20 percent of Uganda’s budget depends on donors and yet everyone knows that it is not true, should we accept that? It is not 20 percent; it is 29 percent. She should have correct information because without information, she should leave the Floor for others to contribute on what we should do for Ugandans. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I informed you that hon. Taaka is making her maiden speech, which ordinarily is protected. Let her conclude and then you can rebut it.
 
MS TAAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was talking about the demand and supply. The demand is high because the Uganda shilling is in excessive supply. Why is it high on the supply side? I will quote that in the State of the Nation Address under the state of the economy, page 9 No. 2, The President said, “The depreciation of the Uganda shilling has been caused by the following factors: (a) Speculative tendencies in the run up of the 2011 general elections,” and then when you go to the minister’s Budget Speech, paragraph 37, which says: “Implementation of the current budget has experienced extra budgetary pressure arising from the need to finance the recent general elections and security related expenditures.” That was one of the reasons causing the recent depreciation of the shilling as mentioned in the State of the Nation Address and the Budget Speech. 

Secondly, there was printing of new money notes. In May 2010, new money was printed with the reason that there was urgent need to curb counterfeiting of banknotes. But as we talk now in July 2011, the old bank notes are still being issued by Bank of Uganda. 

Recommendations:
i)	I would suggest that the ministry of trade 	suspends or halts the increase in licenses.
ii) 	The foreigners or illegal migrants should be checked by the Ministry of Internal Affairs.
iii) 	They should value taxes at the dollar rate but with the equivalent of the Uganda currency 	where the inflation is transferrable to the consumers. So, this is going to cause high taxes.  
iv)	Where the depreciation of the shilling is 	 concerned, the Bank of Uganda cannot stabilise it by fixing exchange rates because Uganda is running a liberalised economy since 1993. But in the short run, Bank of Uganda can  inject foreign currency although it is the taxpayer that suffers. I would, however, have hope with this because some of the funds are mismanaged with big administrative costs. So, if that can be done to curb the skyrocketing inflation and the high exchange rates, it would be good for this country. 

But in the long-term, my minister of finance has already elaborated that we need exports, we need to inject much more into agriculture because in this current budget it is only 4.5 percent and yet we are an agricultural country.

My sister has also said that can get more revenue from the tourism industry. We used to export cotton, copper and the like. So, we should revive those industries.
 
We should discourage donor inflow; we cannot run before we walk. We should develop industries and services so that they give us some growth in our economy, and then run by improving on agricultural products so that we can export to balance the payments. Thank you, Madam Speaker, and Members for listening to me. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, today the Ugandan children are really here in big numbers. I would like to introduce Kiddawalime Preparatory School, Namungoona of Rubaga North. Please, stand up if you are here. You are welcome! (Applause) 

I also want to introduce Nansana Junior School from Kyadondo North represented by hon. Sebunya and hon. Seninde from Wakiso District. You are welcome! (Applause)

12.48
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr John Ken-Lukyamuzi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to react to the two speeches. I will specifically zero in on the statement by the minister of finance because I know that without finance, a state like Uganda cannot survive. One error this Government is making is that it does not know the prescription of Uganda’s economy. Uganda’s economy is environment related. In the absence of the environment, the economy cannot survive and Uganda being so, I would have expected the Government to have paid attention to the dynamics of the environment.

As we speak, I think our Leader of the Opposition has already stated that over 4,000 wetlands have been destroyed in the last 15 years! NEMA, a government agency, has passed an environmental impact assessment to destroy a living wetland in Lubigi in Kawempe. This is chaos and something must be done to make those in the engine of Government know that the economy we are running is environment-based. 

Over US $2.0 billion is realised from bio diversity every year so in the absence of the environment, you don’t have the economy. I want to make some challenges, and very big ones to the Government of Uganda, through the ministry of finance and the Bank of Uganda. We have changed our currency and we have been changing it for the last two years. Up to now when you go to any commercial bank, they still give you old currency notes. What does that mean? It means that the old currency, which would have been burnt or destroyed, is coming back or could come back into the economy. Let me challenge the minister of finance to tell this House how much money we have in circulation today far from what we had before the change of currency? This is a very serious charge. We could even say that part of the inflation manifested is as a result of bad monetary practice.

Why don’t you equally advise the President of Uganda to check the language he is using on economic issues? When the President says that the fall of the shilling should translate into happiness, I get disappointed. Even the weakest economies make sure that their currencies take priority, but in Uganda the President says that under this state of affair, it is very good because those who export can earn money. You must give priority to our shilling -(Member timed out_)

12.51
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable ministers of trade and finance for the statements they have presented as they are very comprehensive.

There are certain facts you must accept and really appreciate. Let us not gloss over them. When the ministers articulate competently the question of the global factors, why is the dollar strong? It is not strong because we had elections; it is not strong because we dished out a lot of money - that is another debate. It is strong because it is the preferred and popular currency on the global market. When you see a mess in the Euro zone, the dollar is gaining. They have sorted their issues; Bin Laden is no more so that global factor is not something we should shy away from.

If we are to blame Government, we should be advancing blame if there has been a major deviation from our fiscal and monetary policy, the shadow minister was alluding to. What have been our fiscal and monetary policies? Let us talk about it. MTEF has been here, the ceilings were set by the ministry of finance such that it is a bitter pill for ministries not to exceed their limits and to check their spending discipline. Government does not compete with the private sector to get credit from the commercial banks. That is what has really enabled our economy to grow for the last 20 something years.

When we are stating the challenges, which are partly globally influenced and domestically influenced by rainfall and crop failures, we shouldn’t only lament but make proposals to the Cabinet on what they can do. The shadow minister of finance has talked about agriculture. I agree but quite often the advocates for agricultural financing only stop at advocating for financing. They do not talk about the priorities.

The honourable minister of finance should tell us how far we have gone with the building of the Tororo fertiliser factory. This will boost the currency usage of one kilogramme per hectare to at least six for Tanzania. Kenya is at 32.

When we talk of irrigation, some of you like to eat broccoli and some spinach at Sheraton. They are very sweet and very expensive - me too, of course, as I am vegetarian. But those things can be grown in 30 days when you are just irrigating micro on your one acre. To me these are the things we should be pushing for in our committees to make sure they catch the priority line of the budget.

To me taxing in dollars wouldn’t be a big problem if there was a matching facility to boost exports. The proposal I would like to give the minister of trade -(Member timed out_)

12.54
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the ministers for their good presentation especially hon. Maria and hon. Kyambadde. I also want to thank the shadow minister for his presentation. My issue is on the last statement he made and on that matter, I would also want to raise this issue.

Last night, I was listening to CBS radio and I heard hon. Nambooze abusing my President that he is – I have a right to talk because it annoyed me and I didn’t even eat supper and I have not eaten anything up to now. Madam Speaker, I want you to comment about it and before you comment, I will not feel good. She called my President “akasenyanku”. In Luganda, they told me it means something, which just moves around picking useless things. When I tried to think about it in my language, it is looks like a chameleon, which carries some sticks on the back.

According to Article 84 of the Constitution, a Member of Parliament may be recalled on any of the following grounds: misconduct, ridicule, or disrespect of the officer. I believe my President is an officer and when we were entering this Parliament, we took an oath and we said that we shall protect this Constitution. We are Members of the Parliament and we have not amended any of these Articles. So, Madam Speaker, I pray that you make a comment on that and if possible, this Article should be taken into consideration.

12.57
MR VINCENT KYAMADIDI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me thank both Cabinet and shadow ministers for their presentations. In the interest of time, I want to concentrate on proposals. Everybody in Uganda knows that we have a financial crisis. I want to urge my party, the NRM, to learn to listen. The finance minister heard good proposals from the Opposition; let us not rubbish them but listen to them. I think that if we take them up, we shall move forward. Uganda is bigger than any of us irrespective of party affiliation. This is the reason why I am saying that if we are talking about investors, we need to know how many investors that we have in Uganda. We may not even know when they came here; we give them land, tax holiday for free. I have billions of money lying on my account, if you gave me a tax holiday, don’t you think I can invest and my money remains in Uganda? Let us learn to think about Ugandans more than foreigners. We are more loyal to foreigners than Ugandans.

The other day I was seeing Obama giving the state of the union address in the Congress. Democrats and Republicans will always applaud whatever the President says because America is bigger. We need this to happen here; the level of political maturity in Uganda is wanting. The Government in power does not respect the Opposition but the Opposition does not also respect the Government in power. We need to see this happen because Uganda is very important. 

I say that we must invest more in research and innovation. Are we rewarding any innovation? More often, a lot of money is spent in public expenditure. I want to urge my Government and my ministry of finance to see how we can move from just spending. We should only spend when it is necessary but not because we should spend. A lot money of is wasted. During the Budget they said that they were going to reduce on public administration expenditure. This is very important -(Member timed out_)

MS NAMBOOZE: The people of Mukono Municipality overwhelmingly voted for me to come here and represent them. The honourable member has made a very serious accusation against me, that I was abusing His Excellency the President, who is the Fountain of Honour. I highly respect the President. I do not only respect him but I also fear him because he is the Commander-in-Chief. For somebody to come here and allege that I abused the President over the radio, which has over ten million listeners is bad. I have not been allowed to defend myself and the hon. Member has not even substantiated the allegations. Is it procedurally right that I, Betty, a woman of proven character popularly known as the teacher of this country, do not defend myself and allow these allegations to go on the record of this Parliament? I humbly request that, Madam Speaker, you allow me to defend myself and the hon. Member to substantiate or withdraw the allegations against me.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nambooze, if you had wanted to interrupt her, you would have raised a point of order. For me I saw you standing but I did not know what you wanted to do. Can hon. Karungi explain what she heard and on which radio?

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Actually I had decided to forgive her but because of what hon. Ekanya said I decided to rise up because I was very much annoyed. We can go for the recording because I believe that it is there. Her allegations on the radio were based on ideology and not on principle because she was merely using imagination. One of the things she said was that an escort of the President went in a bar and killed people. I wondered because sometime back even soldiers never used to go to bars to drink with people. Does this mean that soldiers should not go to bars to drink with people -(Interjection)- protect me, Madam Speaker, I want to explain this because it touched me so much.
 
THE SPEAKER: You alleged that she insulted the Fountain of Honour; was she talking about the soldiers who accompanied the Fountain of Honour or the Fountain of Honour?

MS KARUNGI: She just said that the President is “kasenyanku”. If you want proof you can go to CBS Radio. I pray that Article 84 of the Constitution – (Interruption)

MS KAYAGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of information. I travelled with hon. Karungi yesterday. I gave her a lift and I want to put the record straight. Hon. Nambooze did not abuse the President, neither did she insult him. The statement she made was that the people of Uganda and the Parliament are realising the truth. She said that basing on the elections of yesterday, the Chairperson of UWOPA is UPC, the Vice-Chairperson is Independent, the Secretary-General is FDC and basing on that, we are seeing Ugandans starting to stand on their own and realising the truth. (Applause) Those are the words I heard, therefore, I want to humbly ask my sister, hon. Karungi, to ignore. What hon. Nambooze was saying on radio was not insulting the President but she was giving the examples on how some of the civil servants of this country are mishandling the Ugandans. 

She gave an example of a soldier who went to drink in public and ended up shooting a civilian. So, I do not think she insulted the President in any way and I want to kindly ask my sister, hon. Karungi [HON. MEMBERS: “To ignore.”] to ignore and if possible withdraw the allegation. I thank you.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Further information on this because I was on the talk show. We were two last evening on that programme and the symbolism of proverbs used especially what she has just eluded to, “kasenyanku” – hon. Betty Nambooze and I are saying that if this situation goes on like this, it will be equated to that little insect, the “kasenyanku”, which as much as it makes its house out of sticks, when a bush fire comes, it consumes everything; that we are burying our heads in the sand when actually the situation is getting out of hand.

Regarding the issue on the Army, she was suggesting that the Government should create the officers’ mess to avoid members of the public drinking together with armed men who may have other motives especially when they are fighting for women, beer and the rest. During those days, it was clearly demarcated that serving officers in the Army had their mess where they could drink from. Therefore, unless hon. Karungi has got other motives because originally they had closed this CBS Radio and we do not again want this radio station closed because of this - there was nothing like abusing but it was just that.

I would also request that the hon. Member withdraws that statement and apologises to the hon. Member.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you are diverting us from the work that we came to do today. Can hon. Members go back to the statements of the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry? Three minutes each.

1.11
MR LARTIF  SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): I find it extremely difficult to present what I would want to present on the issue of what has been presented before the honourable member withdraws that allegation. Let her withdraw because it is very painful.

MS KARUNGI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sorry because I see the House is a little bit disorganised -(Interjections)- excuse me but maybe it is the slip of the tongue. I see the House is agitated.

THE SPEAKER: There is a point of order.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, your record in steering this House is impeccable and it speaks for itself. You have renowned experience in steering the Parliament of Uganda in a very orderly manner –(Applause)- and the honourable members of this august House are really very organised, they love their country and have shown patriotism. They listen to each other and they do not have ill intentions against anybody. Is hon. Karungi in order to allege that this House is disorganised and even therefore touching on your integrity and ability to steer this House in a very organised way? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not preside over a disorganised House! Please, withdraw and we move.

MS KARUNGI: I thank you very much. I am sorry and maybe it was a slip of the tongue. I, therefore, pray that the House forgives me on that specific word I have used. 

But on the allegation I have made, I am not withdrawing. I cannot withdraw because I know what I am saying. What they explained to me - unless if it is not true that the person who tried to explain to me in Luganda – if it is not true like that, I can withdraw because I also have no problem with hon. Nambooze.

MR OTADA: You gave very clear guidance to the hon. Member to the effect that she should withdraw a statement that she clearly failed to substantiate. I also think that it may probably be unfair if the hon. Member thinks that she has a point, which she can substantiate in another forum and that she does not want to withdraw the statement she has made.

I think we can go under rule 77 and refer this matter to the Rules and Discipline Committee [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] If the hon. Member has a case which she strongly believes in, let her make that point there and then the committee of the whole House will consider her defiance. For the merit that she really deserves, I beg that we move under rule 77(2) of our Rules of Procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think hon. Karungi was making her maiden speech. She could have had a slip of the tongue and I do not think it is appropriate to send her to the committee as per rule 77.

MR DOMBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural issue. Now that the House is fully constituted and we are going to debate very many important and serious issues, with our Rules of Procedure stating that the language of discussion in this House is English, may I propose that in future, if a Member wants to quote an issue that has been said either in the media or elsewhere, but outside this House, in a language that is not English, that that Member brings a translated version of they want to quote? This will enable Members to comprehend what that Member might have quoted. This is important because you can see that a Member from Kanungu is trying to quote something from a debate that was conducted in Luganda for the House without knowing the levels of comprehension. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I don’t want to encourage Members to come here and speak in Lusoga. The official languages in this House are English and Swahili. I shall not encourage other languages being imported into the House.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I am just trying to figure out a win-win situation in this case. My thinking is that the Chair, having guided that this is a maiden speech for the hon. Member for Kanungu, I would like to implore you to evoke your powers to have this part of the record expunged  from the Hansard. But I also undertake to have a good chat with the hon. Member for Kanungu – yes, I know how many mistakes I made in this House when I had just come in. Some of them were not really that I intended to make them; it was just because if I refused to withdraw any such statement, then the Members would move on to another rule and the next one and so on, until I would be made quiet in this House. That is why I undertake to have that chat with that honourable member. But as I said, I would like to ask you to use your powers to help us sort out hon. Betty Nambooze by getting that part of the record expunged before we do the rest with the hon. Member for Kanungu after the sitting.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, for the very reason that hon. Karungi is making her maiden speech; I want to continue protecting her from further intimidation. The matter she raised has been ably answered by hon. Nambooze and substantiated by hon. Sebuliba Mutumba. The House is also satisfied that hon. Nambooze did not say these words. So, let us not follow hon. Karungi anymore. Otherwise, she will never speak again in this House. Let us go back to trade and finance.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Going back to the issue of trade and finance, I would like to point out that the reason the minister of trade was asked to explain to Parliament issues relating to the recent strike by the traders in the city, is the gist of today’s sitting. I hope you are aware that these traders never called off their strike forever. They just informed Government that they would close their shops for two days and wait to hear from Government. So, any time they will strike again once their grievances are not attended to.

Yes, the minister has presented the various measures. However, I notice that most of these are long-term measures yet I would think that the minister gives us short-term measures that address the grievances of these traders as we wait for the long-term and permanent solutions. We have realised and we all know that 70 percent of our revenue is domestically generated. These traders are our bosses because they contribute almost 49 percent of this revenue we are talking about. So, the moment we don’t listen to their grievances – even as Members of Parliament we cannot be paid our salaries because they are our bosses.

When the traders raised the issue of being told to pay taxes in dollars – I would like to say that it would be prudent for the Government, as a way of sending signal that they are listening, to ask the Uganda Revenue Authority to stop asking local traders to pay taxes in dollars. That is the only way to send a signal that Government is caring. There is no way we can tell – (Member timed out_)

1.24
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Madam Speaker, thank you, for, first of all, calling for this important sitting that has generated two crucial reports.

Let me begin with a proposal that in future, it would be prudent for ministers, coming to address Parliament on more or less similar subjects, to compile a single report. 

That notwithstanding, let me refer you to page 4 of the report by the minister of finance where she asserts that the economy of Uganda depends heavily on imports. I would like to kindly request that the minister talks to the President to harmonise these positions. I am saying this because the President talked about a different thing altogether regarding our dependence on imports. It also looks like the President does not mind about the dollar surge given what he recently said while commissioning a book by his wife.

On page 6 of the same report, the minister of finance talks about the balance of payments that in the short term, the deficit is financed by utilising international foreign exchange reserves. She also continues to say that these reserves were indeed depleted. I want to know the circumstances under which these reserves were depleted.

On page 7, the minister of finance talks about the intervention by the Bank of Uganda on 30 June by selling US dollars. I would like to ask the minister to state exactly what amount was sold so that we can be a more relevant organ – we cannot just sit here and only be told, “Foreign exchange was sold.” It would mean less than if there was a figure of the amount.

On page 8, the minister rightly talks about the issue of discipline and the avoidance of such acts that may betray the economy of Uganda and thus falls short of advising Government on the way it spends. 

The minister of finance urges all of us to promote agro-processing for domestic use and export since she says that Government, in partnership with local commercial banks, is implementing the agricultural credit facilities for Shs 60 billion. I urge the minister to go back and bring a clear explanation of why the cooperative bank does not get reinstated – (Member timed out_)

1.28
MR MARTIN DRITO (NRM, Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Madam Speaker, we have raised some pertinent issues here regarding the depreciation of the Uganda shilling vis-à-vis the dollar. However, in addressing these issues, we have been less technical in trying to find out exactly why this is happening and what remedial actions could be taken. Uganda is an open economy; we follow an economic policy mix, which is potential classical and neo-classical and this involves looking at the use of fiscal policies and monetary policies and using interest rates and practices to regulate our economy. 

When you look at the classical and neo-classical aspects of our economic policies, you are looking at a situation and at the same time we are looking at demand and supply regulating the economy. What greatly troubles me is the cut out point where actually the Government intervenes or the Central Bank intervenes in determining at what level the shilling is allowed to depreciate vis-à-vis the dollar. It would be very interesting to know. 

We have seen the exchange rate of our shilling drop by about 16 percent and at the same time we have seen our foreign reserves cover for our imports in Uganda drop from 5.1 months in December 2010 to 4.6 months in January 2011 and it has come down to 3.7 months. This is a big concern. In economic terms, a country is respected by its ability to maintain its imports in moments of crisis for as long as possible. But 3.7 months is very minimal! 

In what form does Uganda maintain its foreign reserves? The simple spirit to this is that we could keep this in the US dollar, which I am sure is what we are doing, amidst the fact that the dollar is a currency, which is being doubted today because of the massive debt ratios in the –(Member timed out_)

1.32
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative): Madam Speaker, I thank you. I thank the two ministers here and I want to comment on an issue raised by hon. Amelia Kyambadde, specifically the issue of illegal immigrants. As a young representative of the youth and our Government, time is up. Three quarters of the jobs that are meant for the young people who have just left universities are taken up by these immigrants. I want to give an example. If you go to most of these hotels here, even the gatemen are people from outside Uganda. Where are we heading? Let us be realistic. Look at the local shops in the villages and review the local definition of “investor” - go to Busia or deep to that village in Serere, you will find an Indian with a shop there. The Mukwano Group here are the people who give these people services to sell on their behalf. Where is the local population of us, the young of Uganda? 

I want to request the Ministry of Internal Affairs to avail us the list of all the investors we have in this country so that we know what they are dealing in. Look at downtown Kampala; why are the traders crying? Most of the people have loans but here you are, dealing with a middleman who only sells to get profits and yet you depend on loans to earn a living. Where is the fairness? I am appealing to the ministry and the Government to try and vet the investors that we are talking about. In Amuria, a so-called investor is selling pancakes –(Interruption)

MR BIGIRWA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank my colleague for giving way. The issue of immigrants has become too much to bear. Where I come from in Hoima, people are finding it difficult to start business. You will find an Indian operating a shop with capital worth Shs 5 million, which every person in Hoima could afford. Worse still, we have got serious businessmen in Kampala who will send items on credit. The Indians in Kampala will supply their colleagues in the villages. It is worse that they are opening shops at sub-county level and in every trading centre in my constituency. The other day I took a walk to Kampala and I found these Indians doing chapati business. It is bad; and we shall raise some of these matters beyond our parties. 

1.36
MR GRACE BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Government ministers and shadow ministers who have presented. However, looking at the statement of the minister of finance from the angle of an economist, if I were marking this script, I would just not until when I get to page 8. On this page, the minister clearly states what we need to do as Government. This should even have been her first point because she says: “In the next few months, efforts will be made to focus more on facilitating export promotion activities including tourism….” 

We need to earn foreign exchange. This is what we are running away from because our sectors in this country are not performing so well. We need to make sure that we bring in activities from Government that are going to bring foreign exchange into this country. It is on the same page that she talks of agro-processing for domestic use. This is adding value to our goods that will go outside the country. This is the area where the minister should not even sleep; she should concentrate with her technical team and improve the economic situation in the country.

This issue of giving Shs 60 billion to the agriculture sector - it is little first of all. What about the money for people who are not in agriculture, the traders? How are you going to give incentives to the traders who are crying that they are falling out of business? People even no longer fly out of the country. Even airlines are going to stop coming to Uganda on a daily basis. We are a landlocked country. We have to bear that in mind whenever we are doing any activities for this country along economic lines.

We need to extend credit facilities, which are friendly to the local traders. These Chinese come and engage in local business because we do not have the capacity. The local traders do not have incentives. So, we should also look at the local traders.

Last night, I was listening to KACITA on NTV. KACITA is a good group but they are totally not informed about macro-economics. The minister of trade has to organise an immediate seminar for these traders because you cannot stand and say, “Fix the dollar at Shs 2,000.” How will the country function when you just reduce costs like that? It is impossible because we are not doing economic sensitisation of the people down there. We all think they understand macro-economics. This cannot work in this economy. We have to stand up and teach people about how the economy performs. It is very important. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we shall continue the dialogue in the State of the Nation Address. We need to close.

1.38
MS SARAH LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just have two comments to make about what the two ministers have said. One is about what my brother has already talked about: illegal immigrants. The perception of Ugandans towards the Government is that Government does not care. That is why any Tom, Dick and Harry can walk into the country and start a business and stay as long as he/she wants without any effort to eliminate that person. 

Because of illegal immigrants, I walked to the Immigration Department and had a talk with them. This is what I got from them. They know that there are so many illegal immigrants in Uganda, not only the Chinese and Indians. They told me there are quite a number of illegal immigrants like the Congolese, Rwandese and others. They even know where they live but they cannot afford to take them back because our airlines allow you to come in with a one-way ticket. So, when they get these illegal immigrants, the process of deporting them is very expensive to the ministry concerned.

So, Members of Parliament, I want us to be nationalistic. Let us support the Department of Immigration so that at least these illegal immigrants can be taken off our streets and our youth can have the jobs.

I got interested in this because one day I went to Lira and found that all the drug shops were managed by Indians. I know Members from Lira can testify to that effect. There is no single person from Lira who has a drug shop. I think the ministry concerned should look at the airlines. Why do we allow people to come in with a one-way ticket so that when we want to deport them, we cannot because they do not have the ticket? Our ministry has to look for the money to take them back. We have to look at that. 

Secondly, I want to talk about our liberal economy, the fiscal economy. I am not really an economist but one thing I know is that if I go to South Africa or Kenya and I want the dollar, my fingerprints are taken, my passport is taken and all the information is recorded. But in Uganda, you can walk into a foreign exchange bureau and buy US $1,000 or more and nobody follows you. In Uganda, we walk into any foreign exchange bureau and just buy dollars. Why is the economy so liberalised? Why can’t we do something about it so that we look at that -(Member timed out_) 

1.42
MR GEORGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to react to the minister of finance’s statement about the exchange rate.

I am aware Government, through Uganda Revenue Authority, uses the exchange rate as a source of revenue for this country. In the 2010 performance of Uganda Revenue Authority, it was declared that the body was able to collect Shs 7,000 billion out of the high exchange rate that was being levied on the imports in this country.

I agree with the finance ministry’s initiatives of saying the demand and supply should determine the exchange rate; but we should find ourselves protecting imports. It is deceptive for us to say that the economy of Uganda can rely on exports alone. Let us look at our capacity; how many exporters are in this country? Let us look at the importers. How many people derive their livelihood from imports? The majority of Ugandans are employed by importers who have shops who buy from wholesalers and they distribute these items up to the local level. When you get to Bukedea, the majority of my people sell imported items. Look around here. I do not see any MP putting on a Ugandan suit. All these items are imports. It is deceptive for us to ignore the calls of our people when they suggest that at least let the exchange rate be at 2,000 and we ignore them. It is better for the ministry of finance to consider a certain rate because we are talking of a liberal economy. Even the other players must be able to propose a figure such that businesses are rescued in this country.

I want to comment on manufacturing levels in this country. What we call manufactured products, if we really verified them, I want to tell you these items come in form of raw materials to the country yet they are finished products. What they only do is to repackage these products then we say, “Oh, we are selling exports.” This is deceptive. Hon. Members, let us consider the issue raised by the taxpayers in this country. The economy we are seeing in this country - (Member timed out_) 

1.46
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (NRM, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker -(Interjection)- hon. Remigio because it is me who raised this issue –

THE SPEAKER: Yes, you are the one who raised it. 

MR NSEREKO: I want to move in a marathon way, Madam Speaker. The most important thing to fix this economy is to get a dream team just like Kenya did, just like Mexico did at one time. They got a dream team that came up with pertinent problems to fix. It was not partisan in form of politics. You can see political tempers flaring in here and there. What Egypt did after the riots, when there was a change in regime and the dollar had surged, they called on their private sector - the banks, telecoms and even the tourism sector, hotels among others - and told them that, “Since you are our business partners, if you are repatriating 80 percent, let us reduce it to 20 percent for the next 12 months.” 

What happened is that the dollar automatically had to remain in the Egyptian economy and it stabilised. But what we are witnessing now is that even the money that was brought in by the Central Bank – speculators went to the banks, got all those dollars and repatriated them. This is the reality.

Something that we also need to address is diversification of our exports. Let us redefine our economy. What are we exporting? Are we exporting services? In some countries like the Tiger states, it is information technology and brains. What are we exporting? We are talking agriculture, agriculture and agriculture but we are showing nothing for it. What is Shs 60 billion? What are the stimulus packages that we are putting into this economy in order to boost agriculture? We are only talking so much and doing nothing as Government. We ask for months – are we going to fix this economy in months that are not defined? Let us be definitive and say, “In four months, this is what we are going to do”.

This Government has only invested in depleting its reserves through buying jet fighters and other things and that is why –(Interjections)- let us face reality. We have depleted our reserves. We are talking of reserves that are running empty. I want the hon. Prime Minister to come out clearly and inform this country as to whether we really have reserves. I know, from the way I am being informed, that these reserves were depleted.

What we have to do as well –(Member timed out_) 

1.50
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. As a Parliament, we have come to take stock of what we have been doing to our economy. It is time that we looked at what we have been doing and then we find out whether we have been investing properly, so that we can now demand for a better harvest. 

Many colleagues have alluded to many points, which I don’t want to repeat. I think the minister has really done her part because she says that imports are growing. She said that in a normal situation exports should have also grown. That means she is alluding to the fact that there is something abnormal. 

I take exception to the exogenous factors, which I agree are dynamics affecting our economy but the factors, which are internal, namely, how have we invested to ensure that we stimulate our exports - we have been trying to add value; we have been putting money to, is it, Tristar or AGOA girls but what is the effect of such an intervention by this Government? We cannot, for example, accept the minister’s appeal, on page 8, when she says: “In the next few months, efforts will be made to focus more on facilitating export promotion activities ….” And she has not told us what those interventions are. And then she goes ahead to plead with us: “However, Madam Speaker, the  success of these measures - which we don’t know - calls upon all of us the political actors to remain disciplined, to avoid bad behavior.” We should know that we shall have to put our money where our mouth is. 

If we do not do serious value addition, there is no way we are going to improve on our exports. If we do not vet some of these investors, and know that we are putting our money in the right spot, we shall only continue having our economy eroded because at the end of the day, it is a balance of trade game.

Hon. Nsereko alluded to foreign reserves. I can only agree with him. Expenditure not backed by any economic activity - we are reaping what we have been sowing -(Member timed out_) 

1.53
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have tried to refresh my economics at university and I think I can give some prescriptions to the ministers present here and I would urge you to take notes. I just have four suggestions; but before I do that, I want to caution Ugandans. Let us go slow on investors. Last night, I called one of the local radio stations and I said that the moment we start making careless statements, it may cause them to even leave the country and we will lose more dollars. (Applause)

In Egypt, to have one foreigner working in there, you must employ eight Egyptians. So it is just a question of law. We want to go downtown, meet one Chinese working and see that the Chinese employs eight Ugandans. But in the shops, you find only Chinese; three of them and not even a single Ugandan. So, I challenge the minister in charge of labour to bring that particular regulation.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, in Malaysia, it is one foreigner to ten Malaysians. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Precisely! So in Uganda, I don’t know what it is but maybe the minister will tell us.

My second suggestion is consumption. I was in one of the biggest shopping malls in the southern hemisphere and I was looking at women’s shoes but they don’t look as good as the women’s shoes in Uganda. And I was saying to myself that I would have expected something a little flamboyant in South Africa. My guide told me that the Government has very strict rules on importing shoes from the US or UK. They encourage people to consume local products. So, if you want to buy pointed shoes from Paris, you might have to part with about US $250 but in Uganda, almost everyone is putting on golden shoes at about US $10. 

So, you need to direct your taxes to discourage consumption of certain products. We don’t need those products; they make the dollars fly away. And the areas you can influence are consumption of perfumes; shoes and clothes so that we can have people consuming local products. In Ghana, there is a tradition and every Friday civil servants are encouraged to put on African attire. 

Lastly, we need foreign exchange bureaus – I was in Kikuubo and I saw a man pull out about US $300 million from his socks. I am not sure Government is aware of how much money is changing hands in Kikuubo. You go to a bank and find four people lining at a teller but they take five hours to complete their transactions! So, we need to have fingerprints taken at every dollar transaction. You cannot just exchange money. Actually, let me confess - give me just 30 seconds. I was advised that if I have Shs 10 billion I will drive it into Kenya, bring dollars here and out of the 10 billion I will make Shs 20 million profit in one day and there is no Government involved because you do not know what amount of dollars is exchanging hands downtown. So, you need to strengthen that control and we have finger prints and photocopies of passports before any transaction in dollars is done. The moment you do that, you will be able to control the black market dealings, which are going on downtown -(Member timed out_)

1.58
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start by thanking the women for their votes yesterday and to say that the colour yellow is because I am a very good Catholic and I was thanking God. (Laughter)

I want to comment on the issue of the minister of trade. While on page 3 the minister highlights the demands from KACITA, when you look at the minister’s response and interventions, the interventions are mostly three: ensuring access to information, sensitisation of the farmers and continuous consultation with the stakeholders, that is KACITA. 

I am worried because the KACITA people had actually said that if their demands are not met in concrete terms, then they will resume their strike. Can the minister give us concrete proposals? For instance, when they demand that the Central Bank should specifically introduce - because most of their exports are from UAE and China, they want you to introduce the Dirham and the Yen of China as currencies in Uganda and you have not answered that. You have only talked about dollars. 

When they talk about the question of equitable distribution of foreign exchange to all foreign exchange bureaus, it means that they know there are certain people who are given priority to buy the exchange rate and they dominate and they hike the price. They want equal distribution to these foreign exchange bureaus to Kikuubo foreign exchange dealers but the minister has not responded to this. How do we equitably distribute - because finance has failed and Bank of Uganda has intervened by ensuring that more foreign exchange is bought to stabilise the foreign exchange. Can you please tell us what your intervention will be on equitable distribution of this foreign exchange to the small dealers?

When they talk about tax waivers on diesel and they are saying it is the transport industry, which controls the distribution - when diesel and petrol prices are high, of course, they will pass their transport costs of going to Lira, Amoro, Bundibugyo, Kiruhura or Arua and everywhere onto the consumer and they are saying, “Can you ensure you waive taxes on diesel and petrol and intervene in this matter so that they can also reduce?” The transporters will reduce transport fares and the prices of commodities will reduce -(Member timed out_)

2.01
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have quietly observed the statements by the two ministers but I am excessively disappointed because I do not see this country being directed out of this crisis. When the ministers are talking about the global recession, most of these global economies have tried to show to their citizens that there can be a way out of this but Uganda has done nothing. Then my two good ministers come here and give us no hope!

However, I want to give a very clear relationship between inflation and political regimes. When Mobutu Sese Seko was in the DRC, bread was being procured at 10 million Za¿re. And when Mugabe still continued to be in Zimbabwe we saw the Zimbabwean currency depreciate at an unbelievable rate. Today they have adopted the dollar as the official currency. When Museveni is still in power to this day, we are continuingly seeing the depreciation of the Ugandan shilling. That tells you there is a very serious correlation between political administration of countries and inflation. 

What does this mean? The longer you stay in power, you direct the economy of the country to none useful investment other than politics. You invest in politics and in patronage. That means you are directing resources to just the supply end of money. You are not withdrawing it. There is no export of politics. Tell me one country in Africa or in the world where there is political expertise being exported via elections. We wired this country with money and now we cannot recollect that money because it did not go to investment. 

Unfortunately or fortunately, Uganda is privileged to have the best economists in the world - some of them are in here but we are now saying, “You see, in the next three months …,” and the ministers have not given us a sense of direction. How do you rise up to the Ugandans and say, “This is prosperity for all?” Fundamentally, it is just state failure and we cannot continue like this. We can all sit here in our nice jackets and walk with the best handbags and dresses and say that we are ministers, but if our appointments do not reflect any improvement in the lives of people, we are actually absolute liars and God should either recall us or we should continue on. (Applause)

Regional factors: they are talking about the shilling depreciating as a result of the depreciation in other countries. The question I am asking is: what is the volume of trade that Uganda enjoys with these neighbouring countries to the extent that our shilling should depreciate much faster than their own? How much do we reap in the regional trade? What if these are not even answered? You do not even have the statistics and you have the morality to assure Ugandans over air! Such a heartbreaking situation! 

However, let us look at where we could invest our money. The current inflation is partly as a result of food related costs -(Member timed out_) 

2.05
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think we have a crisis. Others might prefer to call it a problem but the multi-million dollar question is: how did we arrive at this crisis? Has it taken us unaware? And if it did, who are those managing our economy? 

Listening to the State of the Nation Address, you would actually think Uganda is a developed country because it is supposed to tell us that we have this problem and these are the consequences. It was not delivered a couple of weeks ago and none envisaged this.

The fundamentals of the economy are wrong and this is the question we have been raising on this Floor, at least for the last 11 years. I have been in this House, reminding our colleagues on the other side who are in Government that actually we are not investing in production. There are things that are not sustainable and, Madam Speaker, let us go to the figures. I have been looking at the share of the taxes on international trade on the total revenue from 2005. In 2005/2006 it was 49.1, 2006/2007 it was 48.9, 2007/2008 it was 50, 2008/2009 it was 49.5, 2009/2010 it was 45. I did not have time and opportunity to look at that of the previous financial year. Can we afford a distortion on this tax base? Hon. Minister, the budget you have just read will end up on paper if you distort this tax base. Before we even pass your budget, you have already pleaded guilty. 

On page 9, paragraph (b) you said: “While in the Budget Speech for the Financial Year 2011/2012, the taxes on kerosene of Shs 200 per litre were removed completely and on sugar reduced by Shs 50, there has been no downward revision in the consumer prices of these commodities.” This is self-indictment and you have just wasted time.

What we have been telling you is that we have not got our priorities right; we need to go slow on these things like subsidies. For example, a friend was telling me that we spend about US $20 million per month subsidies on diesel –(Member timed out_)

2.09
MR WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister of Trade said something that excited me and that is to do with the small and medium enterprises directorate which she wants to set up. I hope this does not end up as a directorate in the ministry and is not implemented.

In the 1980s when the NRM had just come into power, there was a lot of romantic language about small scale industries. You remember the Musa Body fame; the President was moving around industries saying we should help them, but nothing happened. Instead they collapsed. Then the AGOA era came. As much as Uganda championed AGOA – the President has praised himself about that for years – but we have got nothing out of it. If you go to Lesotho, a small country, they are getting hundreds of millions of dollars from AGOA from textiles yet they grow no cotton. They instead get thread from China or India and make nice clothes for the American market. On the other hand, Uganda spent millions of dollars but all of it went down the drain because we politicised business. The President is the major problem facing business growth; he is the one who decides who develops local business and gives money and so none of these ministers can talk. We would have succeeded with AGOA if the President had not interfered the way he did by selecting wrong people to do business. He even went to villages to collect girls who knew nothing about tailoring yet there are many tailors in this country that would have produced wonderful clothes. 

I know a lot about China; most of the things we import from there are from small cottage industries. We could do those things here – Uganda is a major re-export country and I would like the minister of finance to tell us the figures; Uganda is a major re-export country for DR Congo, Rwanda, Burundi, Sudan and Central African Republic. What is the contribution of these exports to our economy? Is it negative or positive? Do they bring dollars or not? We use our dollars to bring things from China and they come to take them to those countries. This is an opportunity for us because we would be making things here to export. But in this country we do not have machine-tool factories; we do not have machines to make machines. Simple things like making nuts and bolts we cannot invest in that. All we invest in is consumption; every time we are just consuming. The President or the minister of finance comes here for a supplementary budget only for consumption. This time when you come for a supplementary budget, it should be directed towards production –(Member timed out_)

2.13
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Madam Speaker, I start by thanking the Minister of Trade and Industry, hon. Amelia Kyambadde for the great work and for starting with an apology. I believe Parliament has forgiven her because we saw her running up and down to look into the traders’ problems. She has ably presented those problems and so I thank her for that. (Applause) However, I also think that most of the interventions to the question she ably presented here – about the problems of KACITA – are not coming from the ministry of trade; it is supposed to be the ministry of finance and Ministry of Internal Affairs to handle. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, you know that the moment Kampala sneezes the rest of Uganda catches a cold. That is why I told you yesterday that in Agago, people were buying sugar at Shs 7,000 per kilo because shops here were closed for two days and traders could not get sugar from anywhere. Even today, sugar still goes for Shs 6,000. So whereas we undermine the two-day sit down strike, we should understand that it is a trend that is set to continue. I heard traders yesterday talk and even UTODA has threatened to follow KACITA and UMA too has threatened. As we dilly-dally, we will see; the moment these two groups begin – even KACITA has warned that this is not the end. I want to request – and we have got information from reliable sources that State House, instead of rewarding the good work of hon. Kyambadde by outlining solutions, they are instead threatening KACITA. As I speak now, the chairman of KACITA is hospitalized because of pressure. They call them directly with threats.

Madam Speaker, on page 9 the minister of finance states that the exchange rate of Ugshs 2,000 to the dollar is price manipulation by the traders and she goes on to say, “The price manipulation is neither feasible ... (Interruption)- can you give me time, please? She says under point (a) that: “The price manipulation is neither feasible nor possible in an open market economy.” I really wonder whether it is a typing error or what? (Member timed out_)

2.17
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I was impressed by the report given by the minister. In fact this is one of the reports, which have been so detailed. We have been giving tasks to ministers here in Parliament ever since we started on Monday and the reports which have been brought have all nearly been thrown out by the Members but this time, the reports that have been brought are concrete and well planned with proper consultations from the departmental heads. I appreciate the efforts put in by the two ministers. 

However, I have one comment. The country now is almost ruled under violence. It is not until the people riot or demonstrate that honourable ministers can respond. (Applause) If such reports would come on time, give information to Members of Parliament so that they, being the people who reach out to communities get the information and take it directly home, then the people would not have developed this habit of rioting. Otherwise, the country is almost out of hand; the agenda of the media – the ministries are working under pressure from the either the media or the Opposition. So, I wonder what we are going to do with these ministers.  

I am trying to advance a point that the media should be utilised instead of just looking at it as an enemy of Government. Let us utilise it properly to do agenda setting. In most cases when you use the media properly, it gives you credit. When you misuse and undermine it, it can even tarnish you. So, Madam Speaker, I am requesting the honourable ministers to get such reports and on routine basis give them to the media and Members of Parliament so that other people may not take advantage of lack of information. 

Secondly, the issues, for example which have been highlighted by the minister of trade are part of what KACITA has already set recommendations for and the day before yesterday on TV, it was reported that if those recommendations are not implemented, then the members of the business community are going to strip and move naked -(Member timed out_)

2.21
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Now that it is two minutes, I really want to say that I have no doubt in my mind that both the minister of finance and that of trade are not only performers by occupation but by practice and from the way they have handled these crisis issues, they have been diplomatic; they are not antagonistic and they are good listeners. I am sure that they have been listening to Members’ contributions regardless of which side of the House they have come from because these are national issues, which are not partisan. 

So, what do I want to see? This House expects to see a comprehensive report, as the minister of trade has stated, that involves all stakeholders and addresses the issues of the escalating fuel prices. The common man wants to see that fuel has been stabilised and is reduced in price. The common person wants to see that the inflation in this country is going down. And what is it that we as the people’s representatives want to see because when the traders close their shops, it hurts all of us as consumers? My colleague said that: “They are not bosses; a customer is always right, we are the ones who make them what they are.” I have also heard my colleagues saying, “These foreign investors...!” Let us not generalise all of them. Some of them are good; some of them are quacks. But it is the Department of Immigration responsible. 

I have been in this House for some time. Every time we rise and bring up these issues, which are very shameful on the part of Government, how come there is no data? There is no inventory about these investors at all.  How is it that today you are telling us that you are going to come up with an inventory about their work permits? This is the only country that I have been to that you can cross the border and come in and go out  and do what you want to do in the way that you want. Why is this Government so generous? (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Actually, hon. Members, in the Seventh Parliament this House commissioned a select committee to look into that particular issue and part of the report said that: “For every foreigner here, there is a big Ugandan giving umbrella cover.”

2.24
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have listened to a number of deliberations very well and they have concentrated on the dollar but when you also look at other currencies within the region, our bargaining power has reduced there too. For example, the Kenyan Shilling today is at 29.8 in exchange for the Uganda Shilling. The Tanzanian Shilling is at 1.6 and the Mafaranga is at 4.2. So, we have to get certain things right. 

A few years ago, fish had taken over the traditional exports that we had and we were getting US $140 million annually from fish exports. Today we get US $80 million, which means that previously we were getting US $11.6 million on average and today we are getting US $6.2 million monthly. That is already a reduction in the number of dollars coming in. So, every part of this county is endowed in different aspects. What we should do as Government is to equip different areas according to their corporative advantage. If Karamoja is endowed in certain aspects, we should help them more along those lines. If Buvuma is endowed in fishing, then we help them along that line. That is the only way that we shall be able to sustain and improve our competitiveness on the market.

Otherwise, we should also move to set a minimum wage -(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are going to continue the dialogue on the State of the Nation Address. You can use the same material in the State of the Nation debate and you will have five minutes there, now you only have two minutes. The ministers will have to come back for that debate, no one from that Front Bench is going to escape.

2.28
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to contribute to the debate basically on two points. The first one is to appreciate the explanation offered by the two ministers about the apparent crisis we are experiencing in the country.

In today’s globalised world, our economies are well integrated and connected with other economies globally and that means that the effect or shock suffered by one economic area or zone definitely affects the other. Of course the degree of effect may defer but it is true that one shock in a certain zone can affect the other zones. That is why as Uganda, there is no way we can escape the crises that the West is suffering either in Europe or the United States or even Eurasia to which we are heavily connected. And so we cannot dismiss, like some colleague put it, that the crisis in Greece can in no way affect the economy in Uganda, it does actually affect.

Secondly, my concern is the proposed way forward. The two statements do not seem to give us sufficient hope. I am not sure that when I leave this House my people will be content with the explanations given by the ministers. Whereas some measures have been proposed, others tend to imply that there is helplessness on the part of Government and, therefore, I think as others have proposed, that we need to have an inter ministerial framework that will bring on board the key ministries jointly to see how a detailed response can be given to this crisis. Otherwise, a single ministry like that of trade or finance cannot, on its own, actually help to reverse the situation.

So I propose something inter ministerial, with key ministries coming together jointly to address the situation as pertains the market. 

2.30
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the two ministers for the very good papers but allow me to bring in the ministry of agriculture because the economic problems we are facing today, in my view, can be handled this way. We have to increase exports and reduce imports. I bring in the ministry of agriculture because it is well known and even the colonialists knew the comparative advantage of Uganda because in trade you have to go for your comparative advantage and ours is agriculture.

However, I am a bit disappointed that on page 7 of the paper presented by the minister of trade she gives very little on promoting production. She says, “Production will be promoted in the long term mainly”. Madam Speaker, last week I was in Rwanda. They have put up very wonderful warehouses, well cemented where they are receiving our matooke. They are now even discouraging buying matooke, which is about to ripen because they want our matooke to stay there for at least a week. Now we have a current problem and you are talking about long term production plans? I fail to understand.

With due respect, the Prime Minister is here. What happened to NARI PIP, which was a Government programme in agriculture supposed to excavate dams for farmers? The dry spell has set in. The people I represent in Kashari are in the cattle corridor and by August, there will be no water. There is high demand for meat in Congo, Rwanda and Saudi Arabia. I want an explanation from the ministry of agriculture -(Member timed out_)

2.33
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker for giving the people’s representatives an opportunity to discuss what is pertaining in this country. I want to thank the two senior ministers for having gone through the baptism of fire and I encourage them to take heart. You are not the cause of the disease. You know doctors even deal with those who have tried to commit suicide.

I only want to thank the experts who are cushioning you tonight. This matter is a technical one. Can we hear more from the technical experts and reduce the political and partisan eyes in this matter? Let us avoid dealing with symptoms. The problem is big. As the Chairman of the Committee on National Economy, two years ago I made a report here warning of the secondary effects of the global economic crisis. So, on the international angle - I hope I will be given a few more minutes because I want to say a few things.

I want to say, on behalf of the committee and Parliament that we are seeking to be on the Order Paper next week and we are working with the Budget office to bring the parliamentary version of the state of the economy. I hope the ministers will be able to respond.

I also want to say that all you are hearing that Asians are manufacturers, distributors, transporters and retailers is as a result of a regulation problem. We have been saying that in our reports. It is not the problem of migrants. If there were regulations, they would not find themselves retailing in Buliisa.

Can I also add that whereas it is for real that we have economic problems, there is also the psychological crisis, which can actually complicate our problem? If the whole world out there gets to know that we have a problem in Uganda, we are going to have a problem with direct foreign investment -

THE SPEAKER: But you will be able to elaborate when you bring that paper, isn’t it?

MR MUKITAKE: Yes, Madam Speaker, but I just wanted - it is very important that the ministry of finance brings to this Parliament information on how much multi nationals like MTN finally take out of this country. Until we have that audit, this country has a risk of losing a lot of money, very little investment and too much being taken out without plough back. There is no country, which has developed without ownership of capital because this means retention of profits and therefore plough back and creating employment.

Last week you brought to us a budget support request. I would like to hear the Prime Minister and the minister of finance and their input in relation to budget re-allocation. We cannot pass this budget the way you presented it as if things are normal. We need serious surgery on our budget so as to put resources in productive areas. 

I hope this is what we are going to get before we actually start looking at the budget -(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we shall continue the dialogue during debate on the State of the Nation.

2.37
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County west, Kibaale): I want to thank the hon. Ministers for presenting their statements. As a man who studied political science and read the book of Walter Rodney, I would give them 90 percent for blaming the global financial crisis to explain our situation here.

They must also understand that as managers of this country, they have the ultimate responsibility to help us who are suffering with the consequences of the global financial crisis. For instance they are allowing the traders in town to be charged rent in dollars. They should only tell the foreign traders to pay rent in dollars. The local traders are paying rent in dollars, increasing the demand for the dollar. 

It is clear that we should stop blaming the global financial crisis. If you go to European countries, you will not find there Malaria but you come to Uganda and you will find people dying of Malaria. Why is it that Ugandans can die of Malaria and Europeans are not? 

2.39
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative Serere): I do not think that at this point in time I can be able to go into the few issues I wanted to raise in terms that are very specific. I want to think that what has happened in Kampala and what has happened with the shilling is just a symptom of a huge problem in our economy. 

I think Parliament should afford itself the opportunity to go in depth on matters of our economy, including an opportunity that will help you get the Governor Bank of Uganda to come and tell us what is happening, get someone in charge of manufactures, get KACITA and that is why I think that this matter should go to the Committee of National Economy and we hear from stakeholders. We can then get recommendations. Even the way we are ending is just like the minister came and she is now walking out and we are also walking. 

I just want to stop at this proposal: send this matter, with bigger terms of reference, to the Committee of National Economy, enrich what they have and they bring a better report and we adopt the recommendations.

2.41
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Mine is a conclusion. Having listened to the discussions carefully, I have a suggestion to Government. If we are to solve the problem of KACITA then we have to look at the high interest rate, the high exchange rate, the high transport costs. Then we have to also to subsidise the loans for the business community. This is a sign that we have an explosion in waiting. In my district there are women dying from labour not because they do not have the health facilities but because they are supposed to be transferred to the hospitals far way. Because of high transport costs, the local people normally fail to raise the money for hiring the vehicles for transport. Today we have KACITA, tomorrow we will have the women of Uganda rising up and demonstrating because they dying as a result of high transport costs, which they cannot afford.

I would like to address myself to the minister in charge of trade. We talked about middlemen. When you go down town, you will find that there many middlemen. For example the printing sector is managed by middle men. They go and get contracts and then pay cash to the commercial printers. This means that they end up paying very little to the commercial printers who are paying rent, salaries and electricity bills.

We have to really address the issue of the middlemen in all the sectors of our economy. We have to look at a way of getting loans for the business community.

2.44
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Let me ask about policies, can’t we influence or even change policies? I know that most of these policies are imposed on us by our development partners. When we talk about liberalisation, we know that it was imposed on us. Sudan is offering a big market for us in the north but we need to regularise some of the activities because now they come and buy products like cassava right from the field. They buy cassava together with the stem and they carry all of it. I think that it is a big problem for us to trade like that. 

I think we need to look at education. Our education seems not be helping us much. We know that our population is young. We need a comprehensive and integrated kind of education. We talk about commercialising and industrialising agriculture but when we go to the education sector, we are only training people for white collar jobs, which may not be available here.

Let us look at the last elections; all of us who were in the Eighth Parliament were given Shs 20 million for monitoring NAADS. That was already too bad, that was giving money to go and distribute to people. This money that we distributed to people may not be productive and can cause this inflation –(Member timed out_) 

2.47
MR AHMED AWONGO (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): I would like to join the previous speakers in thanking the two ministers for a job well done. I have two important questions that I would like to pose to this House. It is true that for us to improve our economy, two elements are very essential. 

The first is improved and increased production especially in agriculture. For all these years, I have been following our budget and there is no single time we have increased the budget for agriculture. The budget for agriculture has always remained below five percent and if this has been a decision of the Executive, what has the Parliament done to ensure that this five percent, which has been there for all these years, is increased?

Secondly, you cannot reap where you have not sown. If you have put very little into agriculture, then what do we expect to get out of the little that we have put into that very important sector of production? All of us are aware of the fact that most of the biggest foreign earners are foreigners and these include the banks, the cell phone companies, Umeme, Eskom and so on –((Member timed out_)

2.49
MR YONA MUSINGUZI (Independent, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): I want to inform this House that I have been told by a friend at Entebbe Airport that he watches on a daily basis a plane full of dollars flying from the airport and it goes unchecked – from these multi-national companies we all know.

I know the global crisis has hit Uganda and the whole world at large but let us not go back to the Stone Age era where every misfortune was believed to happen because it was the order of the day. These problems are not of today but have accrued from today, tomorrow and yesterday.

Notwithstanding the fact that we want some of those investors, some of them are very unnecessary. They are the ones causing that repatriation of our dollars, which we are crying about as we talk now. In the 1970’s – I do not whether it was in 1974 when Idi Amin Dada had a disciplinary measure to that cause - I do not know whether we should revoke that because some of them are not really necessary here and they are making Uganda’s economy go back to a mess.

I know we have a great love for foreigners but in the surrounding countries like in Rwanda if you do not have these papers they call a byangobwa and in Sudan if they ask you for kaltasi or in Kenya when they ask you for kitambulisho to begin that small business, if you do not have them then you cannot do business. Which Ugandan is doing business in India? (Member timed out_) 

2.51
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): I thank you. I want to bring it to the attention of the ministers of finance and trade that from Dubai to Mombasa, it is about 6,800 kilometres and from Mombasa to Kampala, it is about 1,170 kilometres. I have heard honourable members talk about the issue of fuel prices but to transport a container of 20 feet from Dubai to Mombasa costs US $2,200 but from Mombasa to Kampala it costs US $4,000. 

The problems that are making the traders pay high prices are the high licenses, handling and clearing charges but not the fuel. When we talk about improving exports, we are forgetting about the question of the labour loss. I want to assure you, hon. Members that there is no invention going to come beyond history. The voice that is silent is the one that has the answer; you are leaving out the youth who are productive but are not being engaged to productively deliver to our country. What do you expect? 

I am talking here but I know in Kampala, 30 percent of the population is the youth who are smart, went to school and are educated but they are being misled by the landlords of the buildings in Kampala. We over concentrate on helping the aged people but when you do an audit, where do they put the money? You may find that they fly out of the country, do business out there and yet we the young generation can invest in our country and export.

We also have the problem of arbitrary valuations as far as revenue is concerned. There is winter and summer and if you go to buy a coat when it is winter, you will find the price different when it is summer because when it is winter, they use more of jackets and not coats and therefore the price is low. But when you come to Uganda Revenue Authority, they have a data base of prices based on dollars.

The question is, “Did somebody do it in winter of summer?” We are using an arbitrary system because of one thing; the targets –(Member timed out_)

2.54
MR ACHIA REMIGIO (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): I thank you. Leaving alone the reports, I want to address myself to why we are here this morning. Madam Speaker, if you had not demanded of our ministers yesterday to come with reports, we would not be here.

My appeal is that the nature of working in the Ninth Parliament should change. We should not go to the point where we demand for information. We have had this problem in committees. When I used to be a co-chair of the National Economy Committee, ministers used to play hide and seek. You could ask for a report because you want to finish the work – so it has even now come to the Floor of the House.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, let us have a different way of working –(Applause)- because if there is a delay in giving a reply especially with issues of economics, it brings about speculation.

When we heard Mutebile had resigned, something was happening; the people who were in this country – the capital markets and our neighbours attacked the shilling. It jumped from 2,300 to 2,700. The speculators are in this country and probably some of them are even in this Parliament. The speculators get Shs 200 million and buy dollars, wait for three days and then sell at 2,700. They are attacking the shilling. 

You have said in the report that beyond dealing with speculative attacks on the market, the Government behaves cautiously not to deplete its reserves. How are you going to be cautious? What are the recommendations you are giving us to fight his speculation? What are you proposing?  

On No. 2, page 7, you said, “In the short term, Government will maintain flexible exchange rates.” Am I seeing that the Government is thinking of not maintaining a flexible exchange rate in the long run? Is there a debate to that direction? These are some of the questions because the economist and trader read into these words. If I read into these words, I may start another speculation and do something else, which can affect our economy. Some of the things we say here are very important. Timely information at time “T” – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members and Ministers, I have received information that the taxi drivers are also planning a strike over diesel next week. So you may wish to address it.

2.56
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Maria Kiwanuka): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is my maiden appearance in this House and I look forward to many more. I thank you for all the kind comments and for the other ones as well.

I just want to clarify that we came after we had been told that the title of our presentation was the depreciation of the Uganda Shilling vis-à-vis the US dollar. So, inevitably, there was a lot of global discussions and aspects to our presentation. I will just make a few factual corrections and modifications now and for the rest, I will come back to the committee. 

First of all, let me say something on the question of customs assessment. After the customs assessment, taxes are paid in Uganda shillings. However, it is based on the landed values of the imports. And since the imports are paid for in dollars, or Euros et cetera, inevitably the exchange rate comes into consideration. Otherwise, importers in Uganda pay taxes in Uganda shillings.

The second clarification is about the claim that was made about capital outflows. I would like to refer the hon. Members to table to the background of the Budget for 2011/2012 – see table 16 on page 28. In here it is clearly stated that our current account deficit is US $1,439 billion, which was financed by capital inflows of US $1,632 million. This means we were the next recipient of capital inflows and not capital outflows.

A couple of other clarifications were about what our reserves are. The official reserves as of 06 July 2011 are US $1,957 million. This is up from US $1,919 million in the middle of June. 

My reference to the countries in the West was inevitable because much of our capital inflows come from the West in the form of export revenues, foreign direct investments, donor grants and loans and workers’ remittances. Due to the downturn in those countries, their demand for our exports or their imports was down. The job earnings of our Ugandans living there went down. Foreign direct investment had to be turned more to home or local needs. And the countries I mentioned like Ireland and Greece are also competing with us for those inflows. So, yes they are relevant to the discussion.

A lot of comments were made about the inflows and outflows of labour and money in the Uganda market. I would like to remind you that the Ugandan economy is an open market one having been liberalised in the 1990s, which was a major step. As it is with all the major steps, there is always a need for fine tuning and that is why the comments I have received here today – in my third week of office - have been invaluable. We will take them all up. Allegations of course will be investigated. And I would like to point it out here that the Government has already proposed the Anti-Money Laundering Bill, which will soon be considered by this august House. I know this law will address issues associated with laundering resources through Uganda, which have been referred to in various instances.

I also would like to refer you to the Uganda National Identification Project, which is now on. With the completion of this project, it will mean that all Ugandans and all the residents who are here will receive identification numbers. This will help us to track who is a resident and who is not; who is our citizen and who is not. It will be just a matter of regulation. We also think this will help us answer some of the queries that were raised on this Floor today.

Madam Speaker, a lot of the questions raised here this morning were already on our desks when we assumed office; we are working on them. There was a question on the money in circulation and why the old notes are still circulating alongside the new ones. When the new notes were introduced, it was a ratio, the old being 70 percent while the new ones were at 30 percent. Right now the old notes are only 20 percent of the circulation while the new notes are 80 percent. So, we hope they will all soon be out of circulation as old notes.

Another question was about the donor or development partner composition of the Budget. In this year’s Budget, their contribution is only 29 percent and our point is to the declining trend from the 1990s when it was above 50 percent. It is now at 29 percent and hopefully it will continue to decline.

On the Tororo fertilizer factor, I would like to say that I will be back to the august House with the exact information.

There were some questions on fuel procurement, but I would like to say that I have noted the questions on fuel procurement and the answers have been given by my colleague, the Minister of Trade and Industry. Also, more answers will come from our colleagues in the ministry of energy. However, I just want to point out that this is one of the issues that is being handled on a cross-ministerial basis: finance, trade and energy.

I also would like to point out that the ministry of finance had already started to consult with the private sector: with KACITA, UMA, and the Uganda Private Sector Foundation. We received their comments and we are already working on their requests.

As far as agriculture is concerned, the ministry fully agrees with this Parliament, Madam Speaker. That is why you see that in the 2011/2012 Budget, we have focused more on agricultural productivity, agro-processing and tourism. As you will remember, we said that the emphasis of the Budget would not be so much absolute amounts because we have constrained resources, but on value addition. So, we are going to make sure we get value added to agricultural productivity, agro-processing and tourism so that money put into these sectors comes back with a big multiplier. I just want to note that we believe that agro-processing is going to be a major factor in driving this economy forward. Therefore, you will have noted that there was a big investment in infrastructure, energy and roads. 

Similarly, we have other projects that we are going to concentrate on and that will be improving access through rural roads, our local markets and food storage. Our big problem with food security is the lack of food storage. We are looking towards ensuring that the amount of food storage goes up although it will be supervised and operated by the private sector –(Mr Ssekikubo rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, we need to close, Minister continue.

MRS KIWANUKA: On monetary matters, as mentioned here, many of which pertain to our colleagues in the Bank of Uganda, I would like to say that we have already started, in this administration, a system of holding regular meetings with the Bank of Uganda. This means that we have been discussing closely, the Anti-Money Laundering Bill and that all allegations made here today will be considered and followed up.

As far as the kerosene issue is concerned, I didn’t think that would be an indictment. I think it is a validation that Government cannot dictate prices in an open market economy like that of Uganda. Our job is to encourage production. If diesel and petrol had their duty – of course we are lucky to say that the duty on diesel and that on petrol are specific amounts; they are not a percentage. On petrol, it is currently Shs 850 per litre and Shs 530 per litre of diesel. So, you will notice that for diesel, it is less than 20 percent of the pump price and for petrol; it is less than 25 percent of the pump price. These percentages have been coming down because the tax is specific. So, whenever the prices go up, the share of Government revenue goes down.

So, should Government remove these taxes? Apart from the drop in revenues that go to help Ugandans, given our regional inter linkages and given that diesel and petrol are transport commodities, I think the honourable members can see that there will be a lot of reputing by buses and Lorries and trucks from other countries, whereby Ugandans will continue sacrificing but for the assistance of other countries. 

A very important point was made about the need to continue to improve and expand education. Business, technical, and vocational education are major factors in our education policies this year. Together with the ministries of education and labour and the other ministries, we are looking to see that there is a big investment in those jobs where children can become adults capable of employing themselves and others in carpentry, electronics, machinery that was mentioned earlier, woodwork, tailoring, plumbing, name it. There is a big lapse here and this is a sector where a person can readily find employment. 

Madam Speaker, I want to close with a quick look at - (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. You have talked about these measures: food storage, the local market, infrastructure development, agro-processing and value addition but at this point, what are the immediate or short-term laid out measures? What is the turnaround? Within this budget, those are medium and long-term interventions but the problem here is that we need quick or short-term interventions. For instance, I could propose that the Shs 100 reduced from paraffin is so useless; if that Shs 100 were reduced from diesel, then you could ease the transportation of goods like food from the rural areas to urban centers. Also, the business community would be helped with the transport part and other involved costs. So, what hope do we have for now, rather than looking at these long-term and medium term interventions? (Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you had your three minutes each. Hon. Minister, please conclude but in doing so, which is the lead ministry in this matter of the speculators in the petroleum sector? Which is the lead ministry so that we can ask that minister to come quickly so that this country is no longer be held at ransom by these speculators?

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The lead ministry is that of energy and minerals. I would like to finish by pointing out that a lot of questions raised today have really concentrated around regulation and record keeping, to help in decisions affecting investment and production. This is something we commit to, in this year. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the Minister of Defence to come; he had something to say and then the Minister of Trade and Industry will respond. 

MRS KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence. As of 06 July 2011, our national reserves stood at US $1,975 million. Thank you. 

3.11
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want, in supplementing the ministers of finance and that of trade, to underscore the role of security in fixing an economy in development. But before I do that, I would also like to commend my colleagues – the two ministers – for the very informed papers that they have given us and I would like to recommend that all of us here go and read today’s press release that is in The New Vision authored by President Museveni on this subject. I think reading that paper together with these deepens our understanding of the issue.

Secondly, I have heard colleagues asking themselves what they will tell the people they represent. What relief are they getting? My understanding is that once we sit here and listen to our colleagues give the explanation, we become part of the team to explain even the hard aspects of the reality of the economy. Like hon. Odonga Otto said, in some cases, we may have to curtail certain imports so that we are able to live within our foreign exchange budget. So, I think we should be part of the team to explain even the hard options. 

Lastly, in order to come to the point of contextualising security –(Interjections)– I think it is a reality known to all of us in Uganda that even if we have a superb economic policy and even if we take very strong measures, but if these are not based on stability and security, they cannot work and I think we have seen it -(Mr Kyanjo rose_)- hon. Kyanjo, could you hold on? It is up to me to accept the explanation. But if I could continue with my point, we have seen in our country areas that have been with insurgency - whether in the Rwenzori or in the North – but immediately we were able to establish stability in those areas, economic production kicked up again. So, it is important that as we discuss the economy, we watch the state of our security. 

Some Members, in replying to these papers, made reference to the expenditure in defence and created the impression that defence was taking the lion’s share as far as the Budget is concerned. Madam Speaker, there was a time during the NRM adaptation that defence, year in and year out was No.1 in making the call on the national budget. As I speak, in the Budget that we are going to discuss for 2011/2012, defence stands at No.7, No.1 being the works sector -(Interjections)- I will come to the reserves -(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, we keenly comprehended the explanation from the two ministers and I think they were quite superior and very careful in presenting their case so that we could understand it in order to be part of the team. Now the Minister of Defence comes in the middle of it to bring a wild explanation of the necessity for defence, which is clearly known to everybody, wishing to justify why the reserves were depleted and it is not exactly what he is explaining but simply to give the impression that when there is a matter of defence, we should keep quite? Is he in order, therefore, to interrupt this interaction which has been going on quite smoothly? Why doesn’t he go to the defence committee?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, an issue has been raised on the Floor of this House that the expenditure was not necessary. So, in my view, he is laying the foundation for talking about the reserves. 

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was making the point that there are other sectors that draw much more money from the Budget than the defence sector. We have education, we have works, we have energy; we have health and also, the public sector. I just wanted that point to be noted.

There has been the famous constant reference to the US $740 million that was drawn by the defence sector in order to strengthen the defence of this country. I have had an opportunity to speak about this on this Floor when we brought it for approval and also during our induction seminar. Once again, let me take this opportunity to make reference to this point. 

Number one; it is true we made a commitment to spend US $740 million to strengthen the defence of this country. This amount was subsequently brought to the Floor of this House and it received appropriate approval. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of order pursuant to the contents of Article 93(a)(iii), which provision states categorically how monies could be released from the Consolidated Fund. Aware of the contents of this provision, which summarily states that any money which is to be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund as long as it is public funds can only be authorised through Parliament; we are all aware that the issue articulated by the Minister of Defence is well known to serious taxpayers that the President went to the Consolidated Fund, ordered or asked the Bank of Uganda to release a sum of US $735 million for the purchase of the military jets. After doing that wrong without the authority of Parliament, he comes to Parliament and says, “I have got the money but I need your authority.” Are you in order to narrate a story which is unconstitutional pursuant to the provision I have quoted?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think let us allow the Minister to explain because he said that subsequently, a request was brought to this House and was approved. So, there must have been good reasons for this House to retrospectively accept his proposal. Please, conclude. 

DR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, when we came to seek approval for this expenditure, we explained the legal framework under which this was done very clearly and elaborately. I can assure the hon. Member who has just been on the Floor that had we acted unconstitutionally, the Eighth Parliament would never have approved this expenditure.

But as I said, we made this commitment and the expenditures are spread over a period of time. So, for hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi to come here and make very serious allegations that the head of state went to Bank of Uganda, drew money and we merely came here to retrospectively approve is absolutely not (Mr Lukyamuzi rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please.

DR KIYONGA: Lukyamuzi, be orderly. So, I just want to underscore that this expenditure was taken in the interest of the defence of this country. I hear people talking about jets. Yes, we bought jets but also other equipment to ensure that the defence of this country is in a good state. When we return to present our sector budget, we shall be able to say more about this. I thank you. 

3.22 
THE MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues; I thank you for all your contributions. I noted a few points, which I am going to respond to.

As you are all fully-aware, we are here because of the crisis that is taking place in Kampala, and in the country. Among issues I raised as measures, they were not actually all long-term. There were some short-term arrangements, which we have even started working on.

Number one about reviewing licences; it is true the licences are very high and we have started that exercise as per category and we shall inform you in a few weeks about the outcome. In fact the other day I had taken a drastic move but we have started working on them.

About the illegal immigrants; whereas the sentiments are very high, I think we should be very cautious about the steps we take because it might affect our dollar further, or our shilling. What we have decided to do – we have realised that we have 18,000 Chinese already. We have agreed with the Minister of Internal Affairs - unfortunately hon. Onek is not here – that they start carrying out a head count and find out what kind of work permits they possess. So, this is going to be a work in progress.

However, the biggest omission is that we have not been sensitising the traders about some of the arrangements. For example, the locals hear about trade; most of them are talking about issues that we should have explained about; for example, trading in the region. What do they need? What are the commodities required or how should they handle them?

Yesterday we had a meeting with Bank of Uganda and we agreed that they would open up a desk in their offices – I do not know whether it is overdue - to sensitise people about the currency or about the issue the minister has been talking about.

The other issues, like the directorate; I would like to assure the House, Madam Speaker, that this is not going to be like the others. Why do we create this directory? Because we realise that all these problems emanate from the fact that organisations like KACITA and UMA or all these others do not have a focal point to address their issues. Even the traders; you find them running around. They are in finance today; the other day they are in trade, tomorrow they are in UNBS, because there is no focal point. There is no umbrella to address their issues. So, this directorate, we are already presenting a paper to Cabinet and within a short time we will be informing you of the outcome. I regard this also as a short term arrangement. What is important now is to communicate this to the public.

Someone talked about AGOA; it is true AGOA has problems. I am new in the ministry but I am going to study it and find out why it has not had an impact. Allow me find out more about it and I will inform the House. 

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, someone talked about the ban on grains. We have already met on this issue with the minister of agriculture. Of course we realise that there are already some tenders in progress and you cannot ban the exportation of grains immediately but in the interim, what are we going to do? We want to empower the current millers to step up their capacity. We have already received some money for silos in our ministry, so we are trying to locate land and erect silos but with a component on agro processing so that we preserve the by-products that would be used for poultry feeds. 

We need to create regional hubs or regional milling centers so that farmers can use them. In West Nile there would be one, but that is a medium term arrangement. That is why the ban cannot be effected immediately; we have to prepare a statutory instrument for that. 

Another honourable member stated that the ministry of trade is responsible for importation of oil. I would like to inform, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues that the importation of oil is purely under the ministries of energy and finance. We neither license nor regulate the oil transactions.

Another honourable member said that we need to have an inter-ministerial meeting in dealing with all these issues. During the past four days, we have actually had inter-ministerial meetings with the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the ministry of finance, justice, and other multi-sectoral units. This paper was actually a concerted effort. 

The other one is production; that why didn’t I dwell more on production? I did not dwell on production because it would have been out of context then because we are now talking about the traders. Our main interest now is to make sure that we try to sensitise the traders to diversify and go into production. It is a slow process. I cannot be trading in shoes from China today and you just tell me overnight to start growing maize or beans. It is a slow process and that is why I said that it is a long term arrangement. But as far as industries are concerned that is something that we need to work out with the ministry in charge of investment. 

With regard to sugar from Mauritius; in order to satisfy the local demand, we have prepared a paper and we intend to present it to Cabinet. We will let you know in a few weeks’ time about the outcome. 

I thank all of you and I commit our ministry to try and resolve the issues that fall under our portfolio, with the help of finance and Cabinet as a whole under the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. 

3.30
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to add my voice to those that thanked the ministers for the clear and comprehensive statements they made about the causes of the problems that we are facing currently in our economy. It is not really a crisis but it is a problem; and how this has affected the Ugandan financial market. 

I would like to thank particularly the Shadow Ministers: the one of finance, hon. Ekanya, and the one of trade, hon. Kevinah Taaka, for supporting the government statements. And I would like to inform hon. Mujuni Kyamadidi that I loudly applauded them for the good statements they made. 

What is clear is that there is a shortage of dollars in Uganda today. And in a free market, it is a question of demand and supply. We have heard from the statements of the ministers about the causes of the shortage. Therefore, the answers to this problem can only arise from the causes. We must understand the causes and find solutions to this problem.

I would like to thank hon. Ekanya for adding one reason, which had not been articulated - the apparent social instability in Uganda caused by the Walk-to-Work. The Walk-to-Work pushed away tourists; the Walk-to-Work pushed away investors; the Walk-to-Work pushed away dollars and that is why we have shortage of dollars in this republic today - 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I stated categorically that one of the major causes of this crisis is how Government handled the Walk-to-Work, which painted this country negatively in the international media. It showed that there was no freedom of assembly or association. I also called upon Government that we needed national dialogue to solve the political question and the governance question.

I would urge the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that if he cannot substantiate and understand me properly, to think about rephrasing his statement. Is he in order not to understand me? (Laughter)  

THE SPEAKER: Let him substantiate.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I think it needs no further elaboration. The only point I wanted to make is that for this, there can be an immediate solution: simply stop maligning our country especially abroad. I have had occasion, Madam Speaker, to make the point that in the many parliaments and many parliamentarians and Opposition we have had here, we have experienced people who are patriotic, nationalistic and who defend Uganda even if they do not agree with the Government. One example I can give is the hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal has always represented Uganda in the ACP/EU meetings. She spits fire in this Parliament but when she goes out she defends Uganda. Yes! Now that is what we need of our political leaders. That is the solution. Act as Ugandans. 

In summary, the point being made is that the solutions cannot be short term. We need to diversify our exports. We need to add value to what we export. I agree with hon. Odonga Otto. You saw me applauding him. He says we must review our taxation in order to discourage or even to stop the importation of luxury goods. The kind of luxury suits like hon. Wafula Oguttu is wearing. (Laughter) I think that was a great point by hon. Odonga Otto and we shall take note of that. 

So, I want to thank the Opposition for the good points they raised and to assure them that Government will take them into account when we are looking at what we need to do in order to address the problems here.

There is one problem, which I think surfaced in this debate. Uganda as you know has liberalised its capital market. So, for one to suggest that we reintroduce, as some people have done, subsidising imports and controlling the availability of the foreign currencies on the market, clearly this will introduce kibanda again. We all know what the black market did and we all know how we moved away from it. So, it is not a good suggestion really to say that we should begin to introduce Window I and Window II in Bank of Uganda for the management of the foreign currency. It is wrong!

On the immigration debate, I just want to say that this debate warrants very careful analysis obviously and we should be cautious when talking about foreigners. In many countries we know this has degenerated into hate debate. In the US today you know there is a big problem about the Mexicans and so on and so forth. Obviously illegal immigrants must be identified and sent home. Our state services have the responsibility of controlling our borders; we must do a better job to make sure that those who come in do so in accordance with the law. But it is the Government of Uganda that invited all those who had resources to invest to bring them into Uganda, including outsiders and Ugandans outside -(Interjections)- even hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire was invited. [MR TINKASIIMIRE: “I was born here, Sir.”] (Laughter) 

So, let us be careful in articulating the good points about the economy, the role of foreigners in it but in so doing let us be cautious in our language in order not to discourage investors and, therefore, to cause even more capital flight. 

Some few years ago I addressed the UN Economic Commission and that time Uganda was NO.2 to China in attracting Foreign Direct Investment. This was so because of the conducive environment here because of the belief by investors that Ugandans generally welcome investors. So -(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Prime Minister, the information I am giving you is that - because I saw you listening very carefully when Members were deliberating here - most Members were not suggesting you chase away the foreigners but most of them were suggesting that we know how to regulate their being here and we should ensure that their being here does not really inconvenience Ugandans. It should not be at the expense of businesses carried out by Ugandans. So, when you say Members should be careful, I was here following and Members were not saying that we should chase them away but that we should regulate their stay here and ensure that we harmonise being with them. It should not be at the expense of Ugandans. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank my honourable colleague, hon. Akello from Agago for that information. I was also careful in my language. That is why I was saying that let us be cautious; let us be careful. I was not necessarily accusing anyone. I was simply raising the red flag that these foreign investors here are very important for our economy and, therefore, in making a good point about illegal immigration, we should be careful not to frighten the others away.

Finally I had a suggestion, Madam Speaker, that this whole matter should be referred by this Parliament today to the committee on either economy or I do not know which one, but again perhaps we ought to ask in a manner, which does not send wrong signals! In my view, these committees have their mandates, which are clearly spelt out. My expectation is that whenever an issue arises, a committee should interact with the department in Government dealing with it and if they want to hold hearings even in public to invite the public of course they can do so. I think that is the way it should go rather than lumping all these things together. We have heard from the minister of trade and the minister of finance. That may send an unintended signal. My suggestion is that a relevant committee should take it up. The minister of finance apologised here because she did not appear before the Committee on Finance yesterday. So the committee was already doing its job and I think we should let it continue. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Prime Minister for giving way. I thought we were borrowing a leaf from what we had Government doing. Yesterday but one, you said here that a number of sectors were involved in these issues; the issue of the traders and the depreciating shilling and all those related matters in the economy. In her report, the minister of trade talked about extensive consultation. I feel there is no better placed committee here that would have such an overarching position than the Committee on National Committee. That is why I am proposing that let it be the committee which will interface with all the ministries and all the stakeholders. I am thinking of including one or two women who sell tomatoes in Nakawa market so that we can hear what is going on among the ordinary people.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Members I do not know why you are debating this issues because under rule 152, these are the functions of the Committee on National Economy: “(1) It shall be the function of the Committee on National Economy to review, consider and scrutinise all matters related to national economy generally, finance and any other matters referred to it by the House.

(2) The Committee on National Economy shall in particular have the following functions – 
(a) To examine and monitor the state of the national economy... 
(c) To  explore means of  improving the national economy.” 

So, I see no problem because the right committee is the Committee on National Economy and they can borrow expertise from the committees of finance and budget.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I did not want to suggest that it should not go at all; the Committee on National Economy should perform its mandate like the other committees do. I have no problem with that. Our response, as has been mentioned by many, appeared to be slow but I think the ministers ought to have explained the reason; it was not because there were no explanations but there were certain things that needed to be put in place for the Government to come up with a fluid statement to the nation. But I thank you all, colleagues, for your understanding and I urge you to continue understanding and supporting Government in its efforts so that we work together to bring this problem under control. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, so we ask the Committee on National Economy to take an interest in this matter and get expertise from the other two committees. 

Secondly, we had tried to formalise the committees early in the week but some committees were oversubscribed and others were undersubscribed. So we discussed with the whips some rationalisation and we proposed that next Tuesday we will finalise the lists so that the committees can be fully constituted. Although we had originally planned to sit on Monday, we have been here the whole day and so we will sit again on Tuesday instead. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 3.52 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 12 July 2011 at 2.00 p.m.) 
