

Thursday, 21 July 2016

Parliament met at 2.37 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to thank the Deputy Speaker and you, the Members of the House, for the work done over the last few days and I look forward to your continued cooperation. 

In the public gallery, we have pupils and teachers of St Andrew Kaggwa Nursery and Primary School, Kitakyusa in Mpigi District. They are represented by hon. John Bosco Lubyayi and hon. Sarah Nakawunde. They are here to observe the proceedings. Let us welcome them. (Applause)

Secondly, honourable members, I want to complete the representation of the Members of the Pan African Parliament (PAP). From the side of the Independents, we have agreed that the term will be shared between two Members, hon. Veronica Kadogo and hon. James Kakooza. Hon. Veronica Kadogo will serve the first two and half years, and then hon. James Kakooza will complete the other half of the term in the Pan African Parliament. If Members have no objection, they should be declared as Members of PAP in sequence - hon. Veronica Kadogo and then hon. James Kakooza. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The “no” was very faint. (Laughter) Honourable members, last week I attended the Inter-Parliamentary Union-Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IPU-IGAD) meeting in Addis Ababa. I bring you greetings from the Speaker of the National Assembly of Ethiopia, Mr Abadula Gemeda. 

We discussed a number of things and one of them was the need for Parliament to send a mission to South Sudan as part of a diplomatic initiative to resolve the conflict. We shall, therefore, sit later and organise, within the seven parliaments of IGAD, to see how we can compose that mission. When Members of this Parliament are called upon, we will be happy if they can go and assist our colleagues. 

Secondly, I learnt from the Ethiopians something about climate change. They have adopted the concept of a green economy and this year alone, they will plant 12 billion trees. The idea is that within 10 years, they will have 120 billion new trees making Ethiopia entirely green, including the mountains. I hope that the Minister for Water and Environment and the minister of state will find time to go and compare notes with our colleagues in Ethiopia to see how they are doing it. 

The third thing I learnt from them is that they have a number of citizen-friendly policies, especially in the area of trade and investment. In that country, a number of sectors are reserved for the local people; for example, in the hotel industry, if you are a foreign investor, you can only invest in a four-star or a five-star hotel. The small hotels, restaurants and boutiques are reserved for the local people. A foreigner cannot operate supermarkets or shops; you can only do that if you are a local.  A foreigner cannot also engage in the cottage industry. If he/she is an industrialist, has to invest in a big industry so that they do not compete with the local people. 

What was more interesting was the banking industry. The banks are entirely owned by Government while the private ones are for the Ethiopian citizens. They do not allow foreign banks; so they use those banks to direct Government policy on interest rates and on what areas to invest in. They do not allow the people to just borrow for anything. They channel the money for roads, hotels, schools and so much more. I would like to us to see how we can borrow a leaf from them. 

The local investors can receive up to 85 per cent of their loan requirement; if you are a foreigner, you can only apply for up to 75 per cent of that loan. The business of import and export is entirely reserved for the local people. 

They are also planning 12 industrial parks throughout the country to promote the manufacturing industry. One of the things they want is to be the biggest manufacturer on the continent in the next five years. Therefore, they have this land for industrial parks. What they do is to set up the facilities for the investors to come and establish there. 

For the graduates, they have huge microfinance facilities. Graduates are eligible to first apply for a loan of up to $400,000 and when they graduate from that, they can apply to the commercial bank. 

I thought those are interesting ideas and I discussed with Speaker Gemeda, and we shall be sending some of our Members, probably for a fortnight, to study what they are doing and relate with the regional governments to see how they implement many of these programmes. That is what I wanted to communicate. 

MR SOLOMON SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to make my maiden speech. I would like to give more information in regard to what you said. We discovered in Ethiopia, in the area of foreign currency, that these people run a closed economy. It is very hard for you to get a dollar from Ethiopia and yet they are very quick to give you their money. 

Therefore, if we chose to take this up as Uganda and have it implemented by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, it would be very helpful in controlling our foreign currency, thereby increasing our dollar ability and performance. This is something I saw that is effective and efficient for the Ethiopians. That is the information I wanted to add, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to welcome you back from Ethiopia. From your communication, you have made a very important statement. I think this Parliament will benefit if that statement you just made can be debated. If we can get the summary of what you have experienced from there so that it is brought on the Floor of Parliament here and we debate it, so that Parliament owns it, I thought that that would be important.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the statement will be distributed to the Members and we shall place it on the Order Paper specifically so that it is debated. Thank you.

2.49
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of public importance concerning the vandalism of transformers in this country. We did not know that transformers had problems but recently, a very serious situation has cropped up where we discovered that only in 2015, 200 transformers were vandalised, leaving very many people in blackouts and putting a halt to our plans to become a middle-income status nation by 2020.

I believe Ugandans are worried about the situation. To make matters worse, the oil that comes from the transformers ends up being used in restaurants to prepare our food. This has been written in the papers here in Uganda; also in Zimbabwe where the problem is rampant, they have discovered that the same oil ends up in restaurants too.

The density of that oil is higher than the density of the cooking oil we use to prepare our food; so it is for economic reasons that people are using that oil. Zimbabwe, which has got the same problem like ours, discovered that even the copper wires from those transformers end up going to China through South Africa, most likely as raw material. We may therefore find that at some point, we are also exporting copper which is meant to remain within the country and also used for industrial development.

The shocking situation is that while in Kenya, from January to April they have made about 174 arrests in the process of fighting these people who vandalise transformers, here in Uganda very few arrests have been made, leaving the culprits to enjoy with impunity. In Zimbabwe, where they are fighting the same problem, they have taken this seriously and increased the sentences of those people who vandalise the power infrastructure to 10 years. Here in Uganda, people are getting only five years in prison. A case in point is recently, when the Chief Magistrate in Jinja sentenced three gentlemen to five years in prison for vandalising power infrastructure. 

I propose that the ministries of security and internal affairs take this seriously and protect the transformers because it is their mandate to protect the lives and property of Ugandans. Transformers are our property. The people who are stealing oil from the transformers are the former employees of UEB and Umeme, who cannot be caught easily because they disguise as people still working with Umeme.

This problem also concerns the Ministry of Health. We are going to lose lives because we are consuming oil not meant for human consumption. Truthfully, if investigations are carried out, we shall find out that oil from transformers is being consumed; otherwise, where does it go? There is a big likelihood that the allegation made that it is consumed by people is true.

I also appeal to the Ministry of Energy and Minerals to think about protecting transformers because most of these transformers are put in isolated areas and they are prone to vandalism. Therefore, it would be good if we fought that problem so that by the year 2020, we reach where we would like to be. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think we should commend the chief magistrate in Jinja for actually convicting these people even if it is for five years. Three years ago, I was involved in arresting thieves of transformers and wires, among others. They had big warehouses full of these things and when the matter went to court, I was shocked that after two months, the DPP was withdrawing the case and yet the exhibits were there.

I feel that if the magistrate in Jinja has given them the five years, perhaps we should publish those sentences so that other people know that you do not just touch the transformers. However, I hope the Minister of Health has taken note of the use of the oil for human consumption. I hope he can do the needful.

Honourable members, as you are aware, on Thursdays Private Members’ business takes precedence. I now invite hon. Nzoghu to make a brief statement. 
 
STATEMENT MADE UNDER RULE 25(4) ON  HALTING  CONSTRUCTION OF NEW ROADS IN FY 2016/2017  BY  UGANDA NATIONAL ROADS AUTHORITY (UNRA)

2.55
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My statement is on the halting of the construction of new roads in the Financial Year 2016/2017 by the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA). 

On 3 May 2016, Parliament approved a total budget of Shs 2.63 trillion for the Uganda National Roads Authority, and Shs 2.5 trillion was for roads development, rehabilitation, reconstruction and maintenance.

It is imperative to note that following UNRA’s press briefing on 30 June 2016, it was reported widely on 1 July 2016 in the Daily Monitor and in the New Vision that construction of new roads would be halted in the financial year 2016/2017 and priority would be placed on the construction of the Standard Gauge Railway.

A decision to halt construction of new roads raises the following pertinent issues:

a) Defaulting of Counterpart Funding 

Parliament approved Shs 1.2 trillion as donor funding towards roads development and would require counterpart funding, which is highly underfunded. As a consequence, there would be penalties in form of interest due to non-disbursement of funds and delayed implementation, resulting into increased costs arising from inflation tendencies and exchange volatilities. 

It would also delay the attaining of the second National Development Plan objective of realising 6,000 kilometres of strategic road coverage by 2020, which the President has persistently talked about. As a result, there will be delayed compensations, which will heighten eviction uncertainty among project affected persons. Yesterday, a Member raised an issue about evictions and implementation of the standard gauge railway without compensations in eastern Uganda.

Madam Speaker, new roads funded by donors include Tirinyi- Pallisa-Kumi-Kamonkoli (111km); Mbale-Bubulo-Lwakhakha (45km) all in eastern Uganda. There is also Masaka-Bukakata (41km); Kigumba-Bulima; and Muyembe-Nakapiripirit (92km) in Karamoja, an undeveloped area, among other roads.

b) The future liability to Government would include: 

Roads for which contracts were awarded and virements to be undertaken would result into delays and inflation of costs hence a liability to Government. This would be contrary to section 22(2)(c) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. Contracts were awarded for roads that include Soroti-Katakwi-Moroto-Lokitanyala (208km), Mbale–Bubulo-Lwakhakha (45km), Masaka-Bukakata (41km), Kigumba-Bulima (69km) and Rukungiri–Kihihi-Kanungu (78km).

Besides, Madam Speaker, regulation 16(1)(3) of the Public Finance Management Regulations, 2016 requires virement approval from the minister responsible for finance before release of funds. In line with section 18 (1)(e) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, any virement would require the minister responsible for finance to give a report to Parliament detailing compliance impact on the execution of appropriated funds. The Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and targets in the Budget Framework Paper also highlights this. 

However, I was surprised to see the Executive Director of UNRA addressing the press saying that they are not going to work on any new roads in 2016/2017. Where does the Executive Director of UNRA get powers without the approval of Parliament or without consultation with the line minister?

c) Resolution of Parliament

If funds are to be reallocated from vote 113, UNRA, to vote 016, Ministry of Works and Transport, for the development of a Standard Gauge Railway, a resolution of Parliament is required under section 20 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. I have not seen this on the Floor.

Therefore, based on the issues raised, may the Minister of Works and Transport clarify to this House and the public the following:

1. 	Will new roads be constructed in the financial year 2016/2017?
2. 	If no new roads will be constructed in 2016/2017, how will Government avoid defaulting on counterpart funding?
3. 	Are there any virements expected in the first quarter of financial year 2016/2017?
4. 	Are there any reallocations to be made across votes in the Ministry of Works and Transport?

Madam Speaker, it is true that Parliament took its time to approve the budget for financial year 2016/2017; and for most of these roads, the President had gone all over the country promising them to the people and they are waiting for them. More so, most of these roads are in the eastern region and the reason is clear - development must be balanced between regions including the Karamoja sub region.

Madam Speaker, when you review what has transpired during the period, you will realise that Government committed itself to financing the Kampala-Jinja highway with donor funds from the French Government and the people in eastern Uganda are waiting for this. They have now told us that there will be no new roads in the financial year 2016/2017. Whose directive is it? Is it the President’s or the Minister of Works and Transport or the Minister of Finance? Is it you, the Speaker? We need to know as a country - (Interruption)

MR BERNARD ATIKU: Thank you, hon. Nzoghu, for giving way. Madam Speaker, in the last Parliament I was on the Committee on National Economy and loan requests for the roads that hon. Nzoghu has mentioned were presented to this committee, and they were scrutinised and approved. Our expectation was that implementation of these roads should have started by now.

It was, therefore, shocking to hear the Executive Director of UNRA pronouncing herself and suspending any further construction or undertakings on roads for which money had been appropriated and approved by this Parliament. As Parliament, we already approved this money for the spending agencies and therefore, I do not expect this pronouncement to stand. Thank you.

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Thank you so much, hon. Nzoghu, for yielding the Floor. While campaigning to become the President of the Republic of Uganda, His Excellency made a social contract with the people of Uganda. Among the things he promised were some of these roads that hon. Nzoghu has read out. It, therefore, becomes self-defeating for the Executive Director, working to implement a manifesto of the government in power, to begin making such statements without the consent of the people in power. 

We need to know whether it was a directive of the President. As Members of Parliament on this side, we were not consulted. We need to know where she got the powers to make such a pronouncement.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information basing on hon. Nzoghu’s submission. I read the same story and watched the Executive Director of UNRA on NTV making a presentation. She made it very clear that roads that are donor-funded are not going to be affected. Rukungiri-Kihihi-Ishasha Road, Bumbobi-Lwakhakha-Soroti Road and Bulima are donor-funded and will not be affected. 

However, I was concerned when she said that they will not construct any new roads with funds from the budget. We have a road from Kashenyi to Mitooma District headquarters; an advert has been run and the President came and said construction will start and we, the MPs, should follow it up. After running an advert and the people are celebrating, we are being told that you are no longer going to work on that road. I am concerned about that. However, I would like to inform the Member that roads that are donor-funded are not going to be affected, as she said. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter is extremely important but you know that the Executive Director cannot come to this House. I would like to ask the Minister for Works and Transport to reassure this House that the money we appropriated will be used as appropriated. (Applause)

I remember the biggest applause on these roads came when we approved the money for Muyembe-Nakapiripirit. There was very big excitement in this House, meaning that the country supports these roads. Prime Minister, what is going to happen to the roads? (Laughter)

3.09
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I do share the views you have expressed and I also share the concern of colleagues who are talking about roads that could be affected by some statement.

However, let me just assure this august House and you, Madam Speaker, that the Government of the National Resistance Movement will implement the budget as announced. There are no plans to unilaterally remove some roads from the plan and forget about them. The commitments made during the campaigns and in the manifesto will be fulfilled as stated then - (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I have a lot of respect for the Prime Minister. Every year this Parliament passes a budget and the matter raised by hon. Nzoghu is about the money we appropriated for roads. However, the Prime Minister continues with campaign sloganeering. Parliament is not concerned with what was promised; Parliament is concerned with what was presented here and approved. 

Is the Prime Minister, therefore, in order, instead of answering questions that are legal, to come here and extend the 2016 campaigns as if that is a matter that has been specifically raised?

THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister was laying a foundation for how the roads are going to be built. Please, continue. (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I salute you for your wise ruling. Now that the foundation has been laid, -(Laughter)– I conclude by once again assuring this august House and the people of Uganda that Government will implement the budget as passed by this august House.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Prime Minister for his statement. However, one of the key requirements for any new regime now is a charter of fiscal responsibility. It is a requirement under the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and the period is specified therein in that Act. It is through that charter that we expect commitments of this kind to appear and where we would hold the Government accountable and responsible on delivery.

I would like to find out from the Prime Minister, because time has well passed since this document was expected in the House, what is happening. Where is the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility? We need to have those commitments in that charter but Government has been silent about it. It is a legal requirement and he cannot run away from it. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Public Finance Management Act, 2015 requires that the Minister of Finance lays on the Table the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility within four months after the swearing-in of the new President. We will comply with that requirement. 

THE SPEAKER: Are we still within the four months? 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have carefully listened to hon. Nzoghu and the Prime Minister. Indeed, when the President was traversing for votes, at one time he moved with the Executive Director of UNRA and that was in Kihihi, where my candidate at the time comes from.

The Prime Minister is assuring us - We passed the loan for the Nabugabo-Bukakata Road in 2012/2013 and up to now nothing has been done. The statement about halting construction of all these roads by the Executive Director of UNRA must have a source because the appointing authority is close to her.

Madam Speaker, is it procedurally okay for the Prime Minister to just say everything will be done without taking interest in that particular statement which was aired and published everywhere? Promising a road in this country and just including it in the budget excites every Member of Parliament from that area and they will salivate waiting happily even though it takes time. 

Now, when we hear this statement from the Prime Minister just assuring us about the NRM manifesto - we have seen many of them and indeed their reports are not very good. We know them and we have followed them, even those who were here and have left. Therefore, is it procedurally okay for the Prime Minister and Leader Of Government Business to just give a political statement, which some of us will not take seriously until we are assured? 

This is the Executive Director of UNRA, who was appointed to clean up UNRA after corruption and we expect her to improve on the situation. We need to know, and I think it would even be better to refer it to the relevant committee so that they can tell us why that statement came out and Government has not opposed it. 

3.17
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Having heard the statement from the Prime Minister assuring us that the budget will go on as earlier designed, I am happy. However, this statement which has come from hon. William Nzoghu is very shocking and more so for us the people of Karamoja. Just as we are about to taste a tarmacked road, this whole thing comes up. This is really very frustrating. There is also something not clear about this statement; if the Prime Minister is giving assurance that we will continue as planned, how did this statement come about? What is the source of this statement? 

Secondly, when they say construction of new roads from the 2016/2017 budget will be halted, to when will that be? This is also ambiguous. A tarmac road cannot be completed in one year.

Thirdly, what about the funding contribution of the development partners? Will it also be halted? 

Fourthly, which are these roads we are talking about? It must also be made clear. This is why it is not good that a statement comes from a side which is not supposed to read this statement. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I appreciate what you have said but this matter is very serious that I think we need a road-by-road account on the Hansard. Therefore, we request the Minister of Works and Transport to come here and tell us which roads have been suspended and for how long. The country needs to know so that we can go back and tell the people. (Applause)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We need to know from the Prime Minister where such statements are coming from because to me, this sounds like a policy statement and also a political statement. Could it arise out of a situation where we have seen politicians politicking with civil servants? This is because if you have a President campaigning with a civil servant on his podium, he makes an undertaking and the following day we see a civil servant making a policy statement that is political, don’t you think Parliament would be interested in knowing where these statements are coming from? 

We have enacted laws, established offices of these technocrats and we seem to be giving them too much power, some of which is political. I need the Prime Minister to explain to us where such statements are coming from.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not digress from the issue raised by hon. Nzoghu. We want to know, have the roads been suspended? If so, which ones are they and why. That is what we want to know on the Floor of this House; we want accountability road by road.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I refer back to a time when we were discussing the creation of new administrative units. A technocrat in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Mr Muhakanizi, gave us some guidance that he was uncomfortable with us creating new administrative units because they increase on the cost of administration. This is yet another technocrat under the Ministry of Works and Transport. She is also raising a flag that “I am not going to allow construction of new roads”. 

We have passed a budget and made commitments as a country. I would like to add that as the minister comes to tell us whether these roads will be done or not and which roads they are, he should also get in touch with the technocrat to find out why she decided that the construction be suspended. It is possible that she could have seen some fishy activities taking place and wanted to save the Government. We would like to know as the minister comes back.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, our problem is that we appropriated monies here for those roads; what we want to know is why they are not being done. We gave Government the money.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, the item we are discussing is item No. 3 – statement made under Rule 25(4) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and made by a Member of Parliament. The Member made the statement based on a statement made on television. The Member of Parliament did not provide the statement itself – (Interjection) - If a statement was made on TV by the UNRA Executive Director, it would help Parliament if the Member had provided the full text of the message – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have high respect for hon. Felix Okot Ogong. Of course, we now know why he has not managed to come to the Front Bench; it was because of his bad manners. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, many Members watched TV and also read the papers as the Executive Director of the Uganda National Roads Authority spoke. I have not heard any Member say that they have never heard about that statement. I am only hearing it from hon. Felix Okot Ogong.

Under item No. 4(c) on the Order Paper, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is about to present a statement on the release of funds for the first quarter. That first quarter release will include funds for roads, which we passed, and those are the ones on which work will be stopped. 

Therefore, is hon. Okot Ogong in order to question a colleague, who is a shadow minister and has carried out research and confirmed that the Executive Director UNRA has said, on television and in the newspapers, that new roads will not be constructed?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not waste time. The statement was made and I also heard it. When the Secretary to the Treasury came to be vetted for the Bank of Uganda, I asked him, “Have you suspended roadworks?” He was not able to answer the question. It is a matter of concern to this country.

Therefore, Prime Minister, we direct the Minister of Works and Transport to come here with a statement on that issue and explain to the country about those roads. He should come at the next convenient sitting. 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I have been a member of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and also a member of the Committee on National Economy for many years. I would like to volunteer information to this House. 

During the budget time in the last Parliament, while appearing before the Committee on Physical Infrastructure the Ministry of Works and Transport as well as UNRA were at pains to explain the many loans we approved as Parliament for roads and the many roads Government of Uganda is finding money to construct. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Cabinet have failed to put aside money for maintaining these roads. 

The gist of the matter is that UNRA has money to construct roads but has no money to maintain roads. I think the Prime Minister and Government should be able to explain the crisis in UNRA. It is cheaper to maintain roads than leave them to go to waste and again reduce them. That is the technical point. The minister and Prime Minister should put up a spirited effort to help us move because we need those roads that Parliament approved. 

I can even give extra information on the early oil production roads of Kigorobya-Biso-Butiaba, which the President directed should be done three years ago. The minister then, hon. Byandala, approved Kolin to do it but the Minister of State for Transport and Works, hon. Bybabagambi, stopped it. After two years when hon. Byabagambi became full Minister, he gave a go-ahead but the Executive Director of UNRA, Kagina, stopped it. Therefore, this practice of juniors stopping seniors is not a new thing.

Buliisa Road is an example. The President directed and hon. Byandala gave a go-ahead but hon. Byabagambi stopped it as a junior minister. When he became minister, he understood the issues and approved it but the current Executive Director of UNRA has stopped it. I thought I should give this information so that you can understand.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, let us go to the next item. Honourable members, in the last sitting of this House, there was a proposal to move a motion to discuss the conduct of the police. We missed it out on the Order Paper but I would like to invite hon. Muwanga Kivumbi to move the motion, and then the minister will make a statement.

MOTION ON THE CONDUCT OF THE UGANDA POLICE FORCE TOWARDS CIVILIANS

3.29
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I move the motion, I want to say that I am fully aware of how sensitive this motion is and I have taken due precaution in its drafting to ensure that it is properly drafted. 

Madam Speaker, I move under rule 48 of our Rules of Procedure on the conduct of the police towards civilians in Uganda. 

“WHEREAS Article 1(1)(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda stipulates that all power belongs to the people of Uganda, and all authority in the state emanates from the people of Uganda; 

AWARE that Article 211 (1)(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that there shall be a police force which shall and should be nationalistic, patriotic, professional, disciplined, competent and productive;

COGNISANT of the fact that section 41(d) of the Police Act stipulates that the police force shall ensure public safety and order;

NOTING THAT the Uganda Police Force, through uniformed and casually dressed personnel, has beaten and injured Ugandans;

FURTHER NOTING that journalists and media houses have also been assaulted by the Uganda Police Force during the course of their duties;

APPRECIATING that following a referendum held in 2005, a multiparty political system was introduced in Uganda with the aim of consolidating democracy, and building and strengthening political pluralism;

AWARE THAT Article 79(3) of the Constitution of Republic of Uganda requires Parliament to protect the Constitution and to promote the democratic governance of Uganda;
      
NOW, THEREFORE, I move that Parliament debates a motion into the conduct of the police force in Uganda with the view to finding a firm and lasting solution to end this impunity”. 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. Briefly justify it.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, the trigger events of this motion happened a few weeks ago in Kampala. However, there has been a trend that has been ongoing not only for months but also for years in this country. If I may recall, this trend started way back when we were under the movement system. I recall very well as a youth, I was at a rally in Nansana during the Constituent Assembly (CA). A group of youth moved to disrupt a political rally on the instructions of then minister, hon. Jaberi Bidandi Ssali. 

The trend continued up to the presidential campaigns of 1996. I remember when Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere was holding his political rallies in the districts of Rukungiri, Ntungamo and Kanungu, he was thoroughly stoned and beaten. I have a reason as to why I am tracing these stories that far. 

This trend continued. I may skip some episodes in order to save time. In 1998, another group moved to beat up people. The people were following the then Mayor of Kampala, Alhaji Nasser Ntege Ssebagala, in Mbarara town. I was part of that group. A group emerged from nowhere and beat up Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, the trend continued. You all remember the Black Mamba fellows who raided our courts and took charge from nowhere and everybody denied them. Some time back, a group moved during the Mabira saga to beat up people. They were called the Kiboko squad. This squad emerged, unfortunately, from the Central Police Station (CPS). All investigations alluded to one conclusion - that the pickup that brought the sticks that were used belonged to the police patrol. The Kiboko squad emerged from CPS and descended on innocent people at Constitutional Square and beat them up.

Madam Speaker, this trend further continued. From nowhere again, another group dressed - I had prepared a video for each of those episodes I am mentioning so that we could see how a group emerges out of a police station to beat people; unfortunately, time could not allow us to show it. Recently, when Dr Kiiza Besigye was released, you all saw what happened on the streets of Kampala. Policemen atop a police patrol car beat up people.  

Madam Speaker, you were in this Chair when we passed the Public Order Management Act. Even in the law, which I believe is unfair, you are at liberty to protect Ugandans because you articulated the notion of spontaneous gathering. Where someone is declared a winner in a constitutional court case or whatever and people are happy and they gather, that is a spontaneous gathering, and that gathering is fully protected by our law which we passed in the last Parliament. Therefore, for the police to descend on people assembled around Kalerwe, Kampala Road and beat them up was against the law and offending our established law.

Madam Speaker, you are aware that in the law that governs the police force, we have laid down procedures. Even if a gathering is illegal, there are procedures on how the police should disperse the gathering. The law is very elaborate.

Madam Speaker, thanks to hon. Niwagaba and to you, Parliament passed the anti-torture law. Therefore, you are aware that corporal punishment is illegal in this country, and there is a constitutional case to that effect. Even caning animals is illegal. 

Madam Speaker, this brings me to the core of this motion. When we talk about the rule of law and order, to which we must all affirm if we are to be a stable and peaceful country, it inherently implies that the Government and those that enforce the law must be the first to obey the law. However, be that as it may, what we saw on the streets is that those who are supposed to enforce the law are the first to offend the law. The point of debate we have is whether we have a rule of law or rule by law.

Madam Speaker, we are blessed that today in this Parliament we have Lt Gen. Tumukunde.  He is a senior lawyer and has been a long time security operative. He knows, as much as I do - I alerted this Parliament’s Committee on Defence that the police in Uganda was at the forefront of forming the so-called militia groups in this city including Kifeesi, Nato, Black Mamba; as we speak now, we have 21 militia groups that have been curved out of Kampala, with the knowledge of the police force. Actually, the police are mentoring, feeding and financing this.  

Madam Speaker, I mentioned Lt Gen. Tumukunde to allude to the fact that these militia have often been set up by security operatives of this country –(Interjection)– Madam Speaker, I deserve your protection from hon. Tumukunde.

THE SPEAKER: He is just smiling; what has he done? 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: He is just smiling? (Laughter) He is enjoying the debate. Madam Speaker, we are all aware that these militia groups-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you would like to say something, you stand up. Is that a point of order?

LT GEN. (RTD) TUMUKUNDE: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable Member of Parliament to continue to package my name in a matter that I do not clearly understand and upon which I have no outright responsibility?

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member could just be happy to see you in this House. (Laughter)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I congratulate you. I am not talking about other institutions you have headed, but I am majorly focussing on the police.

Madam Speaker, the reason as to why we bothered to make this statement and move this motion is not because we are advocating for anarchy. The history of this country is very painful. At every turn of events, the collapse of the state and state institutions has been extremely expensive. I am seeing the early marks of what happened during Amin and Obote’s regimes when state institutions gave way to militia groups to go out and beat our people.

I am not criticising the police that protects Parliament and the general public. That police force does a heroic job under very difficult circumstances. The group I am up against, and which we must all stand up to condemn, is the one that is fairly political within the police force. The perpetrators of this must be isolated, shackled and defeated. 

Madam Speaker, just the other day, the Inspector General of Police went out of his way to justify the beating of people, saying it is a new method of controlling crowds. The Inspector General of Police is not above the law. (Applause) He must make every single directive and administrative order based on the law. I do not want to go into that issue because it might divert us.

Madam Speaker, just recently, there has been an attempt by the police force to prosecute some officers using their internal disciplinary mechanism. We would have applauded that kind of measure, but they are bringing in fairly small fish. I have before me the example of Aaron Baguma. He has continued to be one of the notorious police officers in this country. He has been everywhere and the Directorate of Public Prosecutions (DPP) has already sanctioned murder charges against him. 

I have been very generous to the police. I brought up this issue in the last meeting when we were discussing ministerial policy statements and I have the letter from the DPP to this effect - preferring a murder charge against this officer. The police have not only protected him but they have also promoted him. 

We all know Ruhweza; we can mention all the names of the notorious police officers but we will not see them in the dock. The first one, by the way, should be Gen. Kale Kayihura. (Applause) Harry Truman said, “The buck stops here”. He is the boss of the police. He is supposed to take every responsibility and answer. That is why we pay him luxuriously. That is why we are saying the investigation the police are conducting is simply a public relations exercise and a cover up. It is insufficient to go to the bottom of the matter.

Madam Speaker, other security organs are not spared. On the Floor of this Parliament, we warned about the recruitment of crime preventers and how they would be dangerous to this country. We were told during the debate on the ministerial policy statement in the committee of Parliament - The Prime Minister is aware of this. The Leader of the Opposition then and I used to sit on an inter-governmental committee to debate the security situation in this country. We argued, together with hon. Katuntu, that Government should bring a law and regulations to facilitate the procedures of crime preventers. To date, they remain on paper. 

One million people, according to the official record, have been recruited. We were shocked when we were passing the budget for defence and internal affairs to be told that there is no money to fund the one million people they have recruited. They are out in the countryside and they are causing all sorts of problems; some of them even have Government property- uniforms and guns. Therefore, when you see the outbreak of insecurity in the country, it is because of what is taking place. The Government cannot simply walk away. 

The case I would like to make before this Parliament is that it is the duty of this Parliament to be the firewall, to be a lender of last resort, to help the people of Uganda and protect them. To do so is not to do a favour to anyone in this country but to leave a lasting legacy that once we assembled here, we ensured that our people were free and at liberty to enjoy this country. I beg to move.

3.48
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for moving this motion. Had we been allowed to play the video of the incidences hon. Kivumbi has mentioned, I am sure this House would have been moved better because they are very painful scenes to watch.

Unfortunately, we seem to be running a country where individuals are above the law. What hurts me most is that the majority of such individuals come from my region – western Uganda. That is the unfortunate bit of it. Madam Speaker, Article 211(3) of the Constitution -(Interjection)- states that- 

THE SPEAKER: Order! Please, allow hon. Niwagaba to second the motion. 

MR NIWAGABA: That is why it is painful for me to debate this motion from that background. Article 211(3) of the Constitution gives one of the qualifications of a police officer and it is very simple - that he or she must be a citizen of Uganda of good character.

It is high time maybe we amended the Police Act to state that whichever police officer ceases to be of good character leaves the police force immediately without any other qualification. The majority of the police officers who are mentioned in these incidences, which we have unfortunately not played for you, cannot by any stretch of imagination be spoken of as citizens of good character.

Madam Speaker, when our honourable members made the Constitution during the Constituent Assembly, one of the Articles included in the Constitution was Article 24, which is very clear. It gives every Ugandan the freedom and right from torture and degrading punishment. The most degrading punishment is being caned publically, especially when you are an innocent by-passer. Moreover, caning people randomly - those who are innocent, those suspected and those who could be guilty - is so abhorred -(Interruption) 

MAJ (RTD) GUMISIRIZA: Madam Speaker, I would like hon. Niwagaba to explain how a police officer can distinguish between someone who is by the roadside watching –(Interjection)- Listen! I would like him to make a distinction to help me understand how the police would tell that say, hon. Guma is just moving along the Kasangati-Gayaza Road and distinguish him from someone who has intentions to demonstrate. 
 
MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, that is why I had said that I wish you had allowed us to play the videos, because hon. Guma would have seen very many citizens innocently doing their businesses, including women and boda boda cyclists parked in their reserved parking stages, being caned. However, that notwithstanding, I believe you will get time –(Interjection)- Yes, please -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Member is seconding a motion, why are you disrupting him? 

MR NIWAGABA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. One of the cardinal principles of our criminal justice system is presumption of innocence until proven guilty by a competent court. Therefore, as hon. Guma would want us to believe, even if a person is participating in a demonstration criminally or otherwise, he or she is still presumed innocent until a court of competent jurisdiction finds him or her guilty. 

However, what we have seen in the recent past is that the police use canes, sticks, wire mesh, and in one of the incidences one of them had a metal bar, meting out punishments to both the innocent and those who are presumed to be innocent. It is a conduct that every Ugandan who wishes this country well must come out to condemn unequivocally. 

Madam Speaker, the danger we have now has been the use of both men and women in uniform and some not in uniform. In one of the incidences which I saw, - if hon. Guma could see it, he would shed a tear - one of the men not in police uniform but under the command of a one Kaggwa, is seen beating a woman. She falls down and the fellow still goes on top of her and stamps her. You really wonder. You have already beaten the old woman, she is down then you come on top of her and stamp her with your feet. Some of them behave worse than animals. It is not a character that can be condoned by any right thinking member of the public.

Article 79 of the Constitution enjoins this Parliament to make laws for peace, order and development. If there are deficiencies in any of the laws, be it the Public Order Management Act, the Police Act or otherwise, it is the duty of this Parliament to inquire into those laws and come up with amendments that would help this country to live peacefully, orderly and with development in mind. The trend that we see of hooded and unhooded men beating innocent citizens, if it continues unabated, if Parliament does not come up with rules and regulations that would guide our law enforcers and our citizens, I see a situation where citizens will have to arm themselves to protect themselves against the very police that should be guarding and protecting them.

Therefore, I invite you, honourable colleagues - This motion is brought in good faith, support it with a view of this House inquiring into why our men in uniform are being used to cane citizens regardless of their political opinions and affiliations. What should we do as a country to stop this kind of savagery? 

What is being done in the view of everybody is savagery. We passed a law on prohibition of torture and that law describes acts of torture. Incidentally, if you read section 3 of that law and schedule 2 (1) on physical torture, caning is one of the acts of torture. 

The idea of arraigning these policemen before the police disciplinary committee is a welcome move, but I would want to see them in the courts of law to answer for acts of torture. I would like to promise Ugandans that as the Shadow Attorney-General, I will do what it takes to ensure that the law, which I moved as a Private Member, comes to effect for these particular police officers, criminally or otherwise. I invite you, honourable colleagues, to support our motion – (Interruption)

MR MULINDWA: I thank you for giving way, honourable colleague. Beating is not necessarily bad. I am a believer and will quote from the Book of Proverbs 23:13-14; it says, “Do not hesitate to discipline children. A good spanking will not kill them. As a matter of fact, it may save their lives.” I thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that is his maiden speech. He has concluded. Let me invite hon. Osegge to use five minutes. The movers are still on the Floor.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to give information.

THE SPEAKER: The movers are still on the Floor.

4.00
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: You should not disrupt new members, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Leave the Members.

MS OSEGGE: I rise to second the motion that has just been moved on the Floor. I do agree that the conduct and brutality of the police in Uganda is beyond the 21st Century human imagination. 

Truth be told, the militarisation of the police force could be part of the reasons that has resulted in the kind of things that we are seeing today. I wonder if Gen. Kale Kayihura, having come from the UPDF, has undergone more training to reorient his conduct as a police officer –(Interjections)– Yes, since he is at the helm of the police. It is no wonder that we see the police becoming that militaristic; the person at the helm is a military man. My understanding of the police is that they are supposed to keep law and order and be friendly to the public.

COL KULAYIGYE: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to insinuate that the military is brutal? (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: The military does many things and I am very proud of the military, which only recently rescued Ugandans from South Sudan. That was a very good thing. Please, proceed.  

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, that notwithstanding, the honourable colleague who has left the Floor also ordered the torture of somebody who was doing business and I think it went down on the record. (Laughter) The police today have been named –

THE SPEAKER: Order, please! Allow hon. Osegge to second the motion. 

MS OSEGGE: The police today have also been named in acts of criminality and robbery, not forgetting the torturing of Ugandans. This raises the question: is this the kind of police force that we need to protect Ugandans? 

Police brutality and restrictions on the right of freedoms, especially of those who dissent from the views of the sitting Government, is unbecoming. Government oversaw the recruitment of crime preventers; my colleague has already alluded to that. It is, therefore, not surprising that today we are seeing the Kifeesi group working with the police one day and the following day the police deny them. Why would the police not begin by arresting the Kifeesi group members working alongside them, other than waiting for the public to complain and then the police begin to deny them? How do we trust a police force that is working with criminals? 

The increase of mob justice in this country is because Ugandans no longer trust the police force. They would rather finish their issues among themselves. We want a police force that is dependable; one we can go to when we have a problem. We want a police force that we can trust and know that when we lay down our issues before them, they are there for us.

In this country, during the political campaign season, the police would side with one group of politicians. They protected one side and brutalised the other side during the time of the campaigns and nobody talks about it. Honourable colleagues, I think we should not be silent because today it is me, tomorrow it will be you. As long as the sun rises, it will set and another day will come.

I sincerely and firmly believe that the time for us to act is now. It would be in the interest of the sitting Government to clean its name. In the eyes of the many Ugandans and the diaspora, we are seeing signs of a crumbling regime because instead of using the law, the Government is using the force of law - ruling by law. It would be in the interest of Government to call the police to order and do their work professionally as they ought to do it.

The police force, according to the Constitution of Uganda, Article 211 (3), is supposed to be non-partisan and to show itself as being non-partisan. If I may read the article verbatim; it says, “The Uganda Police Force shall be nationalistic, patriotic, professional, disciplined, competent and productive; and its members shall be citizens of Uganda of good character.” 

With all those issues that have been raised, do you consider the police of Uganda to still be of good character? This is the time for us to act if you want a peaceful Uganda and a Uganda that is going to move together without pointing fingers or alienating certain people from certain regions. We should not take this very lightly as it is causing bitterness among certain circles in this country. If anything triggers any fighting in this country, we shall see a genocide which we would not want to see. 

There are people from a certain region who are leading in this and when it comes to bringing them to book, they are not brought to book; why? Are they above other citizens? No, they are not.  I think it is incumbent upon us to speak out as representatives of the people of this country. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, let me now guide you. The Ministry of Internal Affairs is going to make a statement before we debate.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter. I do not have a copy of the motion that is being moved by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi and I would want to know the prayers in that motion. Unfortunately, presenter after presenter is talking about different prayers and I have no point of reference about the prayers in this motion. Therefore, it makes it difficult for me to participate. We do not have the iPads yet, so we are in such a precarious situation as we consider this motion because we are not privy to what is being presented here. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we agree that this is a matter of public concern and it is important that we address it. That is why I want the minister to give the side of those who cannot come to this House. Let us hear from the Minister of Internal Affairs then we can debate –(Interjections)– We are listening; use your ears.  

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE CONDUCT OF POLICE TOWARDS CIVILIANS IN UGANDA

4.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, this being my first time to address you since your election, let me congratulate you upon assuming this seat.

Let me also thank Members of this august House for the patience they have had with us as a ministry in presenting this statement to Parliament. I am aware that the expectation was that we should have presented it on Tuesday but with your grace, you accepted our explanation and you gave us the opportunity to do this today.

Madam Speaker, before I present this statement I just want to make three points in summary, and this is what is guiding us in this statement: One, there were certain types of mistakes made; two, there are certain actions which have been taken; and three, we all need the police in order to keep law and order, irrespective of the mistakes. This is the gist of our presentation.

On 12 July 2016, Col (Rtd) Kizza Besigye was released on bail from the High Court of Kampala on the following conditions, which were set by the High Court judge: “The applicant is therefore called upon to live peacefully and not cause any violence as long as the case against him is still pending in court. The applicant to execute a further bond of restraining from acts of violence or breach of peace till the case is heard and finalised. Failure to do so will lead to cancellation of his bail.” These are the words of the judge; they are not mine. I am quoting him. 

To ensure that the applicant, Col (Rtd) Besigye, did not cause any breach of the peace and based on the intelligence reports  of the police, the police made precautionary deployments, including escorting him to his home in Kasangati, Gayaza. This was done after he declared in the precincts of the High Court, after the ruling that he will continue with his defiance campaign. 

On the way to his home, Col (Rtd) Besigye moved in a procession that had been pre-planned and organised. At Kalerwe Market, where a big crowd had gathered, the police, in their effort to ensure that the Kampala-Kasangati Road was not blocked, got involved in a confrontation with the crowd. Regrettably, some police officers in their use of force acted very unprofessionally. Here, I must agree with the movers of the other motion that indeed, the officers acted unprofessionally. This was wrong and the police regret that incident. (Applause)

The next day, on the 13th of July, again Col (Rtd) Besigye, from a court hearing in Nakawa, moved in another illegal procession to the offices of the FDC on Najjanankumbi along Entebbe Road. The police deployed at the junction of Namasole, Busabala and Entebbe junction as it is their duty once they see a procession or a group. Again, there was a confrontation between the police and the crowd in which again some police officers acted unprofessionally in their use of force. Once again, the police regret that incident.

While appreciating the police for enforcing law and order in both cases and keeping the city safe and secure, the acts of indiscipline on the part of individual officers is not acceptable. Indeed, the police have acted swiftly following that indiscipline and instituted disciplinary action against the officers implicated and the process is going on. 

The police headquarters disciplinary court convened under section 50 of the Police Act, which provides for the establishment of a police disciplinary court and this court is sitting. On the 21st of July, five constables and senior officers at the levels of Assistant Inspector of Police (AIP) and three superintendents of police appeared before this court to answer charges related to the unprofessional conduct in executing their duties. Another officer, an assistant inspector of police, will soon appear before the tribunal of the police authority to answer similar charges.

I must, at this stage, digress a little and indicate to honourable members that these are courts established by this Constitution and by this very Parliament. Under Article 129 of our Constitution, the courts of judicature in our country are clearly spelled out. Article 129(1)(d) says, 
“The judicial power of Uganda shall be exercised by courts of judicature which shall consist of – 
(d) such subordinate courts as Parliament may by law establish, including qadhis courts for marriage, divorce….” 

The Police Act, Cap 303, section 49, establishes courts under the police. The following courts are established: public disciplinary courts; police disciplinary courts under section 50; under section 51, there is the establishment and composition of police council appeals court; under section 52, there is the establishment and composition of regional police courts. 

Therefore, I want to tell my colleagues in Parliament that these courts that try disciplinary cases of our policemen who acted in the events that I have stated were legally created by you. They are provided for in the Constitution. Whether they are adequate or inadequate is a different matter.

We commend the police for the restraint and professionalism they established, especially in Mbarara on 16 July 2016. After the events in Kampala in July, Dr Kizza Besigye proceeded to Mbarara on the 16th. Again in the face of the violence, which occurred on his way to Rukungiri and Kabale through Mbarara, the officers restrained themselves. 

In those two incidences in Mbarara, two police constables were injured; they were Police Constable No. 54930 Ouni Paul and No. 65059 Byarugaba Elijah. Unlike the Kampala incidents of 12th and 13th July, and in spite of the unprovoked attacks on them, the police did not react this time in Mbarara. They protected themselves with shields but held their ground in forcing the rowdy crowd to disperse. 

As the procession continued along Mbarara-Bushenyi Road, at the Ibanda-Bushenyi junction Col (Rtd) Kizza Besigye stopped and addressed a rally in the middle of the road. This disrupted traffic flow and even blocked the convoy of His Lordship the Chief Justice of Uganda. The police, again, were restrained and did not disperse the rally, which perhaps Col (Rtd) Kizza Besigye would have wanted. In other words, the police were learning.  

It should be noted that in all these incidences, the crowds were not spontaneous; they were organised. The boda bodas were fuelled in advance of the defiance campaign. It is also noteworthy that the police were not notified as is provided for in the Public Order Management Act. These actions were out of the notice. 

Honourable members, such restraint by the police should not be taken for granted. In fact, it has sometimes led to tragic consequences for the police. Members will remember the murder of AIP Ariong near Mini Price Bata in Kampala. On the 21 March 2010, during an illegal procession again involving Col (Rtd) Besigye, Ariong was smashed with a brick which killed him. Many police officers have lost their lives in the course of duty; the latest cases happened during the traffic incidences on Masaka Road while they were managing traffic. 

Madam Speaker, the police and its activities are a responsibility of all. In 1829, one of the fathers of modern policing known as Sir Robert Peel said this: “The police are the public and the public are the police; the police being only members of the public who are paid to give full time attention to duties which are incumbent on every citizen in the interests of community welfare and existence.” 

In other words, the welfare of the community and its existence is our responsibility. However, as a community, we assign the police and pay them to do that duty but still that does not remove the duty of policing from all levels. Therefore, incidences such as the above should not make us condemn the institution of the police but rather we should work collectively in order to improve the strategic and operational efficiency of the police. 

Indeed, in recognition of the need to improve the police, the Uganda Police Force, during their six-month centenary celebrations in 2014, launched the rectification campaign aimed at addressing its weaknesses. It was temporarily halted because of the election campaigns and it resumed this year, 2016, and is ongoing to improve the performance of the police. 

We all need the police and, therefore, let us not lose sight of the achievements of the police and the sacrifices the individual members of the police make for our good. The police are at the forefront of handling emergencies, from fighting fires to managing victims of traffic accidents and rescue operations during disasters. The latest emergency operation in which the police participated successfully was the ongoing operation of returning our Ugandan brothers and sisters from South Sudan, working together with other security agencies and the UPDF. 

The police, working with sister security agencies and police forces in the East African Region, have successfully fought terrorism. Irrespective of their weaknesses, Uganda can today say we have the least occurrences of major terrorism simply because of the activities of the police together with other security agencies. 

The police have fought violent crime such as gun related crimes, motor vehicle theft, cattle theft, human trafficking. From 2006 to date, the crime rate in the country has been consistently coming down. Therefore, those who think they will use the isolated weaknesses in the Uganda Police Force to advance their selfish political agenda should kindly look elsewhere. (Applause) 

The police will continue relentlessly to fulfil their constitutional mandate of protecting life and property, hence ensuring law and order and preventing and detecting crime. We are confident that the Uganda Police Force, with the support of Parliament, will emerge stronger, more professional, disciplined and pro-people as they strive to transform this country. 

Let me jog my memory; there is something in the Bible where one time Jesus Christ found a lady whom the people were ready to stone because she was an adulteress. The Lord said that those who have never sinned should cast the first stone at the lady. However, He advised the lady to go and sin no more. Our duty here is, therefore, to advise the police to go and not sin again. (Laughter) I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Before we proceed, join me in welcoming head teachers from Kabale Municipality. They are represented by hon. Baryayanga and hon. Ndamira. You are welcome. (Applause) 

Honourable members, we shall use just two minutes each, so that many people get an opportunity to contribute.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to be guided procedurally on how we are going to move. We have two issues at hand; the first is a motion, which calls for a debate. The second is a statement by my brother, the hon. Obiga Kania, who did some preaching – whichever his first name is; I do not know. How are we going to handle the two debates together? I would like to seek your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is the same subject. Just contribute and then we shall agree at the end. It is two versions of the same issue.

4.29
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for making a very good statement, especially when there has been a lot of controversy concerning how the police act towards the population. He clearly shows that the police regret the incidents. This also clearly shows that nothing of that nature will happen to Ugandans again. I would like to thank the minister for being sensitive to matters concerning Uganda.

However, I also received a loose minute when I was receiving the minister’s statement. I do not know if all the other members received it. It is a loose minute to the IGP saying, “Forwarded to you is a list of different heavy sticks which are commonly used and some images which bring them out clearly during crowd control. Attached is a copy of your list for your guidance and action.”

It shows different types of sticks being used for different jurisdictions. I think these are batons. Maybe this Parliament needs to know what exactly the police are using. Are they using sticks made in Uganda, like the ones we used to have in schools?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not know how this document came here. I do not know the author.

MR BALYEKU: Madam Speaker, if it was smuggled in, it is unfortunate. However, it is also fortunate for Parliament to know how the police intend to employ these lethal weapons on the public. When you read the document, it says that some do not hurt so much. It says the batons are made of polycarbonate, transparent, solid and virtually unbreakable materials. It further says that the new batons are easy to hold and swing due to their lower weight and will also hurt less.

Maybe the minister should tell us if these are the types of batons that the police are going to be using or if the police will not use them again. He could as well tell us if that is what they were using before. If the document has been smuggled into the House, maybe we have to know – 

MR SEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to continue referring to a document which has not been laid on the Table?

THE SPEAKER: We are trying to find out how it came here.

MR BALYEKU: Madam Speaker, I would like the minister to explain to the House what type of sticks the police are using, in order for us also to assure Ugandans that it is not random sampling of any type of stick that can hurt the public. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know the value of this thing; just ignore it. Just discuss from your point of view because I do not know how relevant it is. It has no author.

4.32
MAJ. (RTD) DAVID GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): First of all, Madam Speaker, we should sort out some facts correctly. I do not think that it is fair for the police to brutalise Ugandans. However, it is also not fair for Members of Parliament to bash the Uganda police - (Applause)- as they execute their duties.

I request you, honourable members, for your indulgence; please, as much as possible, do not interrupt me. I strictly have two minutes. In crowd dispersal – For some of you, if you do not know, you had better listen and be educated. 

In crowd dispersal, especially Ugandan crowds of returnees from Afghanistan, Iraq, retired UPDF and NRA, the Ugandan police has a huge challenge. They have a huge challenge in dispersing the crowd, especially a crowd that is following a political leader that has been advocating for violence. (Applause) It started as “walk to work” and has progressively gone into “defiance”- (Interruption)

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, the hon. Muwanga Kivumbi made a statement requesting us to discuss the conduct of police. The Minister of Internal Affairs brought a statement and actually in his statement, he regretted certain incidences. 

The hon. Guma is here intimidating Members, -(Interjections)– Yes! He is threatening Members and actually trying to insinuate that the regrets that the minister sought were actually in vain. I, therefore, would like to ask whether hon. Guma, who is also known for violence and his violence went up to the courts of law, is in order to defend the brutality of police. Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the hon. Guma is explaining the complexity of the composition of our society these days. (Applause) Proceed.

MAJ. (RTD) GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Madam Speaker, I am not a violent person. I am just a graduate of the Royal Military Academy, Sundhurst. It does not train people to be violent. 

I would like honourable members to distinguish between content and form. Beating using a stick! I would object to beating using a bar. Honourable members, you are distinguished Members of this Tenth Parliament, kindly listen. You are at liberty to differ –(Member timed out.)

4.37
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The events leading to this motion and the statement can be categorised as very unfortunate. I had a lot of anger but the statement of the minister seems to have disarmed me. I thought the minister would try to justify these events but the way he has finally brought himself to the Floor of Parliament has disarmed me.

However, Madam Speaker, there are things that cannot go unmentioned. We need concrete steps to be taken by Government and police authorities to ensure and to assure Ugandans that this kind of naked brutality will not occur.

More often, we have been told that this Opposition leader has been moving to charge the city and cause violence. However, from what I saw - You know, some of us have been detained and released; that spontaneous crowd comes to welcome you and you do not have time to write to the police. People just come up with enthusiasm. 

Secondly, he was moving out of the city centre to his home. Usually, they block him arguing that he is coming to cause violence in the city, which will destroy traders’ merchandise. However, he was out of town and heading to his home. I found that unjustifiable in the circumstances.

Honourable minister, I welcome the statement and I must congratulate you because the other day, you were up in arms but now, in your statement, you seem to have toned down. If, as you say, he was breaching the conditions of his bail, it is not for the police to use violence to put him to order. Let the court that gave him bail do it. Let these matters be presented to court - (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: I would like to thank hon. Ssekikubo for giving way. Madam Speaker, one of my best friends in this country, who used to sit where Dr Rugunda is seated, was the Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi. He normally clapped whenever we talked about these issues. Rt Hon. Rugunda, your brother sat where you are seated. 

Secondly, the police and the military had the time to organise –(Interjection)- I agree, and I said he is one of my best friends. They had the time to organise and the police called in the military and other men in civilian clothes at such a spontaneous gathering where Dr Besigye was moving to Kansangati. They were able to mobilise the sticks, some of which do not appear in this so-called confidential document, which has a list and images of the sticks that they were using or seem to have gazetted under the authority of no law.

The information I would like to give hon. Ssekikubo is that violence must never be justified. One day I saw my brother, the Minister for Security, crying after having been shot in the leg and that was his second bullet in the leg. The spokesperson of the military in this country said that it was not a bullet - This is the brother I am referring to. (Interjection) You may sit, my brother. They said it was not a bullet and that the General did not know the difference between a real bullet and a rubber bullet. This country is on fire –(Interruption)

LT GEN. (RTD) TUMUKUNDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for an honourable member to come out and make statements against an individual sitting right in front of him, insinuating that I was shedding tears when I actually do not remember doing so? (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, maybe I should use this opportunity to make some statement –(Interjection) - I have already raised my point of order; let the Speaker decide. 

Madam Speaker, we should not condemn right nor should we support wrong. I think that is the starting point. If an honourable member comes up and says that the National Security Council sat and organised stick bearers who were attacking from another direction - I was in that National Security Council and we sat to study this situation and find a way of controlling it. 

We shall continue to make mistakes if, for example, a small police force, composed of very young people whom we have recruited because of the rate of need - we have got such a sharp need these days - are expected to take on serious pressures that involve levels of violence that are sometimes untenable in a democratic country like Uganda. I think we need to look at both sides of this equation. For those of you who do not want, you should not because security is too important to be left to the security organs; every member of society must care to abide by law and order. 

Whether I am shot or not, it does not stop me from saying that we need to always stick to the rule of law. As long as we keep manipulating these situations, we are all at serious risk. The honourable member raised issues of yesterday’s history. I do not want to repeat history. However, as we continue manipulating these situations, that is what we shall always get. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the eyes of the honourable member were completely dry; he did not cry.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I would really beseech my colleagues in Parliament to take this statement but demand that concrete measures are taken to remedy this situation from recurring.

Secondly, I do not know why the movers restricted themselves to the police. From my observation, even the military were involved. I wonder why you only pointed out the police. Once such a motion comes, let it be to correct ourselves; it should not be in vain. Let all those who have sinned be condemned in the same manner. The military are provided for under Article 210 but particularly their –(Member timed out.)

4.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KARAMOJA (Mr Moses Kizige): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. My most sincere sympathies go to those who were beaten. 

Madam Speaker, last night I was watching television and specifically, one of the many case judgments concerning election petitions. After the judgment, I saw police officers pelted with stones and pushed around in Kampala as if this was the first judgment ever. It was as if the police had taken the petition to court or had pronounced themselves on the matter.

Madam Speaker, this provocation is something that we must condemn. The police are being provoked and we cannot continue like this. Even politicians are being provoked. Can you imagine if somebody I defeated in my constituency went around and declared herself winner, and even went ahead and swore in as Member of Parliament for Bugabula North after I had genuinely won? This manner of provocation should be condemned –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Madam Speaker, a professional police on that day would have had handcuffs and a baton. When you talk about provocation, it must be the public –(Interjections)– I am seeking clarification. The induction did not work very well for some Members, Madam Speaker. I can see that some Members are used to raising their hands. (Maj. Gen. Pecos Kuteesa rose_) 
 
THE SPEAKER: Let him give you information. Honourable members, maiden speech; do not disturb the Member.

MAJ. GEN. PECOS KUTEESA: There is one thing that I would like all of us to understand. The police force of any nation depicts the culture of that very nation. The police force we have in Uganda depends on the people they are dealing with. In Britain, they used not to have guns but in America they had guns because of the National Rifle Authority. Now, because things have changed, even the police in London hold guns.

You cannot tell me that you can go with handcuffs to arrest a cattle rustler. When someone is arrested, I am supposed to read to them their rights; how can I read rights to someone - The other day, I saw a person confronting the police in Kasese. That impunity is created by our history because when we demystified the gun, people misconstrued it. 

Wherever there is a positive action, there is a negative one. The people who go to Iraq come back, you give them bhangi, you tell them to follow you and you say the police should come and arrest them and handcuff them! That is not possible -
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that speech is protected. Please, resume your seat. Please conclude, honourable.

MAJ. GEN. PECOS KUTEESA: Madam Speaker, I think hon. Ssewungu has been properly answered. 

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, in summary, as leaders in this country, we have a duty to protect our officers in uniform. Let us stop these provocations as it cannot continue like this. Defiance may be answered by defiance. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.52
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is prudent to give credit where it is due, just as the minister has vividly stated. Indeed, the police are applauded for fighting terrorism but civility demands that when you go astray, corrections are welcome. The brutality that was exhibited by the police has been awash in both print and electronic media and it has reached unacceptable levels. 

Madam Speaker, it is common knowledge that the brutal or archaic actions of Kampala Capital City Authority cost my party – NRM – votes. Also, the effects of these brutal actions of police have triggered a severe backlash among the populace. The enforcers of order have violated order themselves. The lowly ranked officers are the ones being arraigned and charged in the courts of judicature whereas they were under the express orders of their superiors. While their superiors are at liberty to move and are free, these officers are being pinned down by the law - (Member timed out.)

4.54
MS DOREEN AMULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. As the Parliament of Uganda, we must diagnose and dissect the issue at hand. We must have a baseline of what we want as a country. 

We all have a history in Uganda and this can be compared to our neighbouring country, Rwanda. However, Rwanda has introduced a legacy of telling each citizen that they do not want anything that makes them remember or go back to the past.

Where is the problem? If in the recently concluded elections we had eight candidates and I never heard of any policeman beating somebody walking with Kyalya or with hon. Amama Mbabazi, what is this defiance that is costing us our police and civilians? 

As Parliament, why don’t we get up and tell our population that what they are going to do is wrong? The police can never beat up somebody who is not following Col (Rtd) Kizza Besigye. Whether he is just walking, it is trauma in the country. Why can’t we educate the population of Uganda not to indulge themselves in anything? What is this defiance for? What does it benefit the young -(Member timed out.)

4.56
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi. None of us would like to be beaten but again, when you are that side, you do not see the other side of the coin. 

What is causing the beating? Why didn’t you include in the motion that businessmen are losing their property because of the movements of Dr Kizza Besigye? The police have a role to protect Ugandans and their rights. Supposing someone entered that crowd and blew themselves up? Many people would die and we would come here and say, “The police are not assisting Ugandans”. 

No one would like to be beaten up but some people cause their own beating. If they tell you that the Public Order Management Act does not allow many people to move together in order to prevent many things, why would you move in such a situation if you do not want to be beaten? As Members of Parliament, we should see things in two ways –(Interjections)- There is no going without an exit. Once you go without an exit, you are bound to get problems. When you go, make sure that you have an exit. 

Speak to your leader, Kizza Besigye, and tell him that elections were concluded and he was defeated, therefore he should cool down and wait for the next five years. Let the police do their work. Whoever does not want to be beaten, like me, should stay home. Why should I defy the laws of Uganda? I would like to urge every Member to educate their constituents.

4.58
MS JULIET SUUBI (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I request each of us to know that we were entrusted by the people of Uganda, first of all to lead them where we want this country to go and most likely to a middle-income country. How are we going to do this with the defiance campaign?

We are treating a symptom not the cause. Actually, I request that we move a motion to find out what is bringing all this. Why are we provoking the police and why are the police beating Ugandans? There is a cause. Let us treat the cause rather than the symptoms. That is when we shall fulfil the mandate that Ugandans gave us –(Interruption)

MS SARAH BABIRYE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give this House is that there are a number of challenges in organisations, ministries and government bodies be it in health or education, just like we have issues and indisciplined officers in this Parliament. However, the alternative is not to harass the organisation; the only alternative is to follow the law. 

What does the law say? We have police courts that discipline such individuals. Can we please follow the laws? These individuals should be handled using the police system rather than condemning the entire organisation or pouring water on whatever the Uganda Police Force has been doing. Thank you.

MS SUUBI: Therefore, I request that we move a motion that would treat the cause of this problem –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me remind you that the Hansard needs to capture your name and constituency. Therefore, when you speak, state your name and constituency.

5.01
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of State for Internal Affairs for his statement. Actually, it cools the hearts of Ugandans. Thank you very much for being humble in your statement. 

When I watched that footage on television, I lost heart. I almost broke down when I saw an old woman in a gomesi being beaten. This does not mean that we do not appreciate the services of the Uganda Police Force. This does not mean that we do not appreciate the conditions in which the police personnel work. This does not mean that we do not recognise the provocations made by the defiance campaigners on the police force.

Madam Speaker, this Parliament has supported the Uganda Police Force year after year. Today, their budget stands to be one of the biggest passed in Parliament. We have supported the police to promote professionalism. That is why I stand to denounce the acts of violence and unprofessionalism by the Uganda Police Force. It is unfair to Ugandans! I heard the IGP, in his statement, legitimising the caning of Ugandans. This Parliament passed an Act against torture. Is caning a human rights activity? Isn’t it an act of torture? What if it were you?

Madam Speaker, this Parliament has a responsibility to sit down and chart a way forward. What is it going to be tomorrow? Colleagues on the other side also have a challenge. Do we need to be defiant? What effects is it having on Ugandans? Thank you.

5.04
MR PETER SEMATIMBA (NRM, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by thanking the Minister of State for Internal Affairs for ably communicating what he communicated to us. It was very clear that he agreed with us that brutality is not right. Brutality is not for this country and certainly not for this century. 

However, he also made a very clear distinction between individuals who committed the brutality and the Uganda Police Force. I, therefore, would like to take this opportunity to say that as a House that represents Uganda and as a House that is going to be quoted by people all over the world, as we condemn the brutality and make sure that those who perpetuated it are brought to justice, we should separate the individuals from the Uganda Police Force. 

We should appreciate the Uganda Police Force. As the mover of the motion rightly said, the majority of the Uganda Police Force personnel do a great job. Let us not forget that in this debate. The police are doing a great job. However, some individuals are messing up its reputation. Let them be taken care of; let us clean up as far as those individuals are concerned.

My prayer, again, to this august House is that let us not compromise or bring down the name of the Uganda Police Force because it is doing a great job. Thank you.

5.06
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish for us to separate two things: the role and the conduct of the Uganda Police Force and what we are supposed to do as a Parliament and politicians in general.

Regarding the conduct of the police, some people in Kampala are lucky that these things done against citizens are aired on television and seen. For my people in Bugabula County South, when such torture is administered on them, nobody is there to stand for them or witness this. This is the Parliament of Uganda that must put things right. The behaviour of the police outside there is really inhuman and cannot be accepted. This is the time for us to put right what is wrong.  

The Minister of State for Internal Affairs was very clear when he said that he regrets what happened. We are narrowing the discussion of police conduct to only Dr Kizza Besigye. There is a lot beyond what we see going on, which I wish this Parliament could address. 

This Parliament is supposed to establish laws that govern these organs that administer and maintain law and order in this country. Somebody was talking about the law enforcement officers in KCCA. These fellows behave as if what governs them is not what governs us. 

Regarding the behaviour of policemen in plain clothes, we expect the leaders of the police to tell us that when a policeman is in plain clothes - When I was young, I used to imagine that someone who does not wear uniform belongs to the side departments. However, those who watched television saw a man –(Member timed out.)

5.08
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Madam Speaker, I was present when the President was delivering the State of the Nation Address and I saw Members with placards reading, “Release Dr Kizza Besigye”. The President was very clear and he said he does not release Besigye; it is the courts of law. (Interjections)- It is a maiden speech. 

For the months that Dr Besigye was in Luzira, the whole country was at peace. The moment he was released on bail, there were wars with the police. The police are doing the right thing but Ugandans have their hidden agendas and they will always want to provoke the police. What I know is that the police are doing the right thing. I thank you.

5.11
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and commend the minister for the manner in which he raised the statement in the House today. I would also like to thank colleagues for approving me, in absentia, to represent you in the Pan African Parliament. 

This being my maiden speech in this Tenth Parliament, I would like to give it a balance in terms of what has been raised by different colleagues and what has been appreciated by different colleagues in regard to the conduct of the police in Uganda. We must all appreciate that the police are human beings like us. You must appreciate that when you are campaigning in your constituencies, sometimes you go overboard because of what could have - (Interjections) - Provocation is an issue. These policemen are human beings; why must it be - 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members; allow her to make her contributions.

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, we are all aware that according to the Police Act, the police are mandated to keep law and order. Just go to Rwanda. There, the police are well respected and the police also respect the people. However, in our country, if it is a politician from a political party wanting to justify his being in the press, what would the police do?

Madam Speaker, what we have to address is the cause. Most people want to justify their actions using the press because they know –(Member timed out.)

5.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR VETERAN AFFAIRS (Maj. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the minister for the balanced statement. I would like to say that it is good that the mover of the motion brought it forward. However, I find it very difficult to support it because it is one-sided.

Madam Speaker, we are dealing with a situation of militants in riotous situations. I witnessed one such situation in Entebbe and I would like to say that this was an operations mistake. 

Madam Speaker, you may recall that Parliament denounced the use of teargas. The only weapon left for the police is the water bowser, which I understand was out of order. I called the Inspector General of Police, Gen. Kayihura, and asked, “Why are you using sticks?” He said, “We are limited in our options.” (Interjections) Madam Speaker, I need your protection.

THE SPEAKER: Order; allow him to submit. 

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: You have your views and I have my views. It is not correct to condemn the police without regarding the circumstances under which they are operating – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: This is his maiden speech.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I like the way the minister packaged the report - accepting that there was an operations mistake and they are trying to solve it.

Here in Parliament, most of us have made mistakes. People have slapped each other at police stations and they are here because they have repented. Madam Speaker, I request that we allow the minister to clean up the mistakes and also politicians go and sensitise the masses that we should operate within the law. Elections ended, we cannot keep on rioting from place to place and causing violence. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for this opportunity. Allow me to thank the honourable minister for the balanced statement. I would like to put it on record and thank the minister for the degree of humility that he has expressed by apologising before this House and Uganda at large.

I would like to take a note from the honourable minister’s statement, that police authorities have already started disciplinary action and the procedures are well entrenched in the Police Act because they were not pleased with what happened. I am sure that they will get a solution to this.

Madam Speaker, I have some institutional memory of what has been happening under the police, having chaired the Committee on Internal Affairs for three years where I sat with my brothers, hon. Kivumbi as the Shadow Minister of Internal Affairs, and hon. Ssemujju Nganda. 

We had a lot of issues that we handled with the police and one of them was the level of professionalism and administering penalties and punishment. We noted with a lot of concern, in several of our meetings, that we were tired of teargas and pink water, especially in Kampala, because this was done indiscriminately and it was inconveniencing everybody in the city because tear gas cannot discriminate. People would close their businesses and children and pregnant women would collapse because of tear gas. When it came to pink water; it was the same story.

Therefore, as a committee, we sat- (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute for the minister. She was in charge of that sector for three years.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. At one time, we sat and requested the police to come up with means, which are discriminative, which do not halt businesses and which do not torture innocent people. The police went, sat down and started looking for an alternative. This was one of the alternatives that they came up with and the way it was administered is wanting. 

Madam Speaker, what am I driving at? (Interjections) This is my maiden speech.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the minister to make her maiden speech.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling. I would like to conclude by saying that  when we look at the history of the police, batons have been used world over since time immemorial. The definition of a “baton” - (Interjections)- is a small stick - 

THE SPEAKER: You are going to speak at your own time. 

MS NAMUGWANYA: A baton is a short stick. This one just fell short in the length. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by recommending to the House that we give the police the benefit of doubt and let them complete the disciplinary procedure and come up with an alternative way of handling riots in Kampala and other parts of the country. They should come up with specific punishment, which we need to target culprits and not innocent people out there. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.21
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to salute the minister for the statement and also to commend the police for moving under Section 49 of the Police Act to enforce the police disciplinary code, and ensure that those implicated are strictly liable for their actions.

On the other side, I strongly believe that this Parliament, as the body in charge of making laws and all the rules and regulations of all games, should also condemn this so-called “defiance” and appeal to all citizens of Uganda to act within the law.

Let me also state it categorically that in Public Order Management Act and in any other jurisdiction, whether in Uganda or in the Commonwealth, if a gathering, in the opinion of a police officer, is an illegal one, he or she is to declare that the gathering is illegal and ask those concerned to disperse. The mover of the motion alluded to this but did not give the steps that Police are supposed to use. 

If the gathering or procession, in this particular case, is defiant to the proclamation, the second step is the use of batons. If the gathering is still defiant to batons, the third step is the use of teargas or water cannons. If somebody has information contrary to what I am saying, I challenge him or her to rise up and say number one is wrong, number two is right –(Member timed out.) 

5.24
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a very sensitive point. I would like to thank the Government of Uganda for training and professionalising the army and the police. When we talk about police officers, these are not the old police officers who you think did not go to school. I would like to thank the IGP for the good work that he has done.

Madam Speaker, I do not feel well when I see senior police officers arraigned before the press. These police officers should be taken somewhere and told of their mistakes. 

When we were coming to Parliament, some of us used the Bible to swear. As a church elder in the Seventh Day Adventist Church, I believe in forgiveness. I would like to request that this House allows us to forgive the police officers who are culprits in this case; not only them but also other police officers. 

You are aware that Afande Omara is facing disciplinary action. We should forgive these police officers and start a new chapter. I would also like to request Dr Besigye to stop the “Defiance Campaign”, we forgive him and start a new Uganda.

I do not want a country where we are fighting. How shall we develop? Instead of thinking about the Standard Gauge Railway and other infrastructure, we are thinking about defiance. Madam Speaker, I would like to request that we forgive one another and start a new chapter. Thank you.

5.26
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. For me, it is gratifying to know that the minister knows that wrong was committed and that the culprits have been brought to book. This is what Ugandans have been longing for: not to protect those who commit wrongs against others.

Honourable members, it helps all of us as Ugandans to respect the rights of others. We cannot condone that the police be pelted with stones. We cannot condone that the police clobber Ugandans like they are snakes. Personally, I stand to condemn all hooliganism by the police and by Ugandans. Ugandans should resolve to be law abiding citizens and shun hooliganism and defiance. 

The police should exercise utmost restraint. We have been told that where they exercise restraint, indeed people depart. Therefore, exercise more restraint. However, as Parliament, we have erred by not allocating sufficient resources to the police to undertake the necessary training, especially in human rights. 

Honourable members, I pray that we consider the circumstances under which police performs but at the same time we require a high standard from the police. Honourable minister, we require a high standard from the police. They should begin to build a relationship with the people of Uganda so that they build trust and confidence. I thank you.

5.28
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am from Makindye West and part of my constituency, specifically along Busabala-Namasole road, was where the incident happened. It is my people who went through that pain. In fact, some of them asked me to provide them with money and sticks since Gen. Kayihura stated in public that it is okay to protect yourself using sticks. I told them to wait for Thursday and hear what Parliament decides after which I would use my July salary to buy sticks for each homestead to protect itself, if supported by Parliament. 

We are cornering this issue and putting it onto an individual. The word “defiance” happened even before the birth of Dr Kizza Besigye and it means resistance. In 1981, some people resisted against Government acts and now they are standing in Parliament as the National Resistance Movement. I saw it happen and heard it from the Prime Minister himself. Therefore, “defiance” means going or resisting against unlawful orders and illegalities.

This time, police did an illegal act and in fact the minister has said this and he has been very sorry about it. Therefore, do not condemn defiance so much. Police has been behaving this way all along. Last year, 2015, when we were not in Parliament, a journalist was mistreated by the police. You are only talking about people following a political leader. However, a journalist from WBS television called Andrew Kaggwa was carrying out his work when he was beaten by a policeman called Joram Mwesigye and he is now paralysed. Nothing is being done; no one is helping him. 

Therefore, if we corner it to being political - other people who are not political are also suffering because of police brutality. Some of the people being affected by this kiboko, as justified today in Parliament that it also happened to a minister, Lt Gen. Tumukunde.  We must condemn these acts and bring to book those people who have been involved in such acts of illegality – (Interruption) 

LT GEN. (RTD) TUMUKUNDE: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member, especially on the Opposition side, to continue recruiting me to the wrong side of things that I may develop a feeling that will act against them one of these days?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, your being here is so exciting. That is why people continually refer to you.

MR SSEWANYANA: We are concerned because he was the future Minister of Security, so we did not want anything to happen to him. As people from the Opposition, we thank you. (Interruption) 

MS KIIZA: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to the entire House is that the brutality of police should not only be zeroed down to Dr Col. Kizza Besigye. You realise that at the beginning of this month, NTV highlighted a young girl who tasted the brutality of police. There is a bullet that hit her and police has refused to come to her rescue.

Madam Speaker, I am glad that you are handling the matter. Therefore, you may think that this is a matter to do with Besigye but the brutality of police is even reaching out to people who are not concerned. There is a lady from Entebbe who also suffered and yet she was not part of the programme. She was pregnant when she was hit by a bullet and was forced to deliver her baby; up to now, her intestines are still getting out.

Police apologised and promised to treat this woman but they have never treated her. She is actually planning to take legal action against the police. Therefore, we may narrow this debate down to Dr Kizza Besigye but actually, it is beyond him. It is about the lives of Ugandans. Thank you.

MR SSEWANYANA: Thank you for the information.

THE SPEAKER: You have taken more than your two minutes.

5.35
MR HERBERT KABAFUNZAKI (NRM, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to focus on the motion and the statement given by my colleague. 

Madam Speaker, I would like my colleagues to appreciate the fact that there are institutional actions and individual actions. The acts that are individualistic in an institution cannot warrant this Parliament to focus on this motion but only to listen to the statement given by the honourable minister.

If you look at Article 211 and look back from where we have come, there is no doubt that the police force is a nationalistic, disciplined and competent force. However, because of acts that are individualistic, it does not put us in a judgmental situation. 

On this note, I would like this House to appreciate and thank my colleague, the minister, who has appreciated the small mistakes and indeed, these are isolated weaknesses, which can be corrected. Thank you.

5.37
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is human that when a body is confronted, it produces adrenaline to either fight or flee. We have seen Ugandans who are confronted but they are not even fighting back. I need to hail Ugandans for being good in comparison to what the Police does to them. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I am very disappointed. I hail from western Uganda and when Members have been lamenting here and associating the people from western Uganda to whatever is happening here. I have a fear that one time, we or our children are going to pay for the deeds that we did not do.

Many of us here are debating irrespective of the political affiliation. We have tasted the brutality of the Police during the election time. The Police even turned into court bailiffs in the villages and they are grabbing people’s land.

My concern is whether these officers are going to be prosecuted. When are we going to see the IGP also being prosecuted? (Applause)

5.39
MR ABDU LATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When I look at the minister’s statement, I feel greatly humbled and I believe that all the ministers should borrow a leaf. Whenever things go wrong and they come here, they must be apologetic as he has done. I thank you very much for a very good beginning and you can count on our support if you move in that direction. (Applause)

Secondly, the minister has talked about gatherings or crowds in Kalerwe. Kalerwe is part of my constituency and I know that from morning up to midnight, there are always crowds. 

Definitely when you expect a person of Dr Kizza Besigye’s calibre coming out from prison – even in our culture, when you are coming from prison, the way your people welcome you should not be a reason for tear gas and beating. 

I believe that even if somebody puts on a “gomesi” and he is a gentleman, you are going to attract a lot of crowds because Kampala is densely populated. So, the moment you say that these crowds are going to be dispersed with tear gas and canes, then you will really be missing the point. 

Our request, Madam Speaker, is that the Police cannot work without the “wanainchi” and without cooperating with us. I cannot imagine Kampala and Uganda without Police. We are talking about professionalism – the way you handle a crowd and cooperate with “wanainchi” leaves a lot to be desired.

As the chairperson of the city parliamentary caucus, I am advising that if the Police are interested in using our knowledge on how to control crowds without damaging and injuring them, we are ready to offer our service to the Uganda Police Force so that we can move without seeing scenes of the Police beating and brutalising Ugandans. I thank you very much  

5.43
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to appreciate the Police because we need them every day and we cannot do without them. For instance in Kumi, we cooperate so much with the Police. I personally helped to acquire an extra water tap – I think that it is a very good working relationship that this country needs.

We, the members of Lions Club of Kumi Central helped to renovate Kumi Police Station and this has helped to  create a very good relationship between the Police and the public. However, it does not mean that I am here to help the Police and allow them to beat people using very long sticks. It is not in order. (Interjections) It is not a U-turn but the correct thing to say. 

They claimed to have used the batons but I am sure that they are using a long stick for canning people who are innocent. If somebody is standing by the way side to cheer somebody who has been released from prison and more over on bond, why should you cane such a person? I think it is high time that Parliament exercised her authority. Let us use the power that God has given to us to do the right thing because all the power that we have can sort out this country. 

Let us not waste time discussing or making speeches without resolving something that can help us to move forward. We have the power to make the correct laws. People should not go ahead to disturb the country and then just get out like that. I am also worried about big people making reckless statements in the public. You condone such matters by saying that it was good because they helped to – (Member timed out.) 

5.45
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the honourable minister for making this statement because it takes humility to give such an apologetic statement. 

Whereas I do not condone the acts of defiance, I do not support the brutal conduct of the Police because this matter concerns all Ugandans irrespective of our political affiliation. Even an honourable member walking along the way and Police suspects that there is a crowd to be handled, even that Member will suffer the same brutality.

Human dignity is held highly by the Constitution, which is the grand norm. Article 24 of the Constitution states “No person shall be subjected to any form of torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.” (Member timed out.)

5.47
MR FRED TUMUHEIRWE (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I come from the same district with Dr Kizza Besigye. As a person hailing from Rukungiri, I am worried. I would like to thank my colleagues who have moved the motion condemning the brutality of the Police force.

These acts have not started recently. When Dr Besigye wanted to become President of Uganda in 2001, the forces killed somebody in Rukungiri when we were with Dr Besigye. Last year, I witness a tragedy where this Parliament could have lost a big number of honourable members. They included hon. Ssemujju Nganda, hon. Ekanya, Amuriat and the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Wafula Oguttu, when a senior Police officer ordered, in our view, his officers to mount tyre bursters in the middle of a road and you must have witnessed how multiple vehicles crushed in that accident. That is very dangerous. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to add my voice and support the motion that this Parliament moves to condemn the brutality of the Police and we look into our laws to make sure that Ugandans are safeguarded. It is not only about Besigye –(Interruption)

MR KAGINDA: Thank you my colleague for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague that since 2001, the Government has arrested Col Besigye more than 100 times but he has never been convicted of any case. He has not been convicted even for once. That is what I wanted to inform my colleague.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you only had two minutes. Your two minutes are gone; you donated your time to your brother. (Laughter)

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, I beg to raise a point of procedure and I would like to refer to our Rule 44(2) which says; “Statements made by ministers may be debated provided that such debate shall not exceed one hour.” I would like to thank the mover of the motion and the minister for having raised this important reaction to the motion. However, Madam Speaker, having listened to the concerns of Members and the importance that has been attached to this motion and to the presentation of the minister, I beg to move that - (Interruption) 

MR SSEGONA: Madam Speaker, we have Rules of Procedure. A Member rises up on a point of procedure and moves into motion. Is she procedurally correct especially having been here for the four terms?

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, this matter is exceedingly important. I have not yet heard from the UPC and DP. Let me hear from the others.

3.52
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Madam Speaker, you are right to mention that this is a very important issue in the country. (Interjections) I think because of this issue -

THE SPEAKER: You are harassing a Member

MR NANDALA MAFABI: No, I will not, I know him. I have a procedural issue. I recall there is an induction course for MPs and children copy manners from their parents; if they their parents are good then they will be good and vice versa.

Madam Speaker, hon. Seninde is a minister and she was formerly a commissioner. Now, she is trying to bring bad manners in the House. (Laughter) 

Is it procedurally right for Members of the front bench who have been around for some time because they want to go away, and because they are happy with Police beating people –(Interruption)

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, we do appreciate that we have Rules of Procedure in this Parliament and when I rise up on the Floor to raise a point of procedure moreover referring to our Rules of Procedure, is it in order for the colleague that I respect so much to insinuate that I am undisciplined for having raised an issue in the Rules of Procedure and yet, we know that we have the Order Paper that we  are following; the Order Paper is still long, Madam Speaker, and I raised it in good faith because I knew we had another presentation by another minister.

I do attach the importance to this matter and that is why I even thanked the Member who moved the motion and also the minister for presenting this response.

Madam Speaker, honestly, is it in order for my colleague and brother that I have been with in this House for this long to insinuate that I am indisciplined? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, you are a much disciplined person. But having said that, honourable members, we have our rules, of course, but with this subject, we would be happy if Members left this House peaceful, composed and happy.  Hon. Akol, you have two minutes.

MR AKOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue that I was raising is that it is important for us to discuss this issue without separating which party you belong to, because if you look at the beating, some of you who watched this on TV stations, you will never see any person in any colour. There was no UPC, DP or even FDC colours. For that matter, you will realise that it affects you directly. It is not some issue that should be taken along party lines. 

Secondly, this brutality of the Police is not the first time. I wonder why Members try to link this brutality with the defiance campaign, which has been defined in other word as resistance. A case in point, yesterday, I was talking to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. In Amuru last year, there were two youths who lost their hands in the brutality of the Police. One was a student of Gulu University. That had nothing to do with Col Besigye campaign; it was an issue to do with land. We are talking about excessive use of force on the citizens of Uganda when they are the right people to protect the people of Uganda. That is the issue that we trying to raise.

The other issue is that we are all aware the IGP said that is what he ordered his officers to do. Why are we running away from this issue?  The problem is that Members are politicising this issue along the party lines. If the order was from a big person that means the institution is not in position to address the issue. It also means that this Parliament set up a committee that will investigate and come up with a way forward, other than saying –(Member timed out.)

5.58
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. In Bunyoro Kingdom, where I come from and in the wisdom of our mothers, you do not keep a stick that beats your co-wife. Otherwise, you will end up like Amama Mbabazi, who sponsored the Public Order Management Bill here and was very unhappy in Jinja, when he was blocked from going to Mbale. (Applause)

Honourable colleagues, as the Tenth Parliament, we must stand to be counted whether we want to either be a civilian or a military Government and, therefore, do away with Parliament and stop wasting tax payers’ money. Our tax payers expect a lot from us and our citizens and voters deserve better. It is not right for anybody to stand here and condone brutality. I thank the minister for the remorseful tone he has used. 

The matter we are debating is not a partisan one. It is bi-partisan and it is a matter of common good. Our children, mothers and families are looking at us and wondering if the Tenth  Parliament is going to deliver. 

Honourable colleagues, if Government chose last week after this ugly incident to appoint a commission of inquiry, we would not be debating this here. Hon. Prime Minister, we can still do that.  

I can hear westerners now being called “Anyanyas.” I am not comfortable with it. I am from western Bunyoro, where we do not recruit anyway –(Member timed out.) I just want to conclude.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, just conclude your statement in half a minute.  

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, we are not going to achieve a middle income status country, if as a country, we do not build consensus. We are over stretching our police and we are taking political battles to police and courts of law. We are also militarising political questions. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if next week you brought here a constitutional amendment to make the Leader of the Opposition the loser and we domesticate her here in Parliament, it would not go to the streets. Hon. Winfred Kizza, we cannot speak for the number two in Parliament. The number two in the general election should be seated there, expressing his views and not in Owino, Kissekka or Kalerwe. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my prayer is to let not politicians fail to use Inter Party Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD), the National Consultative Council and we start using Gen. Kale Kayihura and the courts of law, wasting tax payers’ money. The money you are spending on police can be used to do other things that our people need. Can you bring a national dialogue, a national conference, a constitutional amendment and we have the Leader of Opposition seated here, and we domesticate him and stop disturbing the streets. I thank you very much. 

6.02
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to refer to the statement by the minister on the second last paragraph on the first page, where he says, “…regrettably, some police officers in their use of force acted unprofessionally. They beat members of the public without provocation. This was wrong and Police regrets the incident.” 

Madam Speaker, Kalerwe is a market place, where most of the people are women. If you look at the footage on NTV, these women were doing their work and fending for their families. They were not part of the crowd that had gathered, if it was there, to do anything or to provoke the police. These are innocent Ugandans and it is the police that provoked them by beating them. 

Madam Speaker, one woman, who had a child fell into a ditch and she is now admitted at Mulago Hospital with her child. What is going to happen? If the minister is regretting the incident, is there any way these innocent Ugandans are going to be compensated for being harassed? I would like to find out from the minister, if there is any arrangement, and if the minister has taken trouble to even find out those people who were –(Member timed out.)

6.04
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I rise to do two things: One is to support the motion moved by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi and to condemn the statement by the minister. 

Madam Speaker, brutality and terrorism by the Uganda Police Force is just escalating. I believe the time is now to call the force to order. The unfortunate thing is that politicians stand here and seem to believe that Uganda is ending today. They support evil and tell us that it is good. 

Not long ago, as Col (Rtd) Dr Kizza Besigye was proceeding to the city, a one “Bwana” Arinaitwe got a hammer in a bid to stop him from proceeding. The following day, the then Minister of Propaganda, hon. Kivenjinja, woke up and told the whole world that what they had seen was actually not a hammer. He also said that the truth is that Col (Rtd) Dr Kizza Besigye had beaten himself. He was a minister and is now indeed elevated to some other level. 

Today, Ugandans are subjected to the “Kiboko” squad, “Kifeesi” under the guidance of the Uganda Police Force. I witnessed a scenario at City Hall in Kampala when -(Member timed out.) 

6.06
MS JOY ATIM ONGOM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by the honourable member. I would also like to appreciate the minister for apologising to this House and to Ugandans for the police brutality. 

Madam Speaker, we all saw the footage broadcast by the media. We should not zero this brutality only to the defiance of Col Kizza Besigye. In Lira, just two weeks back, there was an eviction of the vendors banning them from entering the market. They were just ordinary people doing their business. They were really brutally evicted to the extent that there was a situation where the police had to throw a tear gas canister to a primary school. Over seven children were admitted in critical conditions; some of them had asthma, the population condemns that. 

One of the people who was in a local hotel eating, was shot by police. That was in Lira, not this particular one.

In this particular one of Kalerwe and Entebbe road, I saw it on TV. Some of these “boda boda” riders were just seated; in fact, there was a man who was just seated in the trench, not even bothered by what was happening. He was also terribly beaten. It was very serious.

Another man was on a motor cycle, I think he came from another place and he did not know what was happening and he too was terribly beaten. I just would like to know this, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Just finish your statement and conclude.

MS JOY ATIM: I saw men who were not in uniform. I know these other police men have been taken to court. What about those people who terribly beat the population, where are they? Have they identified them? Where are they? Have the police taken on those particular people? If we leave them, they are the same people who are going to beat our Ugandans and this is serious. We need them to be brought to book. Thank you.

6.09
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Where I come from, whenever there is death in the community, friends and foes come and mourn together. The last two hours, I have been seated here and I am sort of watching a debate of “us against them”.

This is the time we should be speaking one language. It does not matter who is the victim. There should be no circumstances under which we can massage or justify something wrong, because it is happening in our community –(Interruption)

MS TAAKA: I am very perturbed by the continuous insinuation by Members rising up to imply that there has been a debate in Parliament of “we against the other”. I think we have all entirely agreed that police brutality is wrong. 

Every one of us here has condemned the act and I would like this to go out to the public that Parliament has condemned the brutality of Police. (Applause) However, Members are concerned about the issue of defiance. This is because most of the injuries that have been happening in Kampala are as a result of the defiance campaign.

We should, therefore, not run away. Is it in order for the, honourable member, to insinuate that we are in a debate of one party against the other? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the hon. Katuntu had just started and I do not know what he was going to say, whether he was going to tell us who are the “them” and who are the “us”. He had just started. However, we acknowledge your position that we all condemn the brutality and also condemn the defiance. (Applause)

MR KATUNTU: Ordinarily, if it was not her maiden speech, I would not have reacted or I would have reacted differently but these things happen. This place is a learning place.

Let me say this; in the last Parliament, the campaigns would have been worse. It took responsibility of the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition then to form a small committee to address the challenges that were going on during the campaigns. Some of them are actually related to this institution of the Police.

We had to invite the leadership of the police to have some of those challenges addressed. In my own view, even if we debate here and we continue – everybody know that there was a problem. I would like really to thank the minister. I have been here for quite a long time but I have never seen a statement like this; where a minister comes and says “I am sorry”. (Applause)

The statements we have been receiving are justifications. They have been denials. This is the first time I see this and I congratulate, hon. Obiga Kania. (Applause) I do not agree with anybody who says that “Yes, it is wrong but you are the one who caused.” That is the “us against them” debate I am talking about.

Do not justify it under any circumstances; criminality remains criminality. You cannot say that “Yes, I raped her but she was putting on a short dress.” A rapist is a rapist. Therefore, I would like to make some suggestions - 

THE SPEAKER: You have just one minute; try to conclude.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much. If the Leader of Government Business and Leader of the Opposition can take up this particular matter such that there is a continuous engagement process between those two offices to address this challenge - because it is going to be on-going and we will not be converging here every other time, to debate Police.

However, there should be a mechanism whereby Government works with the Opposition to address some of these challenges. That is why I get excited by the hon. Mukitale’s view because as leaders in Parliament, we have been elected. We have got a forum of continuous engagement. Politicians outside there do not have that opportunity and forum.

However, if Government can continually engage, it would give the Opposition an opportunity to make a positive impact on the actions of Government and that is why we are here and that is why we were elected. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if you can revive the forum that you had created last time, such that some of these views after this debate, that forum can continuously engage, it will be a way forward, other than us coming here and quarrel and go away and tomorrow we are headlines. There will be no solution to the problem.  I thank you.

6.13
MS MARY KABANDA BABIRYE (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his statement and to thank the mover of the motion. I request, honourable members, to support the motion because it is a national issue.

I would like to inform the minister that what is killing Police is politics. Those policemen who are mixing with politics are partisan. Those who are nonpartisan are doing well. We request that, let Police do their work. For me, I come from Masaka and you know what is there.

If you go to Police and they know that you are from the Opposition side, they can even fail to greet you. Therefore, let the Police do their work and leave out politics.

On the issue of Besigye, I would like to advice. Is there no way the Government or Police can give a platform to him to meet with his people? The FDC people think that they won and they therefore need somebody to go and counsel them that, “Please, wait for the next term.” 

Dr Besigye has not been given an opportunity. He needs a platform to meet his people, counsel then and tell them to wait until 2021. Unless he is given an opportunity; he will find his own way of meeting his people. Thank you very much.

6.18
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, the Shadow Attorney-General and hon. Osegge who moved this motion.

If there are people who are going to celebrate for the debate that has happened in Parliament today, it is Police. When you adopt violence as a method of conflict resolution, you also become a victim. 

There was a time the police officers’ wives were protesting because their water had been cut off in barracks and their own husbands because they were given orders, they were the ones brutalizing their own wives on streets, throwing them on trucks and firing tear gas at them.

This particular motion seeks to liberate Police. When you order human beings, because they work under order, to go and carry out violence, it does not matter who they come across. These police officers are beating their own parents, relatives because the superiors have ordered that now violence will be a method of dispersing crowds.

I think police officers will be the first to celebrate this motion once this Parliament and Government accept. It is not permitted in any law but just trying to call Government to order that, please, remember the commitment you made.

Madam Speaker, violence can only breed violence. I visited a film classification board in Norway sometime in 2002 and I was amazed. They said children could watch films even of their parents and adults carrying out those issues I will not mention but said that you cannot allow children to watch violence. Once you allow violence on streets, you are inviting violence in schools. 

You have seen RDCs and chairpersons beating people claiming they found them drinking and playing “matatu” respectively. Once you allow violence to take route in this country; there will be a day we will be exchanging kicks and boxes in this Parliament. Cultures grows, they do not –(Member timed out.)

6.22
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I draw the attention of the honourable members to Article 24 regarding dignified treatment. I also draw them to Article 211 that clearly spell out Police conduct. 

I have sad news that the minister’s statement lacked specifics. It was shallow on facts and descriptions. What this country is interested in, is some evaluation that is verifiable. To me, the minister’s statement was like a double-edged sword.

He gave a lamentation answer but also the statement was more or less flaming the fires. Madam Speaker, this country belongs to us. The minister talked about the deaths in Kasese. I encourage the minister to take time to analyse and evaluate those deaths.

When they were announcing our results on the third day, they shot a 14-year-old boy. He had just gone to the tally centre to receive and welcome our results; it grieves my spirit. This young man was just climbing a tree, a bullet hit him and we buried him the following day.

I stand here, Madam Speaker, as a Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs. I want to put the country on notice- (Member timed out.)

6.25
MR GUTOMOI ABACANON (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This debate refreshes my mind about the relationship between the Police and the public out there and then Police and the Members of Parliament.

In the Eighth Parliament, you may recall a select committee of Parliament was put in place and I was a Member. After successfully coming out with investigations throughout the country and a report was supposed to be tabled in the House, the chairpersons of that committee hon. Peter Nyombi disappeared with the report for five months until the end of the year. 

Today, it reminds me that when we are talking about the relationship between Police and the public and then Members of Parliament, then this is a very important matter that should be taken seriously.

We must thank the honourable minister for being very honest. What is happening is very simple; saying that there is great fear of change in this country. However, we need a constitutional reform so that issues regarding the Police and the public should be put right.

Today, I have learnt that Dr Besigye is an important person. It is only fear that this country thinks he should not become the next president. However, let us pray and consult God when we decide on our own. You never know tomorrow.

What is happening should be recorded for the future to investigate and draw conclusions. Today, we want to speak and end this story of Police brutality. Can we do one experiment? 

If this man leaves his home going to his office; as he left court after court bail going to his home and the Police watches and the public who want to follow him follows up to his home or office without interfering or intervention, what would happen really?

I think these people would move very safely and comfortably. If any defaults, then that is the right of the Police to apprehend such a person. Let us give him that opportunity. The Police are the one causing this confusion.

In Lira, they beat up people last week, threw tear gas to  pupils in nursery schools and some of them are still hospitalised. When you hear the Police chief saying that he has authorised beating up of Ugandans; that is not beating Dr Kizza Besigye but the people of Uganda - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Where is hon. Onesimus Twinamasiko? Okay, after hon. Ochen, Twinamasiko, and Nsubuga in that order and then the Prime Minister will speak.

6.28
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, the issues that are raised about the Police are symptoms which detail that we have a political problem in Uganda.

This problem cannot be solved by criticising Police as individuals we must deal with state institutions to bring political order in the country. 

Madam Speaker, I am a testimony; I was arrested by Police and detained in the police station in Soroti and at midnight the DPC came and opened the police cells and I was sprayed with a chemical. We can only pretend in this Parliament if we are not going to stand on our feet to defend the people of Uganda. 

My prayer is that let Government accept and I wish Government could take trouble one day to ask the people of Uganda why they are behaving in such a manner –(Member timed out.)

6.30
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi County East, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This statement by the honourable minister carries some lies. He says that Police got involved in confrontation with the crowd. 

I did not see a confrontation between the Police and the crowds in the videos we watched on TVs, because a confrontation means a hostile situation or a clash or a battle between two opposing sides.

However, it was one opposing side of the Police beating up people who were innocent; there was no confrontation at all. The Police were beating up people who were not responding. Next time the minister is giving us a statement, I pray that he gets a proper choice of words.

I question the relevance of this Police Headquarters Disciplinary Court where the said police officers were arraigned. The Inspector General of Police was heaping praises on the police officers who beat up people.

Now what is this Police Headquarters Disciplinary Court for? If the head of the Police said they were doing a good job, what will come out of this? These police officers should use our usual courts and face the law because this court of the police will not help us as a country.

6.33
MR SIMEO NSUBUGA (NRM, Kassanda County South, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a former police spokesman. First of all, I thank the minister for presenting a well detailed statement. I would like you to look at the last two sentences of the statement on page one, which reads: “Regrettably, some police officers in their use of force acted unprofessionally. They beat members of the public without provocation; this was wrong and Police regrets the incident.”

To me, that is the gist of the matter. We have to appreciate that the Police is a professional institution and has a professional code of conduct.

In any professional institution, expect some members to act unprofessionally but the question is, you as Police administrators what have you done? It is very clear that senior officers have been charged in the Police Disciplinary Court within the Police. The Police have already taken action against its officers who have acted unprofessionally. 

However, the most important thing is we have to find out the cause of this and this Parliament should come up with very clear instructions –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute for the former police spokesperson.

MR NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, today, tomorrow or the other day Dr Besigye will go to court and a crowd will come on the road and the Police will has to stop it from interfering with traffic. We have to be very clear.

Our brothers from the other side the only problem is here in Kampala and Wakiso; you told the people that you won the elections and every now and then they come to welcome their president. But their president never won the elections. That is the truth and the Police have to be there to protect the people of this country to ensure there is traffic flow. However, much as we condemn the Police, Members, we have to be very clear. I thank you.

6.36
MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to refer to the statement by the minister. In the last line on the last page, he said, “We request this House to renew its effort to help the Police to help us.”

I would like to suggest that we take this matter to the Committee on Internal Affairs so that they discuss it exhaustively and come out with recommendations, we have all cried out but not provided solutions. Let the committee suggest how the Police can handle situations like that.

The other issue that I would like to suggest is that we have seen Members of the Opposition being in Cabinet and I believe there is nobody in this world who cannot dialogue. Is it possible, for the sake of peace in this country, for the two parties of FDC and NRM to come together on a round table and discus and come up with peaceful resolutions other than us continuing with this every day?

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, when we started this afternoon, there was a lot of tension not only in the House but also in the country. However, I believe Members have been able to express their views on this matter. I would like to invite the Prime Minister to give us a way forward.

6.39
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I agree with the comments you made that we started with really high tensions. The temperatures are cooling down a little bit. However, I just want to emphasise a few points.

Police action is an end result. There is what provokes the Police. It is defiance that provokes the Police –(Interjections)- The Police have a responsibility to protect –[Mr Sseggona: “Point of order, Madam!”]-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable member is making his maiden speech. (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Ndugu Sseggona, listen to the Speaker –[Mr Sseggona: “No. Order, Madam Speaker.”]-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, sit down. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I am glad that the rule of law has been effected and somebody who was attempting to defy the rule of law has succumbed to the rule of law. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I think this has been a very important debate and the views expressed about lack of professionalism as well as the excesses by the Police are very well taken. I also agree with the statement by the Minister of State for Internal Affairs that the Police should do better. 

However, it is also true to say that when the Inspector General of Police authorised the use of batons, he did not say, “Go and just beat up people”. I saw one or two colleagues saying the Inspector General of Police ordered the Police to go and beat people –(Interjections)- No. Let us get the facts corrected. The Inspector General of Police said, “Do not use teargas. Do not use other means. Use limited means to control the public. Use batons”. That is the position.

I would like to agree with Ngugu Katuntu that the forum that had been established before – of the Leader of the Opposition and some of his close colleagues as well as the Leader of Government Business, with a few of his colleagues – that forum did excellent work and reduced a lot of pressures on political and other issues and really focussed on the common good for the country. Therefore, I support Ndugu Katuntu’s proposal that, that forum should be revived. The Government will do all that is possible to make it work and succeed. This is because we know that, that forum will be able to resolve many issues.

On the question of discussions, one or two colleagues said, “Why don’t you people talk”? The fact is that efforts in that direction have been and continue to be explored. However, it is of no use jumping into something unless there is proper and adequate preparation. This is because the people of Uganda want peace. When we go for something, we should really go for it. The Government is ready and open for any meaningful discussion that will reduce pressure and tension wherever it may be.

Finally, I know that our two colleagues from the Opposition and Government sides have been comparing notes on how best this motion can be logically wound up, taking into account the views that have been expressed by honourable members of this House. With your permission, Madam Speaker, therefore, I would request that either somebody from Ndugu Kivumbi’s side or Ndugu Bahati on our side brings the proposals that appear to bring the two sides together. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the mover of the motion, hon. Kivumbi, and all colleagues who have spoken about this important issue. I also commend the spirit that has been exhibited in this House this afternoon. It is a spirit that focuses on how we can protect Ugandans and at the same time support the Police that protects us.

We have compared notes with the Leader of the Opposition and her colleagues and consulted the Prime Minister and we have come up with five recommendations to wind up this debate.

With your permission, Madam Speaker, I beg that I read them. The recommendations are that:-

Parliament condemns the unprofessionalism exhibited by the Police; 
Government takes the necessary measures to ensure that this conduct does not re-occur; 
Government updates Parliament from time to time on actions taken;
we have adopted the views expressed by hon. Katuntu to revive the committee which was headed by the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition and other leaders to provide an avenue to handle some of these issues;
we call upon all Ugandans and all leaders to respect the rule of law.  

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the prayers, as proposed, be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the next items are small. This one was the major thing for today and we have had time for it. Let us go to the next item and we should summarise it in 10 minutes.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SECURITY SITUATION IN THE COUNTRY

6.47
THE MINISTER OF SECURITY (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Henry Tumukunde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think we should also thank our Members for being this bold and understanding of our kind of situation. 

Before I go to my statement, Madam Speaker, I would like to suggest that maybe we look at one important aspect about who composes the police –(Interjections)– because it is security - I am discussing security. 

Therefore, the big point here is that sometimes these are young people recruited in a rush to catch up with threatening security situations, which security situations enlarge at a very fast rate and so we must always be very fair when we are judging them.

Now let me make the statement on the security. Madam Speaker, the security situation in the country – and we are starting with internal security. The general security situation in Uganda is stable save for the following notable threats, challenges that security agencies are working with other stakeholders to address and require support from the political leaders, including honourable Members of Parliament – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: There is a point of procedure, honourable minister. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I had no intention to disrupt the minister because I consider security situation update in the country very crucial and important. 

However, Madam Speaker, given the short of time you are allocating to this very important subject, we may not be in position to do justice in terms of making our contributions. 

The security situation in the country needs a lot of time for us to appreciate and express our views. May I, therefore, implore you, Madam Speaker, for this particular motion - because it is very crucial and important to us – that we find sufficient time for it or have it debated on the next working day of Parliament?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am not diverting from what hon. Katuntu has raised. As you are aware, we have just passed five resolutions on police. I had wanted to raise a question on minimum force. However, I did not get an opportunity – because were these policemen given batons but they decided to work with sticks? I would like to find out that clarification – (Interjection) - this is a security matter – and because of, we need to know that sticks are a security threat. When we discuss security matters, we need time because the sticks are never bought. They can be picked anywhere and anytime. 

Madam Speaker, you are aware that the person who is moving this motion about the security situation was shot in the leg sometime back while he was a General –(Laughter)- that is why I am saying that security matters need a whole day. We would like to beg that with your good guidance we have a full day to debate these matters –(Interjections) - Madam Speaker, you need to take people for induction courses. When people are speaking – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, as a senior person, you are obliged to treat Members courteously. That is what our rules say, please. Honourable members, apparently Members would want time to read the statement and to debate it when there is adequate time. I will defer it to the next convenient sitting. Let us go to the next item, 4 (c). Please read the text, which has been distributed to you; the Clerk to Parliament should upload another set on the iPads.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON RELEASE OF FUNDS FOR FIRST QUARTER FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

6.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we circulated this paper and gave copies to the Clerk. It is a short statement highlighting the status of how far we have gone in terms of releasing funds.

Madam Speaker, a few days ago, the Leader of the Opposition raised an issue regarding the release of funds. Accordingly, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, has prepared a short statement to update the country on what we are doing to address those issues that were raised by the Leader of the Opposition. This was captured in the New Vision of 12 July 2016, Page 6. 

Accordingly, we have prepared this statement. As observed by the Leader of the Opposition, the annual budget was approved by Parliament on 3 May 2016, in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act. This was to ensure that implementation of the budget for the Financial Year 2016/2017 commences on 1 July 2016 –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are proceeding to receive a statement that is very fundamental; that we are all awaiting and indeed it had been adjourned to make the necessary preparations so that we can receive it. However, here we are with the minister proceeding without giving copies yet it is critical that we follow. Can we, therefore, Madam Speaker, be allowed to receive the copies so that we can follow it?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we have not yet procured iPads for many Members so many of them need the hard copies. 

MR BAHATI: Okay. Madam Speaker, let our staff give out copies to those without but majority of the Members have them. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the procedural matter I am raising is that if you we are going to talk about figures, we need to look at the amounts. These financial matters – and for me, for example, I am very interested in the Shs 2 million per malwa pot; I must see it. Therefore, is it procedurally right for us to move without copies of the written statement – (Interjections) – but this is not a statement with figures.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, former Leader of the Opposition. Madam Speaker, I wish to inform this Parliament and the country that on 5 July 2016, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development approved quarter one cash expenditure limits amounting to Shs 5.7 trillion. 

However, for ministries, departments and agencies to access funding for quarter one, they must be able to provide the breakdown of the funding that have been issued to them in the  first quarter. This breakdown is termed as “Warrants” and is categorised into wage, non-wage, pensions and gratuity and development expenditure.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development approves or rejects a Warrant within 48 hours based on the following: there should be one Warrant per category of expenditure; there must be a plan to clear domestic arrears; and submissions must be made in line with the annual and quarterly work plans. 

The submission of this information to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is critical for ministries, departments and agencies to access their funding and also allow Ministry of Finance to review the planned expenditure to ensure critical areas of expenditures such as utilities, rent, water and electricity have been catered for.

The summaries in the table below show the warrants that have been submitted and those that were approved by 20 July 2016. 

By 20 July 2016, under the category of wage, we received warrants closed to 80 per cent of the budget for wage of this quarter. Out of that, 57 per cent have been sieved and approved. Gratuity has 52 per cent, non-wage has 51 per cent and development has 53 per cent.

Regarding the local government transfers, I would like to say that releases were effected to the local governments on 15 July 2016. All local government accounting officers are required to submit warrants before 20 July 2016. That is when they will be able to access funds except for health and education grants.

Madam Speaker, the purpose of this statement is to show that we have approved the cash limits of Shs 5.7 trillion, but for the spending agencies to receive this money, they have got to do what I have mentioned in No.6. The purpose of this is to show that actually some of the delays we are experiencing in this quarter are not on the side of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, but on the side of the spending agencies. 

We have summoned a meeting tomorrow for all those accounting officers who have not been able to submit the requirements so that they can access cash in order to ensure that at least, by 20th of July, all salaries of civil servants have been paid and all funds have been accessed by the different spending agencies.

Madam Speaker, this is to update this House and the country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Of course, this is mainly information. 

6.58
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the information he has given the House and the nation. 

Madam Speaker, we realise that today is 21st of July. The minister is talking about a meeting that will take place tomorrow to ensure that by 20th of July, all public servants are paid. I really failed to understand whether we shall turn the clock to begin operating in reverse order so that tomorrow becomes maybe the 19th or the 18th so that by 20th, the people are paid - (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Leader of the Opposition, for your information I meant 28th of July. I beg your indulgence. Thank you.

7.00
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the updates and for not releasing resources until people have submitted the warrants they are requesting for. That is a very good move according to the Public Finance Management Act.

Madam Speaker, the accounting officers are appointed by the Secretary to the Treasury. The moment an accounting officer does not perform to the expectations, he or she must be dealt with. 

Here, the minister is showing us people who have not submitted warrants because the moment you say, “80 per cent submitted,” it means 20 per cent have not. That is already a mistake and such people should not be in offices because they are the ones who are going to run to the Members of Parliament blaming the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Let me use the example of my district, Sironko - the CAO would call me and say, “Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has refused to give us money” yet the CAO has not submitted what has been requested for by the ministry.

Therefore, what actions have you taken on these accounting officers who are not up to date? Instead, you are telling us about the meeting. We do not need the meeting. You should tell us what sanctions have been taken on such accounting officers because this law was passed long ago and we must follow it to the latter.

Madam Speaker, having talked about Shs 5.7 trillion, the minister should also tell us who are getting this. There are some ministries that have a huge appetite and these might be the ones consuming the biggest amount here. We need to know the figures. You could be talking about these when certain ministries are taking the entire money while other ministries like the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development are being starved. 

We passed the law saying we must get information before the next release. I am sure by now, you would come to Parliament with the report of the last quarter, which has just ended last financial year to tell us what the release for this quarter is all about and how much each ministry is going to get. Otherwise, we may see Shs 5.7 trillion yet –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: The information I am giving is that the minister has been so economical with the details. This is the first time I am seeing a block figure and on all votes, they are just codes “Y”. One may not know exactly what it means –(Interjections)– yes, it is answered throughout the votes. (Laughter) I am interested in knowing how my vote 104 is performing and other votes as well. 

Madam Speaker, by the close of the last financial year, there were votes and accounting officers that had been blacklisted by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. How have they been affected? Are their funds being remitted? Who is in charge in those institutions and votes? Who is taking care of that?

Otherwise, I would like to agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Yes, it is true we are seeing Shs 5.7 trillion, but for purposes of Parliament and for Members to be in the know, it may not be done now but please allow us see the performances in actual figures rather than the block figures that we need to disaggregate.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, please conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much and my brother, hon. Ssekikubo, for the information.

Madam Speaker, I was about to talk about those letters “Y” and “N” - I do not know what they mean because there is even no key to show us what they mean. Does it mean Shs 1 billion or Shs 50 billion? We do not understand. There is even a new vote.

Therefore, while we must thank the minister for this good initiative, we need the exact figures to be put here and the actions taken against accounting officers who have not done the right thing.

Finally, Madam Speaker, he has said “Before they can access funds except for health and education grants.” In the last Parliament, you will remember how the money we gave to USE was getting lost. When you say these are exceptions, people would fake emergencies and steal. Why are you saying health and education grants are exceptional? Are you telling us that for these, people should not account before they are given more money? 

If you are not aware, the worst places we are losing money in are health centres and schools. You go to health centres, you will find there are no drugs or the health workers are complaining. In education, many people have not got money for USE and UPE and you are saying those are exceptions? The moment you make a law exceptional, my brother, hon. Bahati, you are creating a gap for mismanagement, wastage and stealing. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Mbabali, but let us use just two minutes, please.

7.06
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. During the budget speech, it was clearly made to the public that domestic arrears would be dealt with at first call during the first quarter.

I have just looked at the brief statement of the minister and under No.6, (ii) he says that there must be a plan to clear domestic arrears. That means already there is no plan.

When you look at Table No.8, you realise that he has put all different categories but it does not include domestic arrears. Therefore, the domestic arrears are very important. They have got a negative impact on the economy. As we talk, there is a shortage of liquidity in the public and the revenues are dropping down because of domestic arrears.

It is high time this item is given priority as it was in the budget. I wish the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come out - because the public is expecting the clearance of their domestic arrears. The companies are very distressed, the banks are on their necks and the economy is getting a negative effect. I beg to rest my case.

7.08
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Madam Speaker, I am looking at vote 104 for Parliamentary Commission. I see there is an “N” meaning no in the development budget. May I have an explanation? We are in a crisis; we do not have enough space to sit and we have been budgeting for this item. What happened?

7.09
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you very much, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for putting in place sanctions and the warrants that are necessary to operationalize the Public Finance Management Act. However, this being the first presentation to the Tenth Parliament, honourable minister, you have been giving us very good last quarter of the year releases and the first quarter release.

As Members of Parliament the figure you have not given here would be very useful to committees but specifically as ex-officio members of district councils, while doing oversight, we request that you also get us figures for releases for our districts per sector so that when our Members go for the maiden district council meetings, they speak with authority about releases for water, education and so forth. So, I request that at the earliest you give us that information so that we can be more relevant to our councils.

Secondly, I am concerned - we have come from an election, we have taken time to settle - the point raised by hon. Mbabaali is very critical. In the last phase of last Parliament, we did not have a state of economy report. I would also request that before the committee fully goes into that, Ministry of Finance, Planning and economic Development volunteers that information because out there, people are calling for bail outs and I do not think that is the way to go. Would the Minister of Finance want to help this Parliament at the beginning to have information about the state of economy of this country? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Magyezi comes in, I would like to reassure the House. We had a Business Committee meeting this morning and we agreed that the state of the economy reports will be given early attention. 

Secondly, to the minister, when we were vetting the Secretary to the Treasury as the Director of the Bank of Uganda, we told him about the need for Members to have information about the releases. He said every Member would get those releases. Therefore, your permanent secretary has already tied you, so ensure that copies of the releases are given to us.

7.12
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues and one is on No.8. I would like to thank the minister for the information but help us to understand that table. Today is the 21st day of the month, and only 50 per cent, for the central votes, has been approved - when you look at that lower row. Whether they submitted 80 or 70 per cent, my concern is as per today, it is 57, 52 50 - so what is happening on the central votes as we go to the end of the month, honourable minister?

The second point is further to what hon. Mukitale has said on No.9; help us to understand the little detail, what is going on with local governments? It is saying releases were effected to local government on the 15 July 2016. Honourable minister, should we take it that all local governments have actually received their releases for July as per today? Is that what it means? If it means that, the next statement becomes a bit worrying because it says that all local governments accounting officers are required to submit warrants before closure of business on 20 July to warrant figure releases. You have released on 15 of July, but all accounting officers of local governments are supposed to submit warrants by 20 of July.  It does not tie up. What exactly are you telling us here?

Finally on that, again the explanation, why the exception for health and education? So give us more information on the local governments’ funds transfers so that we are able to engage them. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Just a few clarifications to make and one is that I confirm that yes we received that information from the Secretary to the Treasury and indeed every quarter we make releases, we are going to be sending hard copies and emails. We would have loved to send by email but given the fact that we have not got what belongs to us to access these emails, we are going to first use hard copies.

On the issue of “Y” and “N”, it simply means - if we take say, State House, it means they have submitted the requirements for wage and have not submitted the requirements for pension and gratuity. Then we have approved for - so “Y” means yes and “N” means no. It is as simple as that. However, we should have put a footnote though I thought the former Leader of the Opposition is familiar with this situation and he should have helped instead of condemning me.

On domestic arrears, as a nation we have Shs 111 billion domestic arrears. Out of this, Shs 50 billion has been to pension arrears, which have been released. We issued a circular to all spending agencies to make domestic arrears the first call on this first quarter release and we are monitoring that. 

The reason we continue being transparent in the releases and the implementation, as we are in the budgeting process, is to ensure that the sectoral committees help us to create pressure for implementation during your deliberations in your committees. So, a circular was issued on domestic arrears. 

The other issue was to do with the development expenditure for Parliamentary Commission. That means we have not got the required warrant from the Parliamentary Commission regarding development expenditure. That is what it means. 

The last is to do with health and education. On health and education, the permanent secretaries have not given us details to be able to release funds because we release funds directly to those schools and health facilities. We requested them to give us those details; they have not yet. Tomorrow we are meeting the permanent secretaries of health and education to try, as much as possible, to show them reason why they should do this as soon as possible. We should be able to sort that out tomorrow. I think those were the few issues that you raised 

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, I have perused through this brief statement and I know that when the Cabinet list was announced, we created a new Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. There is even a minister and a state minister but I do not see that ministry reflected on this brief. May I get some clarification from the minister? I also wish the minister to clarify as whether that ministry has an accounting officer. I thank you.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have noticed that on the part of higher education institutions, warrants were submitted but I do not see their warrants being approved yet we are in a crisis with them. 

As we talk, non-teaching staff have announced a strike starting on August 1st, yet as you know, Makerere University is opening on, 6 August 2016.

But also on arrears, if I heard the minister properly, he was talking of arrears of around Shs 110 billion yet Makerere University alone has arrears of Shs125 billion and I know that it is a Government institution. I would, therefore, like to seek clarification from the minister on the status of that. If they have submitted their warrants, why are they not approved so that you release money? 

7.19
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I read item No. 9 especially on the part to do with health and education, where the minister said the permanent secretaries have not submitted their interest for the grants, then I get worried.

Madam Speaker, we all know that the critical areas that we have in our districts are health and education. I would like to say that if we do not get money as specified for these particular issues on time, it disturbs our work in the districts.

I do not know whether the minister does not have a deadline for permanent secretaries to submit their requests for the grants. Is there penalty that is given to such people who delay Government work?

7.20
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I am Herbert Ariko representing Soroti Municipality.

When you look at Programme 308 on Soroti University, the university, according to the Government plan was meant to have started enrolment this year. 

According to the submission by the minister, Soroti University has provided their warrants for all the categories. However, when you go to the approval, everywhere is indicated as “N” supposedly to mean “No.” May I know from the minister whether there is a specific reason as to why such an entity or programme has not been approved yet they submitted their warrants?

Madam Speaker, I would also like to raise concern on programmes, especially those related to regional referral hospitals. For instance, Programme 171 warrants for the wage. Whereas they may have not submitted those for other categories, we realise that payment of a wage to a public servant is not something that you can waive, regardless of the failures of the accounting officer because there are doctors and other category of staff that have provided a service in these hospitals. Matters of health are issues that cannot be negotiated. 

Since the warrants in respect of wage are submitted, is there a way in which sanctions can be given over the other categories yet the wage is provided in time because this is something that should not be conditional? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.23
MAJ. (RTD) DAVID GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): I would like to find out from hon. Bahati; the finance ministry has had a programme called Commitment Control System, which meant that before a permanent secretary engaged in a transaction, they indicated to them where the money is in their budget. 

I would then like to find out how the domestic arrears arise. For example, the Minister for Works and Transport will want to spend Shs2 billion but they will first indicate that it is under such a vote before the finance ministry releases the money. But I keep hearing domestic arrears. How did they arise? 

MR BAHATI: Thank you. Madam Speaker, a Member asked what it means for example, on Page 1, No. 8 - wage – that we have only received 80 per cent of wage. Can you imagine? That is the challenge that we are going through. You are an accounting officer but you are not submitting and not requesting for money yet you know that you are supposed to pay workers by the 28th day of every month?

Madam Speaker, what we have done – and we will be discussing this with the Prime Minister - is that despite all other parameters we had set to discipline accounting officers, delay of requisition for funds for a spending agency is going to form part of that. If you do not request for money and you delay implementation you should be changed immediately – (Interjections) - and you all know the gear that we have engaged in this new term. We are not going to do things as usual.

The other was about Soroti University. Yes, some accounting officers submit requisitions and there are categories - we have given the guideline as indicated in No. 6, but they mix them. We request that they submit wage alone, non-wage and development but you find somebody mixing them yet they are degree holders. We are really going to sort out this thing. [Mr Eitunganane: “Clarification] If I can finish, honourable colleague, and then I come – (Interruption) 

MR EITUNGANANE: We really want you to first clarify something on Soroti University. Let us know what they have not done because there are many “Ys” meaning “yes.” What is the problem so that we sort out because we need the money?

MR BAHATI: Okay, they have not done No. 6, which is the criteria. So where you see “N,” it means they have not done No. 6.

On Makerere University, colleagues, as you know when we increased the salaries for professors, by implication we also increased salaries for non-teaching staff and that created arrears worth Shs28 billion.

This increment was put into the budget and arrears are being worked on to ensure that we do not engage in strikes and all those other things. The Prime Minister is engaging the relevant institution to ensure that they give time to process the arrears.

Lastly, but still again on Makerere University  they did not receive money for salaries for June – they have been using non tax revenue at source, as an institution but this time, they got some challenges. Anyway, Government has come in and released Shs30.2 billion to make sure that they are paid as at end of June.

Honourable colleagues, the ministry is working hard to ensure that the Government runs smoothly. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, minister. We encourage you to continue informing us about all these interesting things. Okay, next item – oh! Budget for the science ministry, okay, say something.

MR BAHATI: I know hon. Obua has been very passionate about science and technology. 

The Ministry of Science and Technology, as the Prime Minister answered yesterday, the Ministry of Public Service is in the process of setting it up. But as a state minister of finance for planning, I was also providing political supervision for the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology.
 
So, we have handed over that department as a starting point and the Minister for Science and Technology now sits at the council. He has been given an office and an institution which has a subvention under the Ministry of Finance, planning and Economic Development as we sort the structural issues. We hope that within one month he should be given an accounting officer and all other necessary enabling instruments to make them function.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE CLOSURE OF NAKIVUBO STADIUM

7.29
THE MINISTER FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Betty Kamya): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and may I use my maiden speech to congratulate you on the double success and also to welcome you from Ethiopia. May I also take the occasion to congratulate everybody in this House for either their election or their appointment.

Madam Speaker, yesterday hon. Allan Ssewanyana, the MP for Makindye West, raised as a matter of importance, the fact that Nakivubo Stadium had been closed. He raised concerns that this might seriously undermine our efforts to effectively participate in preparing for our presence in the African Cup Tournament. 

I undertook to bring a statement today because Nakivubo Stadium is supervised by two ministries: the Ministry of Kampala Capital City Authority, as the host ministry, and the Ministry of Education and Sports, as the user ministry. That is why my name appeared on the Order Paper, Madam Speaker.

However, when we went to investigate, we found out that it was not closed by KCCA but by URA. We, therefore, after consulting, agreed that the Minister of Education and Sports should be the one to deliver this statement. They are more informed about this matter. With your permission, Madam Speaker, hon. Bakabulindi will make the statement.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us invite the Minister of State for Sports to make a statement.

7.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakabulindi): Thanks very much, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, my colleague, the Shadow Minister in charge of sports raised an issue of the closure of Nakivubo Stadium. Unfortunately, I was not around. However, today at around midday, I received a call that I should give an explanation while I was somewhere addressing workers in some factory.
 
Madam Speaker, because of that I only put some few points to explain the issue, which I feel we are going to handle by Monday but the Members of Parliament need to know the background because it is not the first time that they are closing it. And the closure has nothing to do with the day-to-day activities of Nakivubo Stadium.

Madam Speaker, on 14 March 2013, the Uganda Revenue Authority Commissioner-General sent a warrant of distress authorising Simba Speedo Auctioneers to collect and recover the sum of Shs 356,728,390.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, did you send the copies to the Members? I also don’t have a copy.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, I said I was rung at midday today and I am only trying to give the House the background of something, which does need a statement to be circulated to the Members although they need to be informed of what transpired. It was closed by URA because it is demanding money that accumulated between 2004 and 2009. That is why I said it is not a current issue.

There was an arrangement of paying URA - the first instalment was Shs 50 million and the second was Shs 20 million to these auctioneers. While this arrangement was going on smoothly after sometime, they continued to accumulate arrears. But there was this issue of the Park Yard getting burnt where KCCA initially used to collect money from –(Interruption)

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, sports is an issue that is so dear to majority of us here to the extent that this Parliament has a sports club, the Parliamentary Netball Team to which I proudly belong and the Parliamentary Football Team to which our male Members proudly belong. 

Madam Speaker, as Parliament -

THE SPEAKER: Don’t forget me. I am also an interested party. (Laughter)

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. Actually let me inform the House and the nation that the Madam Speaker is the patron of those games in Parliament. (Applause) What I want to say is that Nakivubo Stadium is our pride. It has always been a centre of confusion and a centre of disaster to the development of sports in this country. I am surprised that as we discuss this very important matter the minister is taking it casually.

May I request, as a matter of procedure, Madam Speaker, that now that he is here - because he is saying that he should make a statement and a ministerial statement, as it was highlighted it, is supposed to be documented. This will help us refer to its written text as we discuss it. But we will also take it as a commitment from the minister to the population of Uganda and more so those who really love sports and want to see Uganda going forward, in as far as sports is concerned. It will also be a commitment to help us to achieve the steady progress that we are talking about; you will all realise that through sports we have all become one Uganda; one people. (Laughter)

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I want to say that the honourable minister should compose himself, go back to his office and prepare a written text. We really want to support you honourable minister. We want to see how Government can committee substantial funds to Nakivubo Stadium and to the entire sports fraternity in general. 

May I, therefore, request that as a matter of procedure, the minister comes up with a written statement, which we shall deliberate on and ensure that we come to a logical conclusion of this matter?

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I don’t have any problem coming with a written statement on the closure because you recall very well, hon. Leader of the Opposition that the details concerned about Nakivubo Stadium, a select committee was put in place between March and July last year -

THE SPEAKER: Did they report?

MR BAKABULINDI: Yes, and the debate took place in this House – (Interjection) – yes, we have it and you know it. The issue we are talking about now is closure, which I have said that before the end of weekend – because we shall sit with URA and agree again.  Last time we signed a memorandum of understanding between Nakivubo and URA on how to pay the old arrears. We are going to sit with them again, agree and they will open it. It has nothing to do with operations of Nakivubo Stadium but since my colleague has said the House must receive it written, I am going to put it down. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you see this matter was debated in the Ninth Parliament and this is the Tenth Parliament; Members need to be brought on board. So, please arrange for the statement to be circulated to the Members so that we can speak to it. We have finished with the sports for now.

MOTION MOVED UNDER RULE 221(2) TO RE-INTRODUCE BUSINESS THAT REMAINED OUTSTANDING AT THE LAPSE OF THE 9TH PARLIAMENT

7.38
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Speaker, I rise to move a motion to reinstate parliamentary business of the Ninth Parliament by the Tenth Parliament, under rules 47 and 221 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda: 

“WHEREAS, the Parliament of Uganda is established under Article 77 of the Constitution, with its terms being five years from the date of its first sitting after general election;

AND WHEREAS, the functions of Parliament under Article 79 of the Constitution are to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda; 

COGNISANT of the fact that Article 96 of the Constitution provides that Parliament shall stand dissolved upon the expiration of its term;

AND COGNISANT of the fact that the Ninth Parliament was dissolved on 11 May 2016;

AWARE THAT when Parliament is dissolved, the legislative effect is that all parliamentary business before it lapses and Government is under no obligation to provide responses and answers to written questions, to respond to the petitions and to produce papers requested by the House upon dissolution;

AND AWARE that Rule 221 (1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament provides that a Bill, petition, motion or other business before the House or any of its committees during a term of Parliament lapses upon dissolution of Parliament; 

FURTHER AWARE that Rule 221 (2) allows Parliament to reinstate the lapsed parliamentary business in the next Parliament by a resolution of Parliament;

NOW, THEREFORE, this motion is moved that this Parliament reinstates the following parliamentary business that remained outstanding at the close of the Ninth Parliament:

    1. The Persons With Disabilities Bill, 2014;
    2. The Indigenous And Complementary Medicine Bill, 2015;
    3. The Mental Health Bill, 2014;
    4. The Kampala Capital City Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2015;
    5. The Human Rights Enforcement Bill, 2015;
    6. The Law Revision Penalties in Criminal Matters Miscellaneous (Amendment) Bill, 2015;
    7. The Sexual Offences Bill, 2015;
    8. The Uganda Forestry Association Bill, 2015;
    9. The Anti- Counterfeiting Goods Bill, 2015;
    10. The Sale Of Goods And Supply Of Services Bill, 2015;
    11. The Minimum Wage Bill, 2015;
    12. The Anti-Money Laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2016;
    13. The Data Protection And Privacy Bill, 2015;
    14. The Uganda Communications (Amendment) Bill, 2016;
    15. The Insurance Bill, 2016;
    16. The Marriage and Divorce Bill 2009;
    17. The National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill, 2012;
    18. The Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011; and
    19. The Income Tax Bill, 2016.”

I beg to move.

Madam Speaker, there are reports from the accountability Committee on Commissions, Statutory Bodies and State Enterprises. I would like to seek your indulgence whether I go word by word on them - 

THE SPEAKER: Just take them together. 

MR OBOTH: All the pending reports from the accountability committees - COSASE, Public Accounts Committee, Local Government Accounts Committee; and statutory reports coming from the Uganda Human Rights Commission, the IGG and the loan requests – there are about four pending loan requests; the petitions, about 33 petitions; and one single motion for gazetting and de-gazetting forest reserves in several parts of the country. 

We also have other reports ready: reports from the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, Committee on Rules and Privileges, Presidential Affairs Committee, Committee on Government Assurances and Committee on Equal Opportunities. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, on the other matters, the guidance given during the Business Committee meeting was that oral questions would be resurrected by those who would be interested in them. Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Is there any seconder? Okay, it is seconded. Do we really need to debate this, honourable members? No.  Okay, honourable members, the question is that the Bills and business saved by the Ninth Parliament be reinstated.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE PARLIAMENTARY CALENDAR FOR THE FIRST SESSION OF THE 10TH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

7.44
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the calendar for the First Session of the 10th Parliament be approved and adopted under Rule 8 of the Rules of Procedure. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to be guided on how I should proceed on this one, because some of the business on the calendar have been overtaken by events. These include: the swearing in of Members; the election of the Rt Hon. Speaker and Deputy Speaker; State of the Nation Address by H.E the President; reading of the budget; Motion for a resolution of Parliament to approve the appointment of H.E the Vice-President; Resolution of Parliament to approve - 

THE SPEAKER: I think you do not need to run through. Just state the periods we are going to sit and the periods of recess. 

MR OBOTH: Okay. Madam Speaker, with your wise guidance, we have dates specifically in addition to the other details and they will run as follows: 

    a) First recess will be from 6th October to 14th November 2016;
    b) The second recess for Christmas and New Year festive season will run from 15 December to 9 January 2017;
    c) Third recess will run from 2nd February to 13 March 2017;
    d) Fourth recess will be from 14 April to 23 April 2017; and 
    e) Prorogation by 31 May 2017. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Has it been seconded? Okay, it is seconded by a number of Members. The proposal was discussed by the Business Committee and brought here for your approval. I, therefore, put the question that the calendar be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion approved.

THE SPEAKER: The Clerk is, therefore, directed to publish the calendar and issue each Member a copy thereof. Regarding the revised business, we really want to thank the House. This means that the committees will now have some work to do. 

We now instruct the Government to reprint the Bills for the Members who were not in the Ninth Parliament so that they are able to acclimatise. However, they should also use the reports of the Ninth Parliament, where they exist, as working documents to guide you in your work. This coming week, the accountability committees are going for training and that will take away at least 80 Members of this House. 

Also the sectoral committees need to be trained. But in addition to that, the Government side will be going away for a ministerial retreat to induct the new ministers. So we shall not be able to sit next week. Therefore, I would like to adjourn the House sine die - do you have something, honourable minister? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we had one paper to lay, which was requested by this House. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it the one on post-election? 

MR BAHATI: Yes, the one on post-election, economic and fiscal update.

THE SPEAKER: We shall do that. I was just saying that we shall be adjourning sine die but let the minister now present that paper before we finally adjourn. Please lay the paper.

LAYING OF PAPERS

7.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, the honourable member for Kilak North requested that this information be laid on the Table. I beg to lay a report on “Post–election Economic and Fiscal update.”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the paper is now available for the use of the Members. Is it going to the Committee on Legal or they just wanted information?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, they just wanted information. It was actually published long ago, but we can send it to any committee, if it is necessary. But I think it is just for the information to Members.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, the matter that the Member raised was a matter of law. Matters such as this are always handled by our Committee on National Economy. I would, therefore, let the minister know that it was not just for purposes of information; it is a requirement by law and, therefore, our committee can handle it and see whether you complied. I want to thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the law requires us to publish and - I can see hon. Jacob Oboth and hon. Ssegoona looking at me - I don’t know whether publishing includes reporting to Parliament but we are willing to give you this information. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, we shall ask our Committee on National Economy to look at it. If they think they need to report back, they will come back to us. 

Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for the work done this evening. The House is adjourned sine die. Have a good weekend. 

(The House rose at 7.50 p.m. and was adjourned sine die.) 
