

Tuesday, 12 July 2016

Parliament met at 2.09 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before we go to the first item, let me just make a small clarification about how the House is constituted at the moment. 

The Members sitting behind the bar are technically, not in Parliament. However, for the purposes of these proceedings, we will consider them to be sitting inside Parliament. (Laughter) This arises from the necessity of space and other difficulties that the House faces at the moment, which have forced some Members to sit behind the bar. Any person who is behind those drawn bars is not inside Parliament and cannot, therefore, be considered a Member of Parliament. However, for now, you are all Members of Parliament for the purposes of this afternoon’s sitting. 

Additionally, for the purpose of this sitting, the House will sit in a free manner. There will be no designated side. Therefore, sit wherever there is space; for now, there is no Opposition, Government and Independent. Let us sit freely so that we can execute this function properly. It is so ordered by the Speaker.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

1. Ruhakana Rugunda

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, Rt Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, for taking up the same position again. I welcome you to this Parliament, a parliament where you are no stranger. You have transacted business here before. The rules remain the same except now we have a new Parliament with new Members and that is how we are going to transact business. I am hopeful that you will hit the ground running by dealing with the Prime Minister’s Question Time immediately tomorrow afternoon, as the rules say. I welcome you to this Parliament. 

Again, I give you a copy of our Rules of Procedure, which I am sure you already have - you also have the old one - and also a copy of the Constitution to enable you execute your functions as Prime Minister. Congratulations.

2. Janet Kataaha Museveni 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, hon. Janet Museveni. I welcome you to this Parliament, which you are no stranger to, except that it is now a new Parliament. I welcome you in your new capacity as an ex officio Member of this Parliament. 

I hand over to you these two books; one of them is the Rules of Procedure of this House with which you are already conversant, and also the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, to enable you do your job as a Member of Parliament. You are very welcome and congratulations. 

3. Jane Aceng

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we welcome you to this Parliament. You are no stranger to Parliament. As the Director General of Medical Services, you appeared before committees of this House; therefore, you are very conversant with what goes on in this Parliament. However, this certainly is your first time to come into the Chamber of Parliament as a Member. Congratulations and we wish you all the best.

I give you a copy of our Rules of Procedure, which you should internalise and use to transact business in this House and also a copy of the Constitution to facilitate your work in this House.

4. Monica Azuba Ntege 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable member. I welcome you to this Parliament. I am not aware that you have been interacting with this Parliament before, but this is home to any citizen of this country. You are welcome in your new assignment to execute functions given to you by the Government, by the President, and you will be helping this House in doing what it must to help the people of Uganda.

I give you a copy of our Rules of Procedure, which you should study and which is the handmaid of how you process business in this House. You will also be governed by the Constitution. These two documents will help you in doing your work for the country. 

5. William Byaruhanga

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations and welcome to Parliament, learned Attorney-General. This certainly is your first time in the Chamber of Parliament. Let me inform you that a lot of the work of this House will lean on you because a lot of times, you will be required to stand before this microphone and explain lots of legal matters to the House and take responsibility for a few of them. Therefore, you are welcome, and I am sure you are prepared for the task and are up to it.  We have no doubt that you will help this House in doing its work.

I give you a copy of the Rules of Procedure, which is different from the rules of the courts of law, and also a copy of the Constitution, which is the same as the one you have been using. Again, you are welcome. 

6. Abdu Nadduli

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nadduli, from the way you have been received in this House, I would not want to run for an office with you in this House. (Laughter) You would definitely win because you are very popular with the Members. I welcome you to this House and can only wish you the best in the delivery of your work in supporting the country and the people of this country in delivering services to them. 

I give to you a copy of our Rules of Procedure and a copy of the Constitution to help you in doing your work for this House and also for the people of this country. You are welcome to this Parliament and congratulations, again.
 
7. Beti Kamya

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Beti Kamya, you are welcome to this Parliament and congratulations. I am hoping that you will find this place big enough for you because at one time, you wanted to do something else; you wanted to be the President of this country. I hope this also is sufficient for purposes of giving service to the people of Uganda. 

I will give you a copy of our Rules of Procedure and the Constitution to facilitate your work in this House and the people of Uganda. You are welcome. 

8. Florence Nakiwala Kiyingi

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable member. From the way business is being conducted, you do not need much guidance from me; it seems there is somebody else who is totally suited to guide you very well. I welcome you to this Parliament and wish you the best in delivering service to this Parliament and to the people of Uganda.

I will give you a copy of our Rules of Procedure and the Constitution to facilitate you in doing your work. Welcome to Parliament and please enjoy your work here.  

9. Janat Mukwaya 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable member. I welcome you to this Parliament. You are not a stranger to this Parliament and neither are you a stranger to the Front Bench. You have served in various capacities including being Minister of Justice at one time. Therefore, welcome back to serve the people of this country and to serve this Parliament.

I will give you a copy of our improved Rules of Procedure - they are quite different from the ones we used before - and the Constitution, as amended, to facilitate you in your work. Welcome, again, and congratulations.
 
10. Joy Kabatsi 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I welcome you to this Parliament and congratulate you upon being recognised as a person who can serve this country in that capacity as minister. 

I give you a copy of our Rules of Procedure that will help you in bringing all matters that you need to bring to the House using that mechanism. I also give you a copy of the Constitution. You are welcome to serve this Parliament and the people of this country. Congratulations.
 
11. Philemon Mateke 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister. I welcome you again to this Parliament. Prepare to serve again as minister to this House. You are no stranger to it and neither are you a stranger to the Front Bench. 

I give you a copy of our Rules of Procedure, which will help you in facilitating your work. I also give you a copy of the Constitution. You are very welcome and congratulations again. 

12. Alex Onzima

MR NZOGHU: I rise on a point of procedure – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me receive the honourable member and then I take your procedural point. Honourable member, you are very welcome to this Parliament, which you have been to many times. You are neither a stranger to this House nor the Front Bench. 

I give you a copy of our Rules of Procedure, which you already know, and a copy of the Constitution to continue helping you in facilitating your work to this House and to the people of Uganda. Congratulations and welcome, again. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural point I am raising is in regard to the oaths that our colleagues are taking. Our rules are very clear; the statement that the Members are supposed to swear to is well documented and very clear. Is it procedurally right, Mr Speaker, for additional statements to be given after reading the statement that is provided for in our rules? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the procedural point raised by the Member for Busongora North is that excessive words have been applied to those prescribed by law as constituting the Oath of a Member of Parliament as well as the Oath of Allegiance. The records will extract the appropriate words and disregard any excessive words that have been used. 

Honourable members, I have requests from two Members to make short statements. I will be allowing that shortly. However, honourable members, we will be missing the symbolic significance of this moment if we do not recognise one or two facts. Those two facts have stated and spoken loudly to the nature of our democracy and how far we have come in this process. 

Sitting in this Chair, I have witnessed the honourable members coming from Sembabule, walking together on the Floor of this House –(Applause)– and yet they could hardly walk together back in the district. (Laughter)  All that says that this country is bigger than all of us and that we can all have a role to play in one way or the other, and that is very significant.

The second significant matter that I have noted is that two Members from one house, subscribing to all kinds of different things - united in their house, divided in opinions of politics - have come together and joined in the oath-taking of one of them. (Applause) Immediately after that, they have gone their separate ways. (Laughter) That means that, even in this House, there is enough room for all shades of opinion if one house can accommodate all views. I am sure that even after here, they are going back to the same house. That is significant.

I also noticed that a former presidential candidate and leader of a political party has been appointed by another presidential candidate and she accepted –(Laughter)– and has taken oath to serve this country. 

I think all these facts speak to one thing- that this country and her people are bigger than all of us individually, and we can all have different roles to play. I thought I would recognise these facts that have unveiled before us here. We might risk missing the symbolic significance of this moment; I thought that I should put that on record. I am truly grateful to have been given this opportunity to be the one to see these things actually happening. I am grateful. (Applause) We also thank God that this has been able to happen in our own lifetime. 

I will be making a communication but there are statements from the Leader of Government Business at this moment, and I think that there is a statement from hon. Cecilia Ogwal, Woman Representative for Dokolo; it is a short statement. I will give my communication after that and then I will move to the next business.

3.02
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to make some remarks.

First, I would like to take this opportunity to thank His Excellency, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for the confidence he has put in me and the entire Cabinet to serve in our various portfolios and roles.

Secondly, I thank you, honourable members, for approving my re-appointment as Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. I welcome this responsibility of Leader of Government Business in Parliament as an opportunity for all of us to work together to deliver quality services to the people of Uganda. That is the reason we are here in positions of leadership.

Our tasks during these five years are clear. His Excellency President Museveni has spelt them out at various times, including during the State of the Nation Address, the Budget Speech and the Cabinet sessions that he has chaired. The message is that we must all work to transform our country and improve the livelihood of our people. 

We, in leadership, have a big role to play in the transformation of our country. For us to be able to do this, we need to put our differences aside and focus on the purpose for which we have been called, and that is to serve. Mr Speaker, you have very elaborately made remarks on the question of putting our differences aside and working for a common goal - the transformation of Uganda.

The National Resistance Movement has made a commitment to the people of Uganda, to take the country to modernity through job creation and development as contained in the 2016-2021 NRM Manifesto. This is a social contract we have signed with the people of Uganda. This is in addition to the priorities outlined in the second National Development Plan and Vision 2040. A major challenge for Government today is the need to accelerate implementation of Government programmes, improve service delivery to our people, and stop corruption and wastage in the public sector. 

Since I was first given this responsibility in September 2014, we have invested significant time and effort in strengthening the institutional mechanism for improving cross-sectional coordination to ensure that Uganda acts as one effective entity. In this regard, in October 2015 Cabinet approved the establishment of a delivery unit in the Office of the Prime Minister. Its purpose is to catalyse improvements in service delivery through real-time monitoring of priority programmes on a daily, weekly and monthly basis, to ensure that problems are identified in time and promptly tackled to guarantee successful implementation. 

We realised that our people are impatient and cannot tolerate poor performance. They are right. Our commitment during these five years is to accelerate the momentum of providing timely and quality services in a manner that provides value for money for the country. We are going to work with responsible institutions to remove the bottlenecks that stand in the way of providing a conducive environment for doing business and facilitating investment in the country.

It is investment in critical areas of the economy such as agriculture, infrastructure, ICT, tourism industry, science and technology, education and health, among others, that will create jobs that our people, especially the youth, desperately need and deserve. We will ensure that Government ministries, departments, agencies and local governments are better coordinated, so that they can step up their activities in order to accelerate implementation of national priorities. 

In addition, the Parliamentary Commission, under your stewardship, approved the establishment of the liaison office of the Leader of Government Business in Parliament. This office, which is already in operation, is meant to improve coordination between the Executive and Parliament through receiving comments, suggestions and the like from honourable Members of Parliament, and providing timely responses to these issues. I urge colleagues to make use of this office in line with Vision 2040 and in pursuit of the President’s commitment to improve performance of Government institutions.

We will actively pursue a business-oriented approach to service delivery. We will focus on results, not just processes. The bureaucratic processes should enable and not stall or delay service delivery.

Accounting officers will have to demonstrate more ambition in driving implementation of Government priorities. This process will be backed by a clear and effective sanctioning regime. There must be a price to pay for underperformance. Complacency will have no room. His Excellency President Museveni was quite clear on this at his inauguration and we are going to implement it.

Mr Speaker, we will further improve the working relationship between the Executive and Parliament to deliver results. The doctrine of separation of powers and the principle of checks and balances should not stifle unity of purpose in the transformation of our country but should instead facilitate the process. The Executive and Parliament must therefore always build mutual trust and cooperation. This is a key ingredient essential for coordination.

Finally, I would like to re-affirm my commitment to open methods of work and coordination. As a government, the Executive and Parliament have a joint responsibility to timely enact legislation and account to the citizens. We will endeavour to provide relevant Bills to Parliament and we will work with Parliament to ensure that the Bills are enacted swiftly. (Interjections) With these remarks, I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The point of procedure I would wish to raise is whether the statement that has been delivered by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is a statement that must be debated under our Rules of Procedure, and I am referring to rule 44 (2). It says that statements by a minister - and under our rules this includes the Prime Minister - should be debated. Therefore, is his statement going to be debated or we take it as a statement of personal explanation?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I only wish you had allowed the Member to conclude properly because then we would have established whether it requires debate or not. However, be that as it may, I have also personally found difficulty in housing that statement in our Rules of Procedure. I thought that it was going to be an acceptance speech in concluding the whole elaborate process of putting a Prime Minister in place and becoming a Leader of Government Business in the House. I thought it was an acceptance speech. However, it turned out to be a declaration of policy and it kept changing. I even wondered whether it was a preparation for tomorrow’s Prime Minister’s Question Time. (Laughter)  

I have had that difficulty in housing what the Prime Minister has just stated. However, I find it convenient just to say it was an acceptance speech and like any acceptance speech, you cannot debate it. There will be time to interrogate what the Prime Minister has stated and the statements and commitments he has made through the Prime Minister’s Question Time, which starts tomorrow afternoon. Therefore, let us leave it at that, and that includes the honourable member for Budadiri West.

3.15
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, before I make the statement for which I requested time, I would like to congratulate you and all the Members who have been sworn-in, particularly the ex officio Members who have joined us to make this Parliament’s work lively and to deliberate on behalf of the people of Uganda.

I would like to say that I appreciate the state of the nation address made by the Prime Minister as a newly appointed Prime Minister. I pray that it will be a working document - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, for the record, the Address on the State of the Nation can only be delivered by the President as mandated by the Constitution. Therefore, we can conveniently say, that this is a state of business address in the House because he is Leader of Government Business in the House.

MS OGWAL: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought he was making his response related to the State of the Nation Address. I, however, associate with that statement and I pray that it will be a working document when we will be debating the State of the Nation Address.

Mr Speaker, I stand here to bring out a matter of national importance concerning what is happening right now on the continent. Some of you who have followed this in the media are aware that Uganda, together with other East African countries, has come up with a candidate for chairperson of the African Union Commission. I stand here to confirm that the candidate that has been endorsed by the East African countries, unanimously, happens to come from Uganda. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I had an opportunity to share with you and the House; I am no longer whip of the Opposition but I am a commissioner fully endorsed by the House. The most important thing about the mission I am talking about is that I am a special envoy representing the people of Uganda in marketing the candidature of Dr Specioza Kazibwe Wandira. She is our own and has served at the level of the Vice-President of this country before serving as a Cabinet minister in various capacities in various ministries. Therefore, nobody can doubt her capacity to drive the affairs of the continent.

I want to speak as a Ugandan and not as a member of the Opposition. I want to say that when we are dealing with matters of the continent, matters of Uganda should be put aside. (Applause) Mr Speaker, you very well know that I was privileged to have represented this country and this Parliament in the ACP-EU, where you now lead the Ugandan delegation, and in the Pan-African Parliament. I must tell you that our individual and localised controversial matters cannot be heard at the continental and global level. (Applause)

I plead with Ugandans who may have contrary views about the candidature of Dr Specioza Kazibwe to please tone down your statements. (Applause) I can only plead with you, like the church leaders always tell us - do not raise the issue again; keep it to yourself until our matters are sorted out in Kigali.

Mr Speaker, the election is likely to take place in Kigali, probably on 16 or 17 July 2016. Many of our Ugandan members are already in Kigali in preparation for the D-day. I am urging Ugandans to pray for us, pray for Uganda and pray for yourselves. 

I know that some of us may want hon. Ogwal to talk about the valley dams. However, there are people who have done worse things and those people are being elevated to higher levels. You can trace my record from the Constituent Assembly; the issue of valley damns was raised but Dr Specioza Kazibwe was never censored. (Applause) If there is anybody who found Dr Specioza Kazibwe personally liable, let that person stand up and air that issue-(Interruption)

MR LATIF SSEBAGALA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal is trying to inform this august House about our candidate, Dr Specioza Wandira Kazibwe. However, now she is bringing in things that do not really augur well with the candidate we are selling. 

Mr Speaker, you know that our debates are telecast live on air. Is it procedurally right for someone who is trying to market our own candidate to appear like she is de-campaigning her? Is she procedurally right? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, Uganda has offered one candidate and the East African region has offered and confirmed that one candidate. This House should be briefed about what we can do to support that candidate. Whatever happened anywhere else is not of significance at this moment. 

We should therefore restrict ourselves to the issue of projecting our candidate, who is the best anyway. We have other candidates from West Africa and Botswana, but our candidate can only be the best if we are to do justice to this process. Honourable member, please, you said that on issues of Africa, we should forget about the ones in the country. 

MS OGWAL: Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker. (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I remember when the Pope was coming here, a backbencher got up to speak about the Pope’s visit and yet the Government was involved. We then said that the right people to raise this should be Government. At that time, everybody agreed and Government immediately made a statement about the Pope’s visit.

I recall hon. Cecilia Ogwal saying, “What you know, keep it”, and instead of keeping it, she was the first to bring it out. (Laughter) We know what happened and we had kept quiet, but she was reminding us. (Laughter) You recall the issue of the valley dams and Microfinance Support Centre, which report we have not yet disposed of. 

Mr Speaker, to avoid the problem of Members jumping up and trying to do “good”, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Government to come and own up to the mistakes of our candidate other than us, Members, doing it? Isn’t it procedurally right that the Government side should be the first to lead in this and then we come in to boost?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Member who rose to speak is a special envoy for this purpose. Also, you may not know, but even the presiding officer had been appointed a special envoy for that purpose. However, that is for operations outside this House. 

This statement was meant to brief the House about the processes that are ongoing in the continent for the purpose of selecting the new chairperson of the African Union Commission. That is why we allowed hon. Cecilia Ogwal to speak. Can we keep it that way and conclude quickly. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In view of the submission of Members and the magnitude of the position our candidate is vying for, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that at an appropriate time, probably before Saturday when the voting will take place, the honourable Prime Minister comes to this House and presents a comprehensive report and we, as Parliament, officially endorse our candidate?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we speak now the voters are already in Kigali and they are going to vote and it does not matter what we say here anyway. What we should be doing here is to brief Members and tell them, “Wish us well; we are off to Kigali to ensure that our candidate who the region has chosen goes through to be the chairperson of the African Union Commission.” 

MS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to conclude by saying that it is important that this House is informed about this very important event taking place in Kigali, where our very own member is a candidate. It would be very unfortunate for us to read in the media that the Ugandan Parliament is not unanimous on the candidature of Dr Kazibwe. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to state that the candidate has already been adopted by the East African countries and by most African countries. Envoys that have been to various countries have already got the endorsement from many voters in Africa.

All I can say is that the blessing is coming to Uganda. Fellow Ugandans, be ready to accept it. For those of you who read the Bible, in the book of Joshua it says, “As for me and my household, I shall follow the truth” – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Today is not a Sunday that we should be preaching here. (Laughter) We know we have a candidate who is standing for the chairperson of the African Union Commission. The prayers are more needed in Kigali than here because none of us is a voter. 

Is it in order for a senior Member of the House to continue wanting to pray for a candidate who is in Kigali instead of praying with the voters in Kigali? Is it in order to waste our time instead of us doing something? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we started the proceedings of this House, we prayed. That makes prayers part of our operational principles as a country. Therefore, we pray now, we pray tomorrow, we pray at night and there is no problem with it, and we can pray from anywhere.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, there are many of us who bear Christian names but do not read the Bible. The Bible says “pray unceasingly”. I pray that my dear son, Nandala-Mafabi, will learn to read the Bible. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. I would like to say that the candidate is ready to go to Kigali any time. I pray that some of you will be able to make it to Kigali. Please, go as Ugandans to support us in any way that you can. We want to put up a good profile.

Ugandans have done a lot for the continent of Africa. Before any country could go to Somalia, Uganda was there. Before any country could go to South Sudan, Uganda was there. Before any country could help West Africa, Uganda was there. Therefore, I believe that Ugandans have done a lot for the continent and Uganda deserves to be appreciated for what we have done for the continent. When people feared Ebola, Uganda was there to help West Africans.

As a Ugandan, I believe we must be appreciated for what we have done for this continent. May God help us. For God and my country. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. Can we pause on these matters here for now because we have not even started with the Order Paper?

MR OBUA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You are indeed the custodian of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I rise under Rule 73 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, where it is pointed out that the decorum in terms of the dress code of the Members of Parliament should be upheld by all Members.

Mr Speaker, is the honourable member seated in the second row on the left-hand side of the Speaker – honourable member No.5 – in order to put on a shirt without a tie contrary to the provisions of rule 73(a) of the Rules of Procedure? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House has its culture, it has its decorum and very many things that go with it – manner of dressing, speaking and even listening when other Members are speaking. (Laughter) Therefore, if there is such an honourable member in the House, he could conveniently excuse himself or herself for those purposes that have been raised without having the Speaker to call the honourable member to order.

Honourable members, so far we have dealt with only item No. 2 on the Order Paper – the administration of oaths. Can we have some order, Members! We have just finalised with the administration of oaths, which has attracted a comment from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and a comment from the honourable member for Dokolo District. Can we go to the next item?

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to welcome you to this sitting. As you recall, during the break of the plenary of Parliament, we organised orientation and induction seminars covering a period of two weeks. I do hope the knowledge, information and tips acquired during the period will enable you carry out your mandate effectively.

I wish to reiterate, as much as it has been explained to you, that to be an effective legislator, a Member of Parliament has to have a mastery of the parliamentary procedures and practices. That includes how you dress, speak and how to listen when other Members are speaking. Therefore, it is cardinal that you are conversant with the provisions of the Constitution as well as the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

Honourable members, it takes a while in any organisation for systems, processes and procedures to be fully functional. In our case, Members of Parliament were sworn in, members of Cabinet were appointed and approved, and we have also just witnessed the swearing-in of the ex officio Members of Parliament who were appointed by virtue of Article 108A and Articles 113 and 114 of the Constitution. They are Members of the House just like the elected Members of Parliament, except they have no voting rights in the House. I congratulate them upon their nomination and appointment and wish them success in their constitutional mandate. 

The next functional duty of this Parliament is to constitute committees. This has been awaited because various consultations had to take place. I hope during the course of this week, we will be able to accomplish this task and embark on serious business.

The bulk of parliamentary business originates from the Executive, both by the Constitution and by our Rules of Procedure, because that is the mandate that has been given to the Government that is now in power. My office has written to the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to provide the programme of business for this session. This information is still awaited. I call on the Rt Hon. Prime Minister once again to do the needful so that the parliamentary calendar can be formulated and communicated to all the Members of Parliament.

Honourable members, in the neighbouring state of South Sudan, war broke out last week, resulting in uncalled-for deaths of many people. I call on all warring parties in South Sudan to resolve this problem and their differences in a manner that does not cost more lives - using dialogue and not through the force of arms - so that peace and stability can be ushered in once again. Honourable members, I would like to call on you, in memory of those who have lost their lives, to rise and observe a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the same vein, let us also remember all our colleagues in this House who have lost loved ones. We especially wish to remember Doreen Tashobya, the beloved daughter of hon. Tumusiime Rosemary, Member of Parliament, Entebbe Municipality, who passed on in a motorcycle accident. For all these and others that have not been brought to our attention, we commit their souls in prayer that they may rest in eternal peace. That is my communication. 

 MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In your speech, you guided us on the matters happening in South Sudan. We are all very concerned about Ugandans in that country and what they may be going through. It is a big issue, which is life threatening. Many Ugandans are stranded in South Sudan. Therefore, would it not be procedurally right that you request the Government to bring to this House a comprehensive report to that effect so that we are informed and we could supplement with questions to the Government? More so, the minister concerned is also in the House; would it not be procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was communication from the Chair. After communication from the Chair, usually matters of urgent public importance are raised and they come in form of urgent matters. I have been approached by five Members who would like to raise this matter. Let us follow the rules. Member for Tochi, you had a matter to raise.

3.42
MR PETER OKOT (DP, Tochi County, Gulu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for allowing me this moment. 

Mr Speaker, I rise on an issue of national importance. As you are aware, the Ninth Parliament created some districts and four of those districts became operational on 1st July this year. However, in Omoro District, a problem has arisen and the Electoral Commission is now in the process of organising elections. 

For that purpose, the following issues came up: In 2012, a motion was presented to this Parliament by the Minister of Local Government to create new districts. Omoro District was one of those districts created. Subsequently, the functionality of the new districts was put on hold by the Government then. 

The position was reviewed in 2015, saying that some districts come into effect. At that time, a separate motion was presented by the same ministry to split Omoro County, which by then was the greater Omoro, into two; thereby, they formed Omoro County comprising the subcounties of Lakwana, Lalogi and Odek, and the second county, which is the new county, called Tochi, comprising of Ongako, Koro and Bobi.

Mr Speaker, on 4 August 2015, the second motion was approved by Parliament to split these two counties. Subsequently, on 3 September, the earlier motion of the creation of Omoro District in its original form was adopted creating Omoro District consisting of Omoro County. It is the wording of this motion that has now created a problem because it did not reflect the creation of Tochi County and that has created absurdity. 

Now, preparations for elections are underway by the Electoral Commission and they exclude Tochi from this process. Therefore, I urge the Minister of Local Government to request this House to resolve this matter because it has created problems among the people on the ground; if not resolved, the people of Tochi will be disenfranchised in this exercise. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member for Tochi. Honourable minister, you might have to help us here because you know the substance of your motion and what transpired subsequently.

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jennifer Namuyangu):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue that has been raised by the honourable colleague has come to my attention in the ministry. I have instructed the technical people to draft a brief to that effect. In the course of this week, we are going to bring a motion to amend the resolution that created Omoro District without including Tochi Constituency.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, within the rules, there are procedures you could use. There is a rule that you could invoke to review what has been passed by this Parliament; that is rule 209. Look at that and see if you can move a substantial motion under that rule so that we bring back that same motion and make the review that is necessary for that purpose, instead of bringing a brand new motion that could take a lot of time. If that is agreeable, then you could do it tomorrow afternoon.

MS NAMUYANGU: Most obliged, Sir.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In light of what hon. Peter Okot has raised in connection with political representation, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the minister to prepare a written statement on constituencies, in terms of districts and municipalities that are soon to conduct elections, and present it to this House? This is because Nebbi Town Council is now a municipality.

Mr Speaker, we resolved last year, before we went for elections, that effective 1st July, seven town councils would become municipalities and Nebbi was one of them. We have been given the instruments of operation but we have been left in a dilemma on when they will conduct elections for the new Members of Parliament, or if an incumbent like me will be asked to remain in the municipality so that a by-election is conducted in Padyere or otherwise.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think so, because just like you have issued guidelines and processes for the districts that have come into force, it would only be fair and procedural if we are guided on how the new constituencies, municipalities and all these processes are going to be put in place. In the case of cities, there was no motion, so we cannot - 

3.51
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am receiving instructions for the Ministry of Local Government concerning the constituencies and districts, which are about to carry out elections. However, this is not the mandate of the Ministry of Local Government; it is the mandate of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs where the Electoral Commission resides.

Wouldn’t it be correct, Mr Speaker, if you instructed the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to come and brief this Parliament on the constituencies and districts, which are currently preparing for elections, and we leave the Ministry of Local Government to clarify on the motion on which counties were created, where we still have queries? I was a bit uncomfortable when such instructions were directed to the Ministry of Local Government. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is directed to the Government to clarify on the procedures. (Laughter) If you would like the Prime Minister to take charge, he can take charge right away. However, it is the Government. It does not matter which ministry handles what, but the appropriate arm of Government should kick in and handle those processes that are likely to create confusion. However, in the case of Omoro District, it was clarification on the motion that was presented by the Minister of Local Government and that is why the minister should be in charge.

3.53
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the national security of our country.

For the last two to three months, the country has once again witnessed random killings and deaths orchestrated by army men; some in the barracks and others in bars. I have a long list of places and times where all these killings have taken place. They range from Masaka on 6th June, Makindye Barracks on 15th June and in April in Kanungu. There were also killings in Amuru and so many other places.

The reasons given are that those soldiers are either drunk or have run amok and are mentally disturbed. We live amidst soldiers, including in this Parliament; it would be so sad if one of them runs amok, - (Laughter) - with due respect to my colleagues. 

We have also had assurances from the Commander of the Defence Forces (CDF) who was in the media saying there is no suppression of a coup in the country and that the country is at ease. However, for the Chief of Defence Forces to move to reassure a country, that means that there are doubts. In ordinary situations, a CDF cannot go to the press to reassure the country. You are also aware that various arrests of people purportedly plotting to overthrow the Government are being done. Therefore, there is unease in the country in as far as its national security is concerned. 

Secondly, every town in this country from Kampala, Masaka, Jinja and Gulu is being taken over by malicious groups and gangsters like the kifeesi, to the extent that all the highways are unsafe. We are seeing a steady decline of law and order, peace and security of this country. Therefore, this calls for urgent statements from the concerned ministries about what is happening in the country. 

Nothing should go wrong because peace and security are fundamental for investment and happiness. The people of Uganda deserve a peaceful and secure country and yet all is at stake. We have a history of war in this country and it starts in those kinds of situations.

We are aware also that there were doubts in the last elections and problems ensued all over. Therefore, the country is not at ease. There are also killings around Kasese. We demand that the Ministry of Defence, and to some extent the Ministry of Internal Affairs, come up with a comprehensive report to this Parliament to reassure the country on what is happening. Otherwise, investment and prosperity are at risk. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, do you want to say something on this?

3.57
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Regarding the incidents raised by hon. Kivumbi, there have been some but the situation is not as alarming as he has suggested.

Mr Speaker, the points raised by hon. Kivumbi are significant. However, the security situation is not as alarming as he has suggested. It is true that there have been a number of incidents and the appropriate organs of Government - the UPDF and the like - are following them up to ensure that the root causes and the elements involved are known and brought to book.

Secondly –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much. I seek information on your presentation that the situation is not as alarming as presented by hon. Kivumbi, the Shadow Minister of Internal Affairs.

In Obongi, it is actually more alarming than what he has stated here. Mr Speaker, what is happening in the rural areas, particularly in the north, and citing an example of Obongi through to Yumbe, might not be known by many of you because of lack of coverage by the mass media. There are arrests and detentions of people in gazetted and non-gazetted places by police and the army. In Obongi, we had a case where the chairperson for the Forum for Democratic Change party, called Abbas Jurugo, was arrested and detained for two weeks on allegations of rebel recruitment. When we worked with the police, the DISO and the RISOs, we were eventually able to prove that there was no rebel activity in Moyo. However, people have suffered without trial.

I have just been consulting with my colleague from Yumbe here; there are people in Yumbe Police Station and Yumbe Hospital that were tortured by the army and this was not reported here by the Members of Parliament from Yumbe. The situation is very bad.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the position is this: The matter raised deserves attention and Government is going to come out this week and the responsible minister will make a statement on the matter. However, let me say that Uganda is secure and that these are isolated incidents. The minister responsible will give a comprehensive statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the VIP Gallery this afternoon we have Mr Geoffrey Bigogo Sebendire, the Chairperson LCV, Kasese District. He has come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming him. You are very welcome. (Applause) Can I have the Member for Rubaga North? Let us be brief and raise the matters quickly.

4.01
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in relation to what you stated in your communication- the renewed fighting in South Sudan. 

By the end of yesterday, about seven Ugandans had been killed in different parts of South Sudan and hundreds of other Ugandans are stranded, crying out to the Government for rescue in vain. A number of countries have gone in to rescue their nationals but Ugandans are still crying out to their Government and nothing has so far been done.

Mr Speaker, we all know that Uganda has a defence pact with South Sudan and last year this Parliament was committed to approving some kind of deployment in the spirit of security. Now that South Sudan is part of the East African Community, it is a gesture of solidarity. This has financial implications and a lot of tax payers’ money was committed to have that kind of deployment facilitated. It is, therefore, imperative that Government comes up with a comprehensive report, outlining the status of peace in South Sudan where we have not only committed our soldiers but also large sums of money – (Interruption) 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the information that I would like to give is that I have seen the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs in charge of International Relations; he should have come on the Floor of Parliament to brief the country on what is happening in South Sudan. 

I do not know whether the minister is ready to visit South Sudan because as we speak, I have had calls from my voters in Mbale, because the Mbale market feeds people in South Sudan, and many people are trapped. What is the ministry doing? What is our mission in Juba doing? The minister should have come up to brief the country so that Ugandans know what is happening and how our people are going to be evacuated. I thank you.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, honourable colleague, for that very good information. 

The Government of Uganda has been encouraging Ugandans, especially through the Ministry of Trade, to go and get jobs in South Sudan now that the unemployment rate in Uganda is almost 90 per cent – (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate my colleague for giving way. The issue of insecurity in South Sudan is very serious. My district, Amuru, borders South Sudan and as I speak, many of our business people in Juba are caught up. Last evening, one of the traders called me and said that they have been indoors for the last three days with no food and they cannot do anything. I followed the army spokesperson yesterday and he was saying that the UPDF has no intention of crossing the border into Juba. We really pray that the UPDF goes in to rescue our businessmen who are trapped in South Sudan.  

Mr Speaker, many of us may not know the magnitude of the situation, but some of us who are trading in South Sudan know what it is. Many of our businessmen are trapped and cannot move. We all know the rude and ruthless character of the South Sudanese; they can do anything without minding the consequences. This is a very serious matter. Let our UPDF find a way of rescuing our businessmen and return them back to our country alive. I thank you.   

MR TAYEBWA: I thank the Member for giving way. Honourable members, the situation in South Sudan is one that is very fragile and we should not handle it out of panic or excitement. I happen to have businesses there and the danger faced by a South Sudanese hiding in a house is the same danger faced by a Ugandan also hiding.

I do not know if my honourable colleague is saying that we should send our soldiers to go into the streets, knocking at each door and asking for Ugandans to evacuate. That is not how to do it. I know that Ugandans in South Sudan have associations, and they have a way of communicating to their embassy. The Government should ensure that members who do not have any way of communicating or who do not have information on how to reach their Government can reach them, so that in case there is any way that they can be helped, they are helped but not by sending soldiers to evacuate them. I thank you.

MR KASIBANTE: Mr Speaker, we may not have what it takes to debate how security must be operated to secure the lives of our fellow Ugandans in South Sudan. However, when the fountain of honour is swearing in, he promises to protect the lives and properties of Ugandans regardless of where they are.

In conclusion, all the ministers related to what is happening in South Sudan are here- the Minister for East African Affairs, the Minister of Defence and the Minister of Trade. The Government should brief us on what arrangements it has instituted to secure both lives and property of the Ugandans we have always been encouraging to go and get jobs in South Sudan. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, do you have a response to this? 

THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADRER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, the situation in South Sudan is obviously of great concern to the people of Uganda for reasons that have been very well articulated by a number of colleagues. Government is in close liaison with its regional neighbours, with Ugandans in South Sudan and the authorities in South Sudan. Appropriate modalities are being worked out on how best to help or rescue the people under siege. Uganda is collaborating closely with her regional neighbours. Meetings at a political and military level are being held and Government will be making statements available to inform the country, relatives and the people concerned.

Since we have the honourable Minister of State for Foreign Affairs here, and he has been closely monitoring and handling this matter, I propose, with your permission, Mr Speaker, that he comes up and shares with honourable colleagues some of the basic information that he may have on this important situation.

4.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Henry Okello Oryem): Mr Speaker, I would like to make a preliminary statement on the situation in South Sudan and thereafter, make a full statement another day.

The situation in South Sudan followed eruptions of fighting on Thursday, 7th July between the SPLA and SPLM-In Opposition in Juba. The Government of Uganda has followed with serious interest, both politically and militarily, the events therein. Uganda, with the Intergovernmental Authority for Development (IGAD) partners, are engaging parties – (Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, thank you. I appreciate the nature of the preliminary statement being made by the honourable minister. However, from the manner in which the Prime Minister called on him to make a statement, it seemed like he was ready with a statement. However, we do not have a copy of that statement, either for debate or for consumption for future debate. 

Is it procedurally okay for the minister to proceed without sharing what he is telling the country about such a critical matter, and yet it seems that he came ready with the document that he is reading?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the matter has come under urgent matters and with all urgent matters, where the ministers are available we always ask them to respond to the issues that are being raised so that they are dealt with. I think we are handling it in the same way. The matter the Member has raised is of urgent public importance and the minister responsible is here; instead of speculating, let us hear from him.

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs will be giving a full and comprehensive statement within the next few days on the situation in South Sudan.

Uganda, together with her IGAD partners, are engaging the parties –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is not that we do not want to receive the statement, but a statement from Government must be processed by this Parliament and the procedure for receiving and processing statements by Government is provided for under our Rules of Procedure. A Member has raised a matter of national importance and a minister is reading a statement now. They actually knew that this matter would be raised and that is why they prepared a statement, but they did not come to you, Mr Speaker, to ask for permission to come and read this statement to Parliament.

The procedural issue I am raising is: how then do we deal with this statement? It is going to be read or it is being read; do we debate it under rule 45? Do we wait for another statement, which he says will be presented another time? How do we process this statement, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Member for Rubaga North raised the issue of South Sudan and the sheer urgent nature of what is happening there. The Prime Minister rose to make a comment on what the Government is doing and he requested the minister, who is responsible for the sector, to guide the House on what is happening right now. 

I said that instead of speculating, you have a minister with information about what the Member raised as an urgent matter; can we receive it? He is responding to the matter raised by the honourable member from Rubaga North and he is giving information to that effect. If he has a text, it can only be taken as part of his notes, which he is going to use to brief the House.

We know that statements are made and take a certain form. They must be reflected on the Order Paper or by the indulgence of the Speaker, the Order Paper is amended to accommodate a statement. Right now, however, that is not how it has come. A matter has been raised and somebody has some response to those issues. Can we receive it and see how to process it? 

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Maybe it is an issue of language, but what I am referring to here is my brief. When I have a full written statement for this Parliament, I will be able to bring before you a statement designed and fully detailed for the purpose of this House. What I am referring to here, Mr Speaker, are just my brief notes, which were not meant for this House. However, since I have them, I am using them to brief the House. With your permission, let me proceed. 

We are all equally concerned about the situation in Sudan. I also have relatives and friends in Sudan and I have concerns about our citizens, more than anybody else in this House. I spent three years in South Sudan during the Juba peace talks and I regularly visit South Sudan to engage in businesses relating to Uganda’s relations with South Sudan, Ugandans being mistreated in South Sudan and Ugandans doing business in South Sudan. In this particular instance of insecurity in South Sudan, I am equally or even more pained by the situation more than anybody else in this House. 

Mr Speaker, the IGAD partners are engaging the parties in the conflict with a view of securing an immediate ceasefire and full implementation of the signed agreements. In fact, we welcome the statements by President Salva Kiir, the President of the Republic of South Sudan, and his counterpart, Riek Machar, to the effect that there should be an immediate ceasefire between both parties in the conflict in South Sudan.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, in collaboration with other Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs), are in constant contact with authorities in South Sudan, particularly our mission in South Sudan, to evaluate the security situation and particularly the lives and the welfare of Ugandans who are there. In the meantime, we have sent messages to Ugandans in South Sudan through their associations, through their telephone contacts and other social media that they should stay calm and remain indoors. At this moment, they should not venture outside because there is no way we can guarantee their security, just like the security of the South Sudanese cannot be guaranteed. 

The Government is fully prepared to find secure means of evacuating our citizens as soon as possible. I am not at liberty to tell you when and how. I, therefore, ask this House to allow me not to give the details because the situation is so sensitive in light of the lives at risk.  

This evening, there will be announcements on radio giving telephone numbers of people that can be contacted in our missions for those who -(Interruption) 

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been listening carefully and I am interjecting at the point of sharing information, particularly in regard to sharing telephone contacts and the use of social media.

Last evening, there was a message that was circulated on Whatsapp and Facebook. First, it indicated a telephone contact purportedly of the mission head in South Sudan. However, after sometime, a disclaimer also came that this message was a hoax and that people should disregard the earlier message since that phone contact was not for the mission head in South Sudan. That led to a lot of suspicion and people started making frantic calls. As we speak, there is formal communication to known institutions but individuals who are caught up in various scattered places have no formal communication yet. 

Mr Speaker, a group of people woke up this morning to find the situation calm and somebody offered them a vehicle. They attempted to use that vehicle to escape because they thought that the situation was going to remain calm. An hour ago, I got another message that their vehicle had been ambushed. They do not know what will happen because the people who have ambushed the vehicle where also armed.

Therefore, honourable minister, as you are making this communication, it is important for Government to talk seriously with the authorities in South Sudan because the people who are holding guns are not rebels. These are people who have been accepted by the Government to hold these guns. Therefore, it is important that you send a serious statement so that both the Government and Riek Machar’s forces look at our sons and daughters who are looking for livelihood there with a human eye. I thank you. 

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Thank you. My sympathy goes to those who were injured in the ambush. We continue asking Ugandans who are in South Sudan to remain indoors. The security situation is serious and uncertain. I repeat that we continue urging Ugandans in Juba to remain indoors. 

We are using known methods to contact individual Ugandans wherever they are- (Interruption) 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give my honourable brother is that like him, I also have brothers and sisters in South Sudan. I am also in the neighbourhood of South Sudan. 

We know that Uganda is in the good books of both warring parties this time round. It is not only in good terms with the Government of H.E. President Salva Kiir, but also with H.E. Dr Riek Machar. In February this year, Dr Riek Machar was in Uganda and we have information and knowledge of his people interacting with our Government here. Therefore, this time, as opposed to the past, as a Government we can talk to both the rebels and the Government of South Sudan. 

The rebels have some areas under their control with people under them and they are the authorities in those areas. The Government also has areas it controls with people under its control. All these people are living in fear. The information from the people trapped on the side of Riek Machar controlled areas, for example in the areas of Jebel on the road from Juba to Yei, is that these areas cannot be accessed by the Government. They should be accessed through the rebels because they are the ones who control that area. 

Mr Speaker, what the minister should tell us is whether there is a situation room to give us updates because the situation keeps changing from time to time. We can also contribute silently to those centres of authority in Uganda and help the people because as you said, the situation changes from time to time. It may not need written information, as my brothers and sisters have been demanding for here. When we get information through SMS, where do we go? Which office do we go to as people who are willing to offer a helping hand? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we allow the minister to make his statement and then we can supplement if there are issues? Now we do not know whether he is going to talk about the situation room or not because he has not finished his statement.

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Mr Speaker, the Government of Uganda, through its various agencies, has been through this process several times. We have the expertise, the know-how, and all that is necessary to evacuate as many Ugandans as possible from South Sudan. I ask this House to be patient because all efforts are being made. As I said earlier, there is already a plan underway to ensure that we try and evacuate as many Ugandans as possible. However, I am not at liberty to indulge in this here because I will be putting their lives at risk. 

For some Members who think they may have information that they would like to share with our consulate and individuals in South Sudan, let me give you the numbers here and the names of the individuals. There is Maj. Richard Okello who can be reached on +211928302044 and Mr Anthony Andama on +211925287500. I urge Members to contact those numbers to give any available information that can assist in this evacuation. I also urge those who feel isolated to contact these numbers and they will be taken into consideration for the eventual evacuation. 

The UPDF will not venture into South Sudan as of now. The last time the UPDF ventured there, there was so much criticism, including from Members of this House, as to why the UPDF went there. Today, the UPDF have learnt lessons from those who criticised them for going into South Sudan and hence, the UPDF is hesitant to go there as it did previously. Therefore, the UPDF will only go to South Sudan under the guidance of the United Nations Security Council, IGAD or the East African Community. The UPDF will not take any unilateral action to venture into South Sudan and be accused of breaching its international obligations.

Yesterday, there was an IGAD meeting in Nairobi and IGAD made a resolution on the following basis:

i) 	IGAD urges the parties in South Sudan to cause an immediate ceasefire in South Sudan;

ii) 	IGAD calls on the parties involved to cause the immediate opening of Juba Airport under the protection of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS); 

iii) IGAD stresses and demands the parties involved in South Sudan to immediately open humanitarian corridors; 

iv) 	IGAD will establish an intervention brigade and increase the number of troops from the region soon, in order to secure Juba under the auspices of the UN Security Council, IGAD or under a regional arrangement of the East African Community. 

v) 	IGAD also asks for the immediate implementation of security arrangements that are enshrined in the agreements on the resolution of the conflict in the Republic of South Sudan.

Mr Speaker, I urge this House to have confidence in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the other arms of Government to do whatever possible to evacuate our citizens - and others who we can help - from South Sudan as soon as possible. Thereafter, the UPDF and other regional organisations will examine the possibilities of other security measures to be undertaken to secure South Sudan.

We are aware of the consequences of the insecurity in South Sudan to people and districts neighbouring South Sudan. Therefore, measures are being taken to reinforce those districts to ensure that those who are fleeing that area do not come in with arms and do not cause insecurity in those parts of northern Uganda.

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs will be making a full statement on the security situation in South Sudan as soon as possible. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, would this be sufficient for now and then we give a timeline on when a proper statement can be made and debated? Is that okay? We now do not have all the information and there is no proper guiding document for us to debate. Can we do this? This means that the minister can come tomorrow or Thursday so that we have a comprehensive debate on this matter and also take some decisions as Parliament. Is that okay? Thank you.

Honourable minister, would you be able to come back on Thursday afternoon? Okay, let us have a statement from the Minister of Foreign Affairs on the situation in South Sudan on Thursday afternoon. Thank you.

4.33
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Musita-Namayingo roadwork has finally started. They have started putting tarmac on the road three years after we did the ground breaking with His Excellency the President. However, they have not compensated the people along that road. People’s crops are being destroyed, their trees are being brought down, houses are being destroyed and they are being blocked from accessing their houses.

Mr Speaker, if you look at the ministerial policy statements of the Ministry of Works for the last three years, you will realise that every year, they have been spending Shs 5 billion to compensate those people. However, on the ground, no coin has crossed over to those people. 

Since the Minister of State for Works has just taken oath, I request that she takes this up as her first assignment and that tomorrow, she presents to this House a detailed plan of how Government is going to compensate these people. We need to remember that this compensation needs to be timely and adequate. However, they have started work and yet these people do not know when they will be paid and how they will be paid. I, therefore, beg for assistance, Mr Speaker. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have a response to this matter or do you need to be given more time?

4.36
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Azuba Ntege): Mr Speaker, I have heard and I will crosscheck and come back to Parliament with an answer in due time.

4.36
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I arise on an issue of public importance. My people in Butemba County, specifically in Bananywa Subcounty, are facing threats of land eviction. This is land that they have lived on for a long time. The land had no title but the District Land Board, in 2013, decided to give away this land to a certain company called Kyankwanzi Sugar Works Limited. The people on this land wrote to almost every office but they were not helped at all. 

Mr Speaker, this is land that covers a number of villages, including Ntonzi LCI, Kacungiro LCI, Kiryabisooli LCI, Rwengo LCI and Sindura LCI. However, to our utter shock, in December 2014 the title was released in the names of Kyankwanzi Sugar Works Limited. We have written documents up to the ministry and elsewhere but we have never received any response. 

Recently, in his own capacity as a director of this company, a gentleman by the names of Hajj Bumali Barugambire sent a document to the LCs and the people in the affected area and I have a copy here. He ordered them to leave that land by 30th June, which was last month, but we protested. The Chairman LCIII of that subcounty called me today and informed me that Hajj Bumali has written another document, in his own capacity, ordering people to harvest their crops and go away.

Mr Speaker, this is not a matter affecting only my constituency. This is a matter that affects everyone here. It is within our powers and it is our general duty to ensure that we talk on behalf of our people. This land issue deserves attention. I will have done nothing if I do not speak for my people so that they survive this eviction. 

We are sure that this land was not given through due diligence. I am aware that to give away land and to issue a title, the area land committee has to consult the area leadership - the LCI - and the neighbours of the land to ascertain that there are no encumbrances on that land. This was not done. I have all the documents right from the beginning up to now and I promise that on Monday, I will bring a file with all the documents. 

Mr Speaker, I beg that you direct the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to personally visit this area and see whether there are no people. There can never be an area that is an LCI and it does not have people. The worst is that even the chairpersons of the same area have been affected by this land wrangle. 

We, the people of that area, are not against the investment by any investor but we are requesting that the investor comes and we grow for him his sugarcane as out growers and he buys from us; can’t the common poor in this country own anything? Why should the majority of our voters be praised during election time and they are thrown out after elections? Mr Speaker, I request that you direct the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to intervene in this matter as urgently as possible to save my people from land eviction. (Interruption)

MR MUHEIRWE: Thank you for giving way. It is not only in Butemba where this is happening but in Hoima as well. All the recent evictions are from land titles processed in 2012-2013. These land titles were processed under dubious means. Somebody applies for 200 acres but at the end of the day, he asks for some more land and it ends up being 20 square miles.

Other than people versus people, there is also land that is being grabbed by Government of Uganda from the bataaka. On Kyangwali refugee land, there was a land survey done in 1998, which was for only 92 square kilometres, and in 2013 we had another land survey, which extended the boundaries from 92 square kilometres to 136 square kilometres, which is going to leave over 12,000 homesteads homeless. 

This is the information I would like to pass to my honourable colleague so that this House finds a lasting solution to the evictions in Uganda.

MR KAMUSIIME: As I conclude, Mr Speaker, I would like to say that the land I am talking about is single block 824, folio 3, plot 9. This is just a drop in the ocean. Kyankwanzi District was known as the maker of NRM - the people who fought for this Government and whose relatives lost lives and property - and we have been supporting this Government. However, I see that they are on the verge of suffering within their own Government.

I am passionate about what I am talking about. I feel it and I cry for help. I beg that the minister should intervene in these matters urgently to save my people from an eviction. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.43
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The first point I want to put straight is the claim that Government is grabbing land. Nothing can be further from the truth. Government can only take land using legal means and where necessary, pay for the land as required by law.

The second issue is the one raised by honourable members about Kyankwanzi and Hoima. It reflects what is happening in a number of other areas. As you may remember, even in the last Parliament, this matter was repeatedly raised. 

I propose that these two incidents be investigated and that the Minister of Lands  Housing and Urban  Development also comes to this House and presents a comprehensive statement with regard to the plans that Government has to deal with these rampant land evictions, so that we as a House can have one common position on dealing with these matters. I do realise that these matters may be different from here to there, but I think we need a general approach. 

It is true the law is in place but it is also true that the law is being misused and that there are many legitimate people who are on land but are being evicted by more powerful people using their political and also monetary muscle. That is why I think a more comprehensive statement would be more appropriate, Mr Speaker.

4.45
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I find this an excellent opportunity to raise this matter of urgent public importance in the presence of the Leader of Government Business. 

Since May, we have had heavy down pours and multiple landslides in about six subcounties. It is actually the six that are the hardest hit but almost three-quarters of the sub counties in Bududa have had landslides, which have devastated crops and livestock. Currently, almost all the hills in Bududa are awash with cracks. We have realised that even with light showers, these cracks turn into catastrophic landslides. 

Rainfall patterns have changed, given the issues of climate change, and there are looming catastrophic disasters of landslides in Bududa at the cost of human life. What is of great concern is that even with the avalanche of correspondences which we have sent to the relevant line ministry under the Office of the Prime Minister, there has not been even a single response or a single official from the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees come to Bududa to conduct the required needs assessment. 

To exacerbate the matter further, after the subcommittee of Cabinet came to Bududa and spent 14 days conducting a detailed assessment on the frequency and magnitude of landslides, they eventually endorsed the resolution of the Ninth Parliament and earmarked Shs 8 billion for the emergency relocation of the people who were living in the high risk hills, which are now cracked. However, to our shock, the Shs 8 billion was only released in the last financial year and another decision was made to reallocate this money to other sectors. 

This was an irrational decision that was made because as we talk, the landslides that I have mentioned, for instance those that occurred on the 15th May in Bushiyi Subcounty and on the 25 June 2016 in Bushika, have caused a general displacement of the people and seriously disrupted their normal life. These people are helpless, hopeless and homeless. There is a serious humanitarian crisis in Bududa.

My request and humbly appeal to the Leader of Government Business is to accord expeditious attention to this crisis or else you are about to get the worst news ever. He should also reinstate the budget allocation that was made for the emergency relocation of the people who are living there. The people are willing to relocate but the misinformation that is being peddled around by some of the callous people, who are doing this for monetary gain, is that the people are not willing to relocate.

Seventeen relatively safe locations were identified by a team of technocrats - it was a multi-sectoral team - which conducted this work in a fortnight. They identified these areas for emergency relocation and eventual resettlement- (Interruption)

MR SIMON OYET: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I have been carefully observing the behaviour and conduct of some of the newly sworn-in ministers. Even when issues of national importance are being raised, some of them have spent more than 30 minutes sleeping, including the Deputy Attorney-General. Are they in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not observed what the honourable member has raised. However, being an Attorney-General requires deep thinking - (Laughter) - and it is very difficult for somebody to be in deep thought with open eyes. (Laughter) However, I have not noticed that. Please, proceed.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. To conclude, I would also like to bring to the attention of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that a good number of the internally displaced persons that were relocated to Kiryandongo have returned to Bududa. Nametsi where we had the 2010 landslides, which claimed over 300 lives, is now awash with these returnees and they are traumatised. They ought to be accorded psycho-social support before you even think of relocating them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you like to wind up?

MR NAMBESHE: Yes, Mr Speaker, I am winding up.  The situation in Bududa is precarious, severe and life threatening. These cracks can detonate into a major landslide at the cost of human life. Already, crops, houses and property have been ravaged, including eucalyptus. These are very prevalent issues that require urgent attention by the Government. I beg to submit. 

THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, the cracks and issues being raised by hon. Nambeshe about Mt Elgon and landslides is a very valid point and Government is fully aware of these. There is a programme to resettle some of the people affected both in Kiryandongo and a number of other areas. 

It would be proper that the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, who is not here now because he is dealing with the problem of Ugandans who are stranded in South Sudan, makes a statement. With your permission, Mr Speaker, I will ask him next week to update this august House on how the problems of the victims of the Bududa landslides are being handled. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there are immediate things that cannot wait for the statement. You might have to find ways of making some interventions where appropriate.

DR RUGUNDA: That is very true. Ongoing programmes on resettlements are in place.

4.55
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence. Unfortunately, this is an afternoon of death and threats to human life. I would like to address Parliament on a matter of urgent national importance relating to the carnage on Kampala-Masaka Highway. 

Mr Speaker, when this road was designated for reconstruction, we were all happy and we were indeed happy that there has been improvement on the outlook of this road. However, over the last one week alone, we have lost over 30 lives and in one single incident, a family lost six members. We are concerned, as regular users of the Masaka-Kampala Highway, which is a gateway to three major regional borders, that this road, which had given our people some happiness, is a source of misery.

There are questions we are trying to appreciate. While all accusations have been directed toward reckless drivers on the road, we take note of the fact that this road lacks adequate signage. There are hardly any road signs to notify even those drivers who are not reckless about the nature of this road.

Again, ominously, the road is uncharacteristically slippery and the question one raises is whether it does not point to some form of engineering recklessness on this road. My friend, the Minister for Works, who has just been sworn-in today, I am afraid there is no honeymoon because death on Masaka Highway has a daily roll call and it needs immediate attention.

Mr Speaker, we would like to appreciate if it is essentially recklessness on this road to blame. However, there are very many well paved roads in this country, but the regular occurrence of accidents in particular spots remains the same on this road. During the construction, one of the key assurances given was that the key dark spots were going to be cleared. However, I am afraid to say that the dark spots are even darker after reconstruction. This is why we need to understand whether there was no engineering mistake on this road.

I would have risen on a substantive motion to request for an engineering inquest; however, for the beginning, can the Minister of Works and Transport come out and explain whether Kampala-Masaka Highway is unique so that people can devise a way of riding on this road? With your permission, I would like to take a ride with the new minister on this road, preferably-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For that one you do not need the authority of the Speaker; you need the consent of the minister. (Laughter)

MR MPUUGA: I would like to ride with her, preferably in a commuter taxi, so that we to appreciate that this road has issues that need to be resolved. It was completed but it is undergoing continuous repair.

Again, pointing to a possible engineering disaster on this road, we have no proper explanation to give to our people on road signage unless the minister comes out to explain. It is true some of the signs have been stolen, but we have seen a lot of stealing and that cannot stop Government from finding other methods. I am aware that some of these are stolen because of the material they are made out of. Can we devise material that is not attractive to thieves and re-erect signage on this road?  I am trying to think aloud, Mr Speaker. 

Beyond recklessness, there must be another problem. We appreciate the regular presence of the traffic police personnel. The police are regularly there and people driving on those roads are aware that the traffic policemen are there and they are very alert and we appreciate it. However, beyond traffic policemen, there is an engineering disaster on that road and we need a clear explanation to give to our people as we find a way of curbing recklessness.

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, on the day we lost 21 people, I was supposed to attend a burial near my constituency and I witnessed another fatal accident before Mpigi. From that time, I felt that there was a very big problem. This cannot be limited to recklessness. There is a bigger problem and we need to understand it and help our people before we again face another disaster. You cannot know who the next victim on this road will be. Mr Speaker, I so request. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Does the Government have anything to say on this matter?

5.00
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Mpuuga for raising this very important point. Recently, we have been watching on television and hearing about this on radio and everybody is concerned. I would like to take this opportunity to pass on our condolences, on behalf of Government, to the families who have lost their dear ones through road accidents. It is terrible.

In the last Parliament, a similar issue was raised and the question of road signs was raised. Scrap is on very high demand. Hon. Byabagambi stood on this Floor and told us that they are coming up with signposts made of concrete, which might not be stolen because plastic is also stolen. He gave us the example of the beautiful Kisoro Road where reflectors are stolen and put in houses to create light. It is terrible and annoying for the owners of the facility to be the ones to vandalise it.

Therefore, it is true that when it comes to the quality of the roads, we may engage engineers to do a thorough check. Why is it that accidents are happening more frequently at similar spots? What could be the problem in those very spots? I remember Jinja Road used to be like that. We used to have many accidents on Jinja Road and something was done. 

Mr Speaker, I pledge to inform the Minister of Works and Transport, who requested me for leave because she is travelling. I promised that I was going to stand in for her, and little did I know that that a question was going to be raised. I take it upon myself, colleagues, to interact with the minister to make sure that we do a technical check on the work on these roads and see whether there is a problem. I am sure the problem can be rectified. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules require that if you have an urgent matter to raise, you raise it with the Speaker before coming to the House so that it is listed and we deal with it in a way, so that we know what is happening. We have other matters that are coming up. The Order Paper shows that we would be designating Members to committees but that is now not going to be possible because the time is very little. We intend to rise by six o’clock. 

I have four Members who have indicated that they have urgent matters to raise. These are the members for Amuru District, Kyaka North, Erute North and Mukono South. They have indicated to me that they need to raise some matters. After this, we will be able to rise so that we can come back tomorrow and constitute the committees. 

5.04
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national and urgent importance.  

On 24 March 2016, the Ninth Parliament passed a motion that was brought by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi and it was on forests. We talked about a lot of issues and one of them was that the minister should present a law against bush and charcoal burning. However, I am also aware of the time that we had because we have been campaigning.

The reason I am raising this now is because in Amuru and Nwoya districts, and generally the districts of Acholi, illegal charcoal burning has become very rampant and the brains behind this project are actually soldiers. We have key names such as Capt. Gilbert Rukundo and Capt. Johnson somebody -(Laughter)- from Nakasongola barracks.

On Saturday, I was in Pabbo Subcounty, Amuru District, on a fact-finding mission. When we went there, the people that actually received us were soldiers and not policemen. Why would we have soldiers coming to protect and guard the charcoal dealers? (Interruption)

MR AKOL: Thank you for yielding the Floor. Mr Speaker, I would like to give information pertaining to what hon. Lucy Akello has raised. 

On 8 June 2016, we had a problem in Amuru District where one boda boda cyclist was taken by the charcoal burners and he is nowhere to be seen up to now. Upon the disappearance of the boda boda man, on the 11th we had a meeting that was convened in the district by the district security chairperson, who is the Resident District Commissioner (RDC). In the meeting, it was realised that we have a lot of charcoal burners in the district to a level that one subcounty alone had more than 1900 people who were in commercial charcoal burning. In that meeting, about 14 action points were agreed to be followed by the district, and the people who were supposed to implement were the police personnel. 

When I made a follow-up on 4 July 2016, I talked to the regional police commander who told me that he had got some orders not to disturb those who are burning charcoal. It comes to the fact that there must be some people behind charcoal burning in the place and this needs urgent action. Thank you.

MR OYET: Thank you, hon. Akello, for giving me way to give supplementary information. In Nwoya District where I come from, in the sub-counties of Koch Goma and Lii, there is a captain called Capt. Nsereko and his team who are in charge of the two sub-counties. On average, every day we see a minimum of 20 trucks of charcoal leaving for Kampala. 

Around 17 May 2016, the district leadership made a resolution to stop commercial charcoal burning and some steps were taken.  It is only unfortunate that some people have not understood fully the reason why we decided to stop commercial charcoal burning. As a result, one very important person in the country, at the position of a Cabinet minister, made a tribal campaign statement, which targeted the Baganda community, which is very unfortunate.

I would like to say that when we access this place, we are national leaders regardless of where we come from. I speak for the people of Buganda and I do this on record. I also speak for the people of Karamoja and elsewhere. It was very hurting that hon. Nadduli, the Minister without Portfolio, when he was thanking his people for the appointment, made a tribal statement, which is very unfortunate.

What we are doing as a community and as leaders from northern Uganda is to preserve the future of this country. It is also about the source of livelihood. This commercial charcoal burning has caused a lot for problems to the extent that even the rain pattern has changed.  We used to know that the 15th of every month – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now debating or giving information?

MR OYET: Mr Speaker, I am giving information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, give the information.

MR OYET: Let me summarise by saying that what hon. Akello has raised on the Floor of this House is a serious matter, which is happening. It is happening in a big magnitude in Nwoya District. Thank you.

MS LILLY ADONG: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that let us not look at this charcoal burning as if it is only in the north. You are well aware that for the last two months, Kampala has not had rain. Isn’t it shocking to you? It is not only Kampala but the situation everywhere is alarming. I urge us to join hands and stop this charcoal burning. Let the security personnel who are involved stop the act if they are national leaders. I submit.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, honourable member. The information I would like to give you is that some of these men who are protecting their charcoal are moving in the forests with guns. We do not know where they get their guns from and why they are escorting their charcoal using guns. We, therefore, call upon the Government to come up very clearly. You know our people are scared in the bush and they are not used to guns. (Laughter)

MS AKELLO: Mr Speaker, may I be protected? I would like to thank all the Members who have added onto my appeal. For the record, the boda boda cyclist who has disappeared is called Oola Brian and he is only 17 years old. The motorcycle he had acquired was still brand new and he had got it on loan. This is how sad it is.

It is not the first time this is happening. This is now the second incident where we have boda bodas disappearing. Sometimes we get them dead. However, for Brian, we have not got him. We therefore appeal that the Government helps us find this boy because the family is very worried.

What we also need to set straight is that we are not against any tribe. What we are against is someone walking from Nakasongola, Gulu and going straight into the bush without even informing the authority, without telling the subcounty officials that they are going to place a, b, c, d to cut trees. They just move and settle with their families in the bush. I would like to implore Members, especially those who still doubt, to take a walk in Amuru and Nwoya; you will be shocked to see what is there.

As the affected people, we request the Government to implement the motion that was passed on the 24th. Amongst them is the law on bush and charcoal burning. What is happening is because there is a lot of irregular timber cutting and charcoal burning. Secondly, I request and pray that the House and the relevant ministries interest themselves in these particular soldiers that we have mentioned here; what interests do they have?

5.16
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. All of us are concerned about our environment generally. This is not an issue touching one area of this country. It is actually a global concern.

Secondly, I would like to say that we have legislation around to regulate this; the problem is enforcement. I do not want to hear lamentations as if we have no authority and as if we do not have local governments – (Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The point of order I am raising is that it is very annoying and disappointing for a whole Government Chief Whip, who has been here and who would have helped the Government to implement, to talk the way she is talking. Is she in order to be speaking in that way instead of encouraging us that this time things are like this? Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I understood from the statement of the Government Chief Whip was that there are institutions that should be preventing and policing these issues. What are they doing? That is what I understood from the Government Chief Whip. Instead of us standing here as if there are no institutions in charge of these things, why don’t we charge these institutions to deal with these issues? I think that was her point.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, you are the best. (Laughter) Most obliged. It is true I am speaking my mind. I am not a lamenter and I hate lamentations and that is me.

I remember during one of the celebrations of World Food Day, which took place in Arua, Gen. Moses Ali was the guest of honour and he witnessed the signing of the Arua Local Government Ordinance, which put in place some dos and don’ts, including taking alcohol at specific times of the day. On that day, a head of a family had to explain his source of food for the family members; if one did not explain, there would be repercussions. This was Arua and I would like to salute the district.

Local governments must wake up and do their work, and only be beefed up by probably Government. Therefore, it is not true that there is a vacuum in the legislation about bushfire and charcoal burning. That is one. (Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, the Government Chief Whip was spot-on in not lamenting and I applaud her. However, the Members on the Floor raised issues of armed men carrying out charcoal burning. The Government Chief Whip can say she will be coming back, but more forests are being razed down by charcoal burners.

Is she in order to lament without addressing the issue of armed men in our forests? Is she telling ordinary people to go and confront them when there are names of UPDF officers that have been mentioned who are threatening local governments? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is true a resolution was passed in this House giving guidance to Government to cure the gaps in the implementation mechanism for the protection of forests against these illegal activities, which are now rampant. That is what the Member is raising. Honourable minister, if you are responding to that, please deal with that so as we avoid this other -

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: There are some people who were mentioned by the Member who are not members of this House, but they seem to belong to some institution, by their ranks, called the UPDF. I am taking it upon myself to instruct the CDF to make sure this matter is critically followed up. People must stop abusing their offices. (Applause) I pray that I will also be assisted by the representatives of the UPDF in this august House to make sure officers do not abuse their offices. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Government Chief Whip, for giving me this opportunity to give you very useful information. 

Mr Speaker, the Government Chief Whip was trying to tell Members of Parliament not to lament and I actually agree with her on that. She further went on to urge Members of Parliament to encourage Government, especially the local governments, to take action, citing examples of districts like Arua. However, I would like to give her information that districts like Gulu have also taken serious action, including formulating ordinances and the action we watched on TV where the chairperson LCV of Gulu was caning people who had been caught doing charcoal burning.

As the Government Chief Whip instructs the CDF to take action, I would like to also advise that she directs the departments of Government that are supposed to implement resolutions of Parliament and policies of Government to also take action in order for us to work together. Otherwise, Members of Parliament will never keep quiet because they are the representatives of the people. Whatever is happening to them or to the people must find its way in this Parliament because that is what we are employed to do by our voters. Therefore, when they raise these matters, it is not lamentation. Thank you, Madam.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we wind up this matter?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Yes, and I beg that I am understood. I am not in any way blaming any Member of Parliament for raising whatever they have raised. However, because the matter is so serious, it tends to annoy; I mean, everybody wants to find a solution. That is the spirit in which I raised this point. 

I cannot end without sympathising with the family of the other young man who was reported missing. The honourable member said he was kidnapped by a charcoal burner. That means there is some scanty information which can really assist the police. I just hope that a statement was made because this is an act of criminality. As you recall, we have been seeing boda boda motorbikes being retrieved by the police with the assistance of all of us. So, I hope that a statement was recorded and I further hope the police are taking action on this matter. I would like to thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, there is an assignment that we need to execute today and that is constituting the Parliamentary Commission. Please, let us stay on. When we finish the urgent matters, we will ask both whips to present the names for us to accept them. So, we will receive the proposed backbench commissioners this evening as we plan to handle the committees tomorrow.

5.27
MR PAUL ASABA (NRM, Kyaka County North, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I will be very brief.

Mr Speaker, in my constituency I have got a challenge. I have a very big bridge that has been broken by heavy trucks and two subcounties cannot be accessed. My constituency has only five subcounties. As a Member of Parliament now, I cannot access the other two subcounties because of that broken bridge.

This road was worked on by the district local council programme. I consulted the district leadership to find out if they had the capacity to handle this construction. However, when the district engineering department went to the site to do an assessment, they realised that the bridge works were beyond the district’s capacity due to a small resource envelop. I felt that I should now come to this august House to seek guidance on how to handle this matter. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Government Chief Whip standing in for the Minister of Transport and Works? What happens where the budget required for the construction of a bridge is in excess of what the district can provide?

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, my role here is to really take notes and inform the relevant ministers. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not what you said earlier, honourable member.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I have taken note and I will inform the relevant minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please follow it up with the Government Chief Whip and the minister. The House has taken note of this bridge and we will see how to help on this matter. 

5.29
MR CHARLES GUTOMOI (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My concern is about health. 

We appreciate the efforts of Government in handling hepatitis B. I have visited three to four places in Lira where they are testing and also vaccinating those found negative. Unfortunately, what surprises me and my people is that they have been charging those patients. The charges started at Shs 25,000 even at the regional referral hospital, dropped to Shs 5,000 and by yesterday, they had negotiated to Shs 1,000 per patient. I wonder whether this is a directive from Government or the community is simply being cheated. 

Mr Speaker, you are aware that for the last four months, there has been no rain in some parts of Lira District - although two days ago, there was rain throughout the sub region – and some people cannot afford that Shs 1,000. The rate at which the medical checks are being done is very slow. I wonder what the ministry can do to help the community because at one point yesterday, they would check only 300 people out of the 6,000 in the area. (Interruption) 

MR ODUR: Thank you, hon. Gutomoi, for giving me the Floor. I recently visited the health facilities in my constituency. In Amach Subcounty Health Centre IV, only 200 vaccines were sent and the same with Barr Subcounty. 

The reason health workers are exploiting people by charging them in the constituency is because the vaccines that are sent are less than the number of people going for testing. More than 300 people test for hepatitis B yet the vaccines are less. I thought that I would give you that information.

MR GUTOMOI: Thank you very much. I still have to inform this House about those who have been found negative and positive. For those who have tested positive with hepatitis B, there is no treatment and I am wondering what is going to happen to them. Do we allow these people to buy the vaccines? 

This is because the panic in my constituency and/or in Lira District is too high. Once they test positive with hepatitis B, people begin shedding tears and collapsing. What should we do for this emergency issue that has become very serious? (Interruption)  

MR OCHEN: I am the Shadow Minister for Health. (Laughter) The matter before Parliament is a very serious matter in this country. In my constituency in Kapelebyong County, I found private companies and individuals going around conducting tests and actually charging the same amount that my honourable colleague has raised. This happens all over the country where this problem exists. 

Recently, while in my office as the Shadow Minister for Health, I received a preliminary report that some districts received vaccines for hepatitis B but that others did not. Mr Speaker, it would be more appropriate for the Minister for Health –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, on what point did you rise? (Laughter)

MR OCHEN: On information, Mr Speaker.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then give information because now you are debating.

MR OCHEN: Mr Speaker, my plea to this House is for the health minister to make a statement to this House regarding the distribution of the hepatitis B vaccines to the entire country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, hon. Gutomoi, wind up.

MR GUTOMOI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What I found out is that when tests are carried out on one’s liver and they are found negative for hepatitis B but another disease is found, such patients are left to deal with it alone. Is this how we are going to treat our taxpayers in this country? Yes, the person’s sickness may not be related to hepatitis B but leaving them to deal with their sickness by themselves - what are we going to do about this?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable minister, are you selling vaccines?

5.46
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Mr Speaker, the issue of hepatitis B vaccination has been discussed in this Parliament before. It is an issue that we are all concerned with. We are concerned about the health of the people and Government is doing all it can to ensure people receive vaccination. We cannot do it all at once; we are doing it in a phased manner.  

Mr Speaker, you will recall that we informed this House that we had started vaccination in 12 districts and this Parliament appropriated Shs 10 billion for that exercise to start. We also requested for a supplementary so that we could increase the number of districts to 30. However, because of other very important challenges, we received only Shs 3 billion at the end of last financial year -(Interjection)- Vaccines have been ordered for and other districts will be given vaccines accordingly. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let her first finish before you raise the clarification. We have not even understood what she is saying. Please! 

DR ACENG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Government of Uganda is providing vaccines free of charge. In the areas where vaccines are being given at a price, notably Erute County North and Erute County South, we have not officially distributed vaccines there. Therefore, it means that they have private practitioners who are offering those vaccines at this point in time.

However, we are committed to distributing vaccines in the first quarter of this financial year to all the high burdened districts that were presented in this Parliament and the number is 30 districts. After which, we shall move in a phased manner. Thank you.

MR OLANYA: Thank you so much, honourable minister. There is a serious problem we are going to experience as Ugandans. According to the guidelines on hepatitis B vaccination, one is supposed to be vaccinated twice - one month apart - and the second dose is given after six months. What is happening in the community is that when people get vaccinated in the first month and they go to the hospital for the second shot after a month, they are told there is no vaccine. What is going to be the implication of not having the right dosage?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have to accept the clarifications; it is not free for all. The ones you allow will be the ones to speak. It is your mandate now. It is up to you, but you have a time limit. Which ones are you accepting?

DR
 ACENG: I will accept from that corner and the last from him.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for accepting my clarification. Hepatitis B is very contagious and you know that. If you supply vaccines to one district and you do not do it for the next district, don’t you think this disease is going to spread so fast and affect the whole country?

When you bring in drugs, they should go to all neighbouring districts so that the disease is neutralised. However, when you bring few vaccines and put them in one area and not in the neighbouring districts, then you will not be doing a service to this country at all. How are you going to handle that issue?

MR BARYAYANGA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to seek clarification. Parliament passed Shs 11 billion but I heard the minister talking about Shs 10 billion; where is the other Shs 1 billion? 

Another issue is: Can we get clarification on the districts that are receiving this dosage such that we know where we are going? This is important because they were 39 but now we are talking about 12. How did these differences come about, because when we were passing the monies that is what we passed?

MR ATIKU: Thank you, minister. I am speaking as the ambassador for people living with hepatitis B. I have been advocating for this exercise that Government has embarked on since the time my friend and brother, Dr Baryomunsi, was the Minister of State in Charge of Primary Healthcare together with the current minister while she was Director General of Health Services.

Mr Speaker, Arua District is one of those districts that were in the first batch of 12. Our experience has been that when the first batch of vaccines was delivered, they had fewer testing kits and that is the route through which the health workers started charging the public. When I raised the matter with the then minister, he assured me that more test kits would be delivered and indeed more test kits were delivered. However, later the trick again changed; they started telling us that what they call “prickers” were inadequate. However, when prickers where delivered, again they continued to charge Shs 4,000 per person. 

Mr Speaker, the situation has been so bad to the extent that what is going on now in Erute is that private practitioners have taken advantage of the situation. In Arua, they have been going to schools testing students and pupils who are not qualified for these vaccines or testing. Students have been tested without counselling and some have opted to get out of school because according to them hepatitis B kills. So anybody found positive loses hope immediately. That is the situation under which most students have been.

When we interacted with the public, we were told the health workers tell them, “Ours is to test; for the other services, go and find in the hospitals.” The hospitals then recommend that people go to a specific health centre at a fee.

Therefore, the whole administration of the mass vaccination against hepatitis B, honourable minister, has been mismanaged. 
As a new minister and a technical person, it is important for you to get to the root of this problem now that you are in this House where we can question you politically. Please, rescue and streamline things before resources are wasted and people lose hope to the extent of wanting to commit suicide. Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable minister.

DR ACENG: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I take note of all the issues that have been raised by the honourable members, but allow me to explain the issue of the Shs 11 billion and Shs 10 billion. When we started the exercise of vaccination, the first amount of money that this Parliament appropriated was Shs 10 billion. This is the money that we have been using until the end of last financial year. We then requested for a supplementary because of the high burden of hepatitis B in this country. The supplementary that was supposed to be given to us was Shs 11 billion but I have clearly stated that out of this money, which was meant for us to increase the number of districts to 30, only Shs 3 billion has been given.

However, I would like to state that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has made a commitment that during the course of the financial year, the balance of the Shs 8 billion will be given together with the Shs 8 billion that was appropriated for this financial year. We are hopeful that it will be given.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of the irregular vaccination, where some people receive one dose but they do not receive their next dose after one month, this is unfortunate. The health workers have been sensitised and educated on how to give this vaccination and in the districts where we started, we did make a follow-up by engaging the district leaders as well as the health workers. They have guidelines all over the country; all the district health officers in this country have these guidelines on what to do. We shall, therefore, follow up on the districts that you have mentioned and find out why this irregularity is happening.

On the issue of supply of vaccines to one district and leaving out the neighbouring districts, we do take note that nearly all the districts in Uganda are affected. However, it is also clear that some districts have a higher burden than other districts. We all chose together to start with the high burden districts and those are the districts that we are systematically considering first.

I will kindly request that you be patient with us. The cost of the vaccines is high, the number of people who require the vaccine is also high and so we cannot do it all at once. We are committed to carry it out in a phased manner. 

However, let me again reiterate here that Government provides vaccines free of charge. I am, therefore, requesting that if you find vaccines being charged for in the districts where we have distributed vaccines, kindly alert us so that we follow up the issue. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.49
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern combines three issues including road accidents as I requested you in writing. However, one has already been handled by my colleague, hon. Mathias Mpuuga from Masaka Municipality, and so now I am going to handle two.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, only one. 

MR MUYANJA: Mr Speaker, we have a challenge, which I thought this Tenth Parliament can look into. Many Ugandans are fed up of the way we are using our roads. Many of us here, for example, would prefer to stay here for another three hours but moving from Kampala to Mukono will take you not less than four hours. It does not matter whether you are going to Kawempe or Masaka. However, all this is due to the recklessness of our drivers and the total neglect by our traffic police who do not caution some of the reckless drivers, like those who drive Government vehicles. Whoever drives a car with red number plates has right of way. That is why I thought this House should tell us who has right of way in this country; is it whoever is driving a Government vehicle or whoever puts hazard lights, who can push other road users aside, causing accidents? 

Mr Speaker, I visited Mulago Hospital two days back with a WBS television crew - you might watch it on television tonight - and we recorded 140 victims of motor accidents. There were 103 motor accidents at Kirudu Hospital within one month. Kawolo Hospital recorded 41, Mukono Health Centre IV had 49 and Mukono Dispensary had 21, including boda bodas. Can the police come out clearly to enforce the law so that we can have sanity? Otherwise, we have a problem. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there any statement from Government on this issue? 

5.49
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, hon. Muyanja has supplemented on what hon. Mpuuga raised. What I have picked, and probably which hon. Mpuuga did not raise, was the abuse of office by some people who drive cars with red number plates or official vehicles. He has urged police to make sure they enforce traffic laws. I have taken note and will communicate accordingly. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we deal with the Order Paper now to allow us handle the issue of the commissioners?   

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMISSION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I ask the whips responsible to present the names for this Parliament to act on? 

5.52
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The NRM party has designated three Members of Parliament as backbench Parliamentary Commissioners. I beg to present:

1. 	Hon. Peter Ogwang, Member of Parliament Usuk County; 
2. 	Hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara, Workers Representative; and 
3. 	Hon. Robinah Nabbanjja, Woman Member of Parliament for Kakumiro District. 

I beg to present. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. That is not yet properly constituted. Yes, Opposition Chief Whip.

5.53
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Mr Speaker, I would like to present the name of hon. Cecilia Ogwal from our side. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, the names that have been presented to constitute the backbench Members of the Parliamentary Commission include: 

    1. The hon. Peter Ogwang from Usuk County; 
    2. The hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara, Workers Representative; 
    3. The hon. Robinah Nabbanjja, Woman MP for Kakumiro District; and 
    4. The hon. Cecilia Ogwal from the Opposition. 

Honourable members, those are the four names that will constitute and have been proposed and designated to constitute the backbench Members of the Parliamentary Commission. I, therefore, put the question for your approval. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. That brings us to the conclusion of today’s business. Tomorrow’s House starts at 2.00 p.m. House adjourned. 

(The House rose at 5.55 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 13 July 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 
