Tuesday, 21 July 2015

Parliament met at 2.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I am glad to acknowledge the work that has been done by the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. This morning, I received a full copy of the report on the Constitutional Amendment Bill; something we and this country have been waiting for. I am glad and congratulate the legal committee for bringing this forward and now it is back with us. As you can see, item number six is a motion for the second reading of the Bill – it will be coming up today. I am hopeful we receive it and see how we can process it.

To remind ourselves, the time for handling this is almost not there. Therefore, we are going to work doubly hard to finish with this and pave way for other electoral reform Bills that might come to implement the provisions of what we would have just passed. 

You should also know that the rules requiring the passage of constitutional amendment are very different from what we have been using. I know the challenges we have been facing with the ordinary proceedings of this House. When it comes to constitutional amendment, the whips are going to have to work even harder because the numbers required to pass constitutional amendment are much higher than what we use to pass our ordinary business of the House. Therefore, whips, please be informed that we will be requiring your utmost whipping so that we can have the necessary numbers to process these amendments.

Honourable members, you recall that I gave guidance to the legal committee so that matters from the country are handled not by piecemeal but in a comprehensive way. I gave guidance to the committee, which they have heeded to. I said “Please do not shut the door of the committee from any member of the public who would like to come and raise issues which relate to the Constitution and other matters”. Let it be open and I am glad that they have done that. By doing that, everybody has been on board and all the issues have been captured as we shall be hearing later today from the committee as they will report. 

Therefore, at the appropriate time, this matter will be called and as I said, we need to handle it expeditiously. Time is not on our side. The time we have is only what we have and we cannot create any more time than what we have. Let us work within that framework and push even harder so that we can have these matters delivered early enough so that we have time to do the electoral reforms and also pave way for the elections to come.

As you are already aware, the electoral commission has gone ahead - I am informed that some elections are actually going on. That even makes the issues more complicated but still we are being called upon to provide guidance on how we are going to handle this matter. Thank you for coming today.

In the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Real Foundation Nursery and Primary School represented by Hon. David Muhumuza and Hon. Lyndah Timbigamba Kyenjojo District. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

2.14
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this chance to present a matter of national importance. On Friday morning at 4.30 a.m. Benn-ways International Uganda Ltd factory in my constituency was burnt down by mysterious fire. The damage as a result of this fire is huge, massive investments lost, employment opportunities of over 500 residents were lost and their livelihood and survival together with the relatives and dependants of these employees is at stake. This is what we are faced in Rukungiri Municipality currently.

The factory has been a major processor of coffee and maize. The machinery and all structures worth over Shs 2 billion were destroyed to ashes. The damages due to the burning down of this factory have negatively affected the people and the people in the neighbouring districts.

Before this fire, His Excellency the President of Uganda, Kaguta Yoweri Museveni, had visited this factory and commended the local investor for the commendable initiative of value addition on agriculture products that is in line with vision 2040. On that particular occasion, the President pledged to give them more support so that they could expand production and improve market for local products. 

Today, this factory is in ashes. I stand as a people’s representative pledging through this Parliament that the Executive through the Prime Minister finds resources to help this factory rebuild to resume production of value added products of coffee and maize. In the same spirit, I also appeal to the ministry of disaster to consider the plight of the employees, relatives and other dependents of this factory since their incomes have been cut off.

The people affected directly and indirectly are eager to hear the position of the Executive in regard to this undesirable situation in which we have found ourselves. We shall be glad to know how far the President’s pledge has reached and what plans the Executive has put in place to help this local investor. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Anything from Government on the matter raised from Rukungiri?

2.16
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (MS Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to pass on my sympathies to our local investor and secondly I was noting down as the honourable member was raising the matter. I pledge to put it before the Leader of Government Business so that we can have a response to it. Thank you.

2.17
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In Kitgum District, my constituency, we have a wave of insecurity. Last month, two people were shot dead in Lagot, Muchwini Sub-County. One of them was an expectant mother and the person who killed these two people has never been arrested. He is still on the run.

Again, this month on the 18 July 2015, three people were shot dead, among whom were Odong Michael, a teacher of 32 years; Ojok David Mao, 31 years old and Amony Grace - the fourth person escaped. The suspect has also not been arrested. I made contact with security personnel, including the CID, OC and RDC; they have not been able to arrest these two suspects.

Mr Speaker, the people of these two villages are on the run, because they have now been given information that they are coming back to continue with their atrocities. The people of Lagot in Mucwini, whom I visited last week, told me they longer sleep in their houses. This second incident was in Pawili, in Lagoro Sub-County, and the residents are equally on the run. 

Mr Speaker, my plea to this honourable House and to Government in particular is that they take interest in this insurgency. We are given tips that there are some deserters -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it an insurgency?

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, this insecurity has really caused panic in three neighbouring sub-counties which can escalate into something else.

The information we have is that there are some deserters who have guns and are within the community. We would like Government to first of all investigate this and bring these people to book. Probably, they should even go further to understand how –(Interjections)- one is a deserter; the other is a soldier who is in-service – that is according to the information from the CID-OC. But they are not able to arrest the culprits. 

We want Government to beef up security, investigate this matter and arrest these people. This will give assurance to this community who are now sleeping outside their houses and are still being threatened with further atrocities.

That is my plea, Mr Speaker. We need urgent intervention; we want those in security to go and look at this situation, not from Kampala, but go and help the situation from Kitgum District. Thank you.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, very, much. Mr Speaker and colleagues, matters of security must be dealt with expeditiously. I would like to advice that whenever we receive such incidents in our constituencies, we should straight away work with colleagues like Gen. Aronda, the IGP and the rest, so that we can swing in action and deal with the matter.

I would like to inform my colleague, and my mother, that I am going to make sure that the concerned agencies get this information, and request you as well to give us whatever information you have so that it can be utilised to make sure that we crack down those who are causing insecurity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, very much honourable members. In the VIP Gallery this afternoon we have hon. Henry Kyemba, a senior citizen and member of the Judicial Service Commission. He has come to observe the proceedings of the House today. Please join me in welcoming him. You are welcome, Sir. (Applause) 

2.22
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I rise on a matter of national importance. Over the last several years until last week in my constituency - my constituency is around the Karuma Game Reserve and the Murchison Falls gazetted areas. People have been accessing the gazetted areas unlawfully, but there are days that they are allowed to move in and fetch firewood and other such things.

Last week, a group of young men went to the game reserve, and it is almost confirmed that they were captured in an area which was a complete no-go zone in the park and they were summarily executed by the game rangers.

Efforts by the security people in the district and the locals to access the game reserve were frustrated. The allegation is that the game warden, a one Kyomukama Evelyn, who is in charge of issuing orders to these people on whether the operation should continue or be aborted – (Interjections) - it is alleged that she frustrated the whole search. These people disappeared from their homes.


This is not a matter which is only common for Kiryandongo District; even my colleague from Nwoya has had a number of people from her constituency summarily executed.

Mr Speaker, a one Opwonya Joseph, 39 years of age; Akenda Martin, 31 years of age and Ochieng Patrick, 20 years of age have disappeared and to date, their bodies have not been recovered.

This is a matter that I shared with the Executive Director of UWA and there seems not to be any headway. Let me allow my colleague to give some information –(Interruption)

MS ADONG: Thank you, honourable colleague. Mr Speaker, a similar incident happened in Nwoya District, last year in December, where two men went missing to date. They travelled from Pabbo, one is called Mr Ongom who was 26 years old, and the other was called Ola. 

They were also purportedly killed in the park because we have ways of detecting; they went with dogs and they came back without the owners. They looked for the people in vain but the UWA authorities denied seeing them up to now.

We were considering issuing a habeas corpus - seeking for a court order but it is still at large. That is the information I would like to give.

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, this is the whole crux of the matter. My appeal is that this matter should be of great concern to Government, because it amounts to extra judicial killing.

One may argue that these are gazetted areas and therefore, it is illegal for these people to go in there. But there must be due process of law that must be followed once someone is caught on the wrong side of the law. Mr Speaker, I request your office to give us guidance on this matter.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I agree with hon. Otada that this is a matter which Government has to come out and give guidance on. I listened to him as he was submitting, and he has informed this House that the Executive Director of Uganda Wildlife Authority has been duly informed.

I would like to pledge to take it from there, to find out what the ED of UWA has done so far. I think in due time, I will expect the minister in charge to inform this august House about what action she has taken so far. Thank you.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. These two issues of national importance; the one raised by hon. Otada with the information given by hon. Adong of Nwoya are very serious. Matters of execution, death of human beings and just shooting people on sight are very serious.

I would think that the right procedure would be; I know you will give your guidance but would require that the minister comes with a statement giving an account of the whereabouts of these human beings who were purportedly executed. The statement must be brought clearly to tell this House and Ugandans, not just a mere guidance by Government because accountability must be made of lives lost.

Secondly, as the Government Chief Whip has rightly mentioned, Government must give guidance because there is no law that requires poachers to be shot when caught acting against the law. I am very sure there is a provision in the law that deals with them apart from executing them or directly shooting them on sight. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I thought it would raise a serious statement that would be brought before the House. Thank you for the opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will go by your ruling on this subject.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE RECRUITMENT OF IMMIGRATION OFFICERS

2.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, this statement was sent to the Office of the Clerk so I hope it is on Members’ iPads.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, this statement is in response to issues raised by Parliament regarding alleged irregularities during the recruitment and selection exercise for posts of immigration officers, trainees and immigration assistants trainees in the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

On Thursday, 25 June 2015, I presented a statement to the House on the then on-going exercise of recruiting immigration officers and immigration assistants trainees. During the debate that followed, a number of serious allegations were raised. These included: lack of transparency, qualifying persons with disability and pregnant ladies being discriminated against, applicants being forced to undergo stringent physical exercises that were not disclosed in the jot advert and cases of bribery.

Consequently, the House resolved that the recruitment process be halted and thorough investigations into the allegation be conducted. Following this resolution by the House, the exercise was halted and a multi-sectoral team of senior officials was set up to investigate and subsequently report on the matter. 

At the same time, a review of the whole process was done with a view to establishing whether or not any laws, regulations or procedures were breached.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I wish to report as follows: honourable members are aware those immigration officers are the first and last persons anybody legally crossing a border makes contact with. They must therefore be mentally and physically alert at all times. This is especially so, now that transnational crime namely drugs, human trafficking, terrorism, money laundering etcetera have become extremely rampant. These persons must have the capacity to help us fight these vices.

Honourable members, I wish to draw your attention to Uganda’s unique setting in the region. We are situated in the middle of a region with conflicts. Given the peace and stability we enjoy, Uganda plays host to refugees running away from danger. Most times these do not come to Uganda through designated and manned entry points; they use the shortest and most convenient routes to safety.Unfortunately, there is no guarantee that all those who come here by such means come with good intentions. It is certainly possible that wrong doers may at times take advantage of such conflict situations to come here and harm us. 

Immigration officers whose duty is to facilitate the legal entry and exist of persons from Uganda must therefore have capacity to deal with such situations. They must have capacity to patrol our borders and to apprehend all those entering or exiting through ungazetted and unmanned entry points.

Otherwise, wrong doers, for example, terrorists will simply walk here, do what they want to do and walk away. A highly mobile immigration force in addition to those who sit at gazetted entry points is required. Uganda’s vast and porous borders make this necessary. Uganda’s immigration manpower currently stands at 350 officers. These are the ones we are currently relying on to man the porous land borders and to cover all possible entries over the water bodies. 

Honourable members will agree that this a far cry from what may be considered being the bare minimum required. Wrong doers do not observe set times. They come in and go out whenever it suits them. Immigration officers must therefore be there all the time not only at designated entry points like Entebbe Airport, Katuna, Mutukula, Busia and Malaba which are all open 24 hours a day, but all possible entry and exit points that may be used.

Honourable members, it is with all this in mind that the Ministry of Internal Affairs decided to take steps to build capacity in both numbers and skills of the immigration force. We are happy to report that both the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development agreed with us. They gave us the authority to recruit and train these officers. As a result, you here in Parliament appropriated for recruitment, training and deployment of these officers.

The need to bring the new recruits on board as soon as possible still stands. Many times wrong doers have attempted to harm us. They continue to exhibit their determination to do so. We must not drop our guard. We must remain vigilant at all times. We need to rapidly build capacity in numbers and skills to do this work hence the extremely urgent need to bring these people on board. 

What were the procedures used?
Honourable members, upon realisation of the urgent need to recruit, train and deploy immigration officers, the Ministry of Internal Affairs approached the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. They both cleared and authorised the recruitment. Immediately following this clearance, the public service was contacted.

Honourable members are definitely aware that the Public Service Commission is a constitutional body established under provisions of Article 165(1) of the Constitution. The mandate of this commission is derived from Article 165 and 166 of the Constitution. The functions of the commission among others include: advising the President in the performance of his function provided under Article 172; appointing, promoting, confirming and exercising disciplinary control over persons appointed in public service.

In line with the above mandate of the commission, the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Internal Affairs declared to public service 300 vacancies, 150 for the post of immigration officer trainees and 150 for immigration assistant trainees. After a series of consultative meetings, the commission embarked on the recruitment and selection exercise. The posts were advertised in December 2014, shortlisting, aptitude test and physical fitness exercises were accordingly conducted on 4 February, 28 April and 22 June 2015 respectively.

Under cover of letter AB 94/263/07 dated 26 June 2015, addressed to the Minister of Internal Affairs, with a copy to Chairperson Public Service Commission, the Clerk to Parliament indicated that due to a number of allegations, the House had resolved that the exercise be halted. The write up below is therefore intended to respond to the issues raised by Parliament.

The rationale and general guiding principles governing appointments in the Public Service: This section is intended to provide an insight into the operations of the Public Service Commission in order to appreciate the way recruitment is conducted by the commission, including but not limited to this exercise.

    (a) Enabling Instruments for recruitment into the Public Service. 

Under Section 166(4) of the 1995 Constitution, the Pupblic Service Commission is empowered by Parliament to make regulations for the effective and efficient performance of its functions. In line with this provision, Parliament passed the Public Service Commission Act 2008 and eventually the Public Service Commission regulations were made in 2009.

Under Regulation 25 of 2009, the PSC is mandated to determine the procedure to be followed in dealing with applications for appointment to the Public Service and to regulate its own procedures under Section 56 of the same regulations.

In line with the above, the Public Service Commission undertook to systemise and modernise its selection criteria by using written examinations to supplement the existing assessment techniques. These efforts also date as far back as 1989 when Government supported the use of examinations in the Public Service by promulgating it into a policy under – Circular Standing Instruction (CSI) No.6 of 1989 as revised in 1993 under paragraph 14(b).  The Commission also created a Selection Systems Department in 2001 and issued guidelines for its operation and the general administration of examinations in the Public Service.

Competency-based written examinations and other practical tests are therefore being administered for recruitment of Permanent Secretaries, Directors, Chief Administrative Officers, Under-Secretaries, and so forth, whose jobs require specific competencies. This initiative is being cascaded down to cover all posts in the entire Public Service. This is in line with the request by H.E. the President to the Public Service Commission to use scientific methods for recruitment. The request was made in the 1990s.

(b) Affirmative action

The Public Service Commission applies the principle of merit in relation to affirmative action by considering disadvantaged groups who merit appointment. For instance, PWDs and women are normally given first priority in case they obtain same scores during selection exercises, for example, oral interviews.

(c)	Methods of work by Public Service Commission

The Public Service Commission works through boards which are constituted by the Chairperson of the Commission.  The boards execute policies and procedures of the Public Service Commission and are mandated to determine the most appropriate selection criteria within their jurisdiction in line with the existing policy and guidelines of the Public Service Commission and the Public Service in general. The final decisions are however taken by the full Commission. 

(d) Appeals 

The Public Service Commission provides room for appeals from aggrieved candidates/applicants at different stages of the recruitment process. Each is handled and decided on its own merit.

Preliminary stages of Recruitment and Selection in the Public Service 

Recruitment into the Public Service is normally characterised by a number of activities. The major ones are as follows: 

    (a) Preliminary stage
    i) Recruitment planning including budgeting.
    ii) Job and workload analysis
    iii) Job evaluation
    iv) Obtaining clearance from the Ministry of Public Service to fill the vacant post(s)
    v) Receipt of submissions from MDAs, specifying the job description, person specification and competencies. 
On receipt, these are forwarded to the responsible Public Service Commission Board.

(b) 	Processing the submissions by Public Service Commission

    i) Studying and analysing the submissions by responsible boards for approval by the entire Public Service Commission, for example, drafting advertisements, conducting interviews, writing briefs etcetera.
ii)	Participation of technical representatives from submitting Ministries, Departments, Agencies (MDAs) in shortlisting and oral interviews. 

(c)	 Decision making by the Commission on recommendations from the various boards.

(d) 	Communication of decisions of PSC for implementation.

 (e) 	All decisions of the Public Service Commission are communicated to MDAs for implementation through minutes.

(f) 	Any appeals, and other form of request arising from the decisions of the Public Service Commission are processed through the normal processing cycle. Each case is handled on its own merit.

Status of staffing in the Ministry of Internal Affairs

The need to train and recruit more staff in the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control has been outstanding for long. This has affected service-delivery, specifically in the areas of effective border management and control.

The current staffing levels stand at 350 staff members including clerical staff. This puts the ratio of staffing levels to one immigration officer to 150,000 compared to the internationally recommended ratio of 1:2500 as is the case with Sweden and Norway. It is 1:4500 for Ghana. Staffing levels in Tanzania stand at 1:8000 personnel. Kenya has 1:3500; Rwanda 1:800 and South Sudan 1:4000. Ours is 150,000 per each immigration officer because of the small number of staff we have.

Hon. Members, the current 350 immigration officers we have are a far cry from what can be considered to be adequate. That number was considered adequate many years ago, when such phenomena as terrorism, persons and drug trafficking, money laundering, the increasing numbers of travellers and others were not with us. In view of all these considerations, a re-think of the size, composition and skills required of immigration officers became absolutely necessary. 

Given the fact that immigration officers are the first persons, and the last persons those coming into our country and those existing make contact with, this means that the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control is part and parcel of our security apparatus. Should immigration officers be found wanting in anyway, our security and safety and that of our investments will be jeopardized. This therefore means that we can broadly classify immigration officers in two categories: 

(i) 	Those that are required to perform specific specialised duties such as border patrols, apprehending illegal entrants and those without the necessary entry travel documents. This category of staff, which we are targeting this time round, requires specialised training that includes, but not limited to self-defence and endurance. This enables them to adequately defend, manage and control the border activities. It is for this reason that the advert specifically stated that all successful candidates will have to undergo the specialised training and that they will have to be physically fit in order to do this job.

ii) 	The second category involves staff who carry out normal and regular office work, for example, at designated entry and exit points like Malaba, Busia, Entebbe, Katuna and Mutukula among others. These process travel documents like passports and are not required to move long distances.  

The training these require and their work schedules do not involve strenuous exercises. The next recruitment exercise will target this category of staff.

The need for a new approach to training immigration staff

Given the current nature of sophisticated trans-national crime, illicit arms trade, human trafficking, drug trafficking and terrorist related movements, a combined set of training is required in order to detect, counter and eliminate such criminals with utmost professionalism. This calls for specialised and other forms of training to prepare the immigration officers -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure.

MR BABA: I have to give this full information in order for honourable members to appreciate what we are up to– (Interruption)  

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I thought that the Minister of State for Internal Affairs would quickly respond to procedural matters.

The minister knows why Parliament requested for this particular report. We wanted to know elements of corruption and discrimination in the recruitment. You are now telling us about the guidelines of what happened and the skills that are required and the nature of training. 

However, you have not focused on the key things that Parliament is looking for. We want to know whether there was corruption and if not, tell us that there was no corruption. If there was no discrimination against women, then tell us and go straight to the point because we have so much to do. But you are telling us stories and more stories. 

The copy of the report is not even uploaded on the iPad. Is it procedurally right that this honourable minister continues to bore us –(Laughter)– even without copies of the report? Is it procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the honourable minister was doing a good job and discouraging members from asking him any further questions in the future. (Laughter)

Honourable minister, the question was very specific that there were some problems regarding the recruitment and you should have assisted the House by just going to that and confirming that there was no problem or that there was a problem and that you are reviewing. That would have been sufficient for us today.

You have gone beyond that and I think that you may need to come back and help us with that, please.

MR JAMES BABA: If you do not give enough information, the members tell us to go back and bring more. I am now trying to give enough information and you are saying that it is too much. I have suffered this here before - (Laughter) -But let me now go to the issues. 

Allegation No.1 - Lack of Transparency

Let me start by how we prepared for it. The exercise was preceded by a number of activities including but not limited to sending of SMS messages to all invited applicants, display of the shortlists on the Public Service Commission website for a minimum of seven working days –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: I thank you very much. Mr Speaker, you have just guided that the response we expect from the minister is really specific. Is the minister in order to disregard your guidance to go to the specific answers that the House is looking for and take us through the procedure that the recruitment was conducted? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do those SMS that were sent to different people prove that they were not sent to specific people preselected? If it does, then it helps your case to show that there was transparency because you can send SMS to only a category of people and not everybody. 

We need for you to confirm to us that we can have confidence in the process. That is all. Honourable minister, you have not been doing that. Please help us with that and then we move because we have a lot of business.
 
MR JAMES BABA: Those who were shortlisted were invited to undertake the exercise. 

Let me go to issue number two on discrimination of pregnant women and those who were breastfeeding. 

On arrival, all pregnant women and breast feeding mothers were requested to report to the Red Cross tent which had been put in place to handle unique and special health related cases.

As a precautionary measure, and before the 10 kilometre marathon run, the women in this category were requested and advised to consult a medical doctor and counsellors from the Uganda Red Cross who were on the ground. They were logically advised and counselled that it was for their own safety and that it would have been very dangerous to their health and to that of their unborn children, for them to run in their condition or to attempt to participate in the 10 kilometre marathon race. 

The expectant mothers, after getting expert advice –(Interjections)– why don’t you want to hear – (Interruption) 

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, for the good of this country, it is important that we get this information right. The minister is narrating how the expectant mothers were sent aside for their own safety because the exercise that they were to undertake was risky. 

My point of procedure is that was this one of the requirements put before the applicants - that expectant mothers are not expected to come? Was it clearly stated as a requirement during the application?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not a procedural point. You are pre-debating the matter before it is finished. 

MR JAMES BABA: After the expectant mothers received expert advice, they voluntarily opted out, were registered and clearly informed that their cases would be reviewed and taken up by Public Service Commission, in order to come up with an appropriate position and way forward.  

It was therefore, premature to allege that they had been unfairly disqualified from the exercise, before getting the official position of the Public Service Commission.

These ladies were advised and guided that the Public Service Commission would handle their issues later and therefore to come here and allege that they were discriminated against was premature. We beg to submit.

2. People with Disabilities (PWDs)

Likewise, People with Disabilities were advised and counselled and their case handled in the same way as that of the pregnant women.

The above situation notwithstanding, the health experts and counsellors’ opinions were given to them and they were fully supported under section 6(4) of the Employment Act about how they should be properly secured.

This section reads as follows; “In distinction, exclusion of preference in reference to a particular job based on inherent requirements of that particular job shall not be deemed to be discriminatory.” So, a specific law is quoted here from the Employment Act 2006, section 6(4) and these people were advised so.

Similar provisions as well as the constitutional ban on the discrimination against women enshrined in Article 33 of the Constitution were interpreted by the High Court of Kenya; Constitutional under Human Rights Petition No. 390 of 2014 (as reported in Kenya law reports 2015).

In that case, the High Court of Kenya ruled that discrimination meted out against pregnant women who sought recruitment to the Kenyan police was justified as quoted below:

“Applying, therefore, that standard as established by the European Court of Human Rights in the present case and noting the criteria for limitation of rights under Article 24 of the Constitution, I am satisfied that the discrimination meted out against women who were pregnant into the National Public Service Commission was justifiable as argued by Mr. Ojwang. I say so because the need to protect the lives of the pregnant woman and the unborn child cannot be gainsaid. Mr. Kaburundi in that regard deponed that the recruitment would eventually lead to admittance into one of the three police training colleges and I take judicial notice of the rigorous training that recruits undergo for a period of nine months. In that context and at this juncture, I am constrained to ask myself how a pregnant woman is supposed to undertake the rigorous and heavy course without being a danger to her own health and that of the unborn child.

Mr Olola urged me to consider the possibility that pregnant women should be recruited and they undertake the training at a future date after giving birth. With due respect to Mr Olola, I do not think that argument is reasonable. To suggest so is unreasonable and impractical as I do find. In the circumstances, I do not find a violation of Article 27 of the Constitution as alleged.”

While the decision at the High Court of Kenya is strictly speaking not binding in Uganda, it is however highly persuasive. In any event, the provisions of the law in Uganda are very clear under Section 6(4) of the Employment Act. Until the Parliament changes its mind and repeals Section 6(4), that section remains the law of the land in Uganda in respect of employment both in the public and private sectors.

I wish to reassure this House that after consultation with the Public Service Commission, it has been agreed that all applicants in the two categories (pregnant ladies and persons with disabilities) who turned up for the exercise and were registered shall be considered during the planned recruitment and  selection exercise during the course of this financial year 2015/2016.  This will be – (Interruption)

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I stand under rule 70 which concerns the motion for a member not to be heard. The rule is very clear that if a member persists in irrelavance or tedious repetition or use of objectionable explanations, that member should not be heard. The Speaker has guided the minister, we have raised matters of concern but the manner in which the minister is proceeding - he has persisted in reading irrelavant matters and yet this House is so congested with very urgent matters. We were asking for specific reply to the questions which we were interested in. Mr Speaker, my motion is that the member should not be heard. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion has been moved based on my guidance and since it is based on that I need to give an assesment of what happened since I gave the guidance. From the time I gave the guidance, the minister improved and stuck to the guidance I gave. So, I would urge the hon. Member for Dokolo to withdraw that motion because the minister is now proceeding properly and he is about to wind up.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I will need an assurance that indeed he will be proceeding properly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He will be proceeding properly.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: I withdraw the motion.

MR JAMES BABA: So Sir, thank you for that very useful guidance. These pregnant and mothers shall be considered in the next intake after having gone through this exercise. 

The second issue is about the alleged bribery. The Minister of Internal Affairs, my boss who is here, has set up a special committee led by senior prisons commissioner officer, the assistant commissioner of prisons with 10 other people to investigate the cases of bribery and the minister will report back to the House on the findings of the bribery.

On the allegations of strenuous exercise, Mr Speaker, I have explained why this is necessary for the category of immigration officers we need to man these borders and therefore we need able bodied people right now to undertake that exercise. We shall use other people for desk clerk work when we subsquently recruite them.

In conclusion, in what I have stated above, I believe the exercise was conducted in a transparent manner and we hope by answering those issues relating to pregnant mothers and those nursing babies and the issue of bribery which we undertake to investigate and report back. I pray that:

    1. The urgent need to bring the new recruites on board is very necessary and therefore what Parliament halted - we pray that you allow us to proceed and we shall come back with the reports on bribery for the reasons I have explained.
    2. The security situation demands that these people are recruited, trained and deployed as soon as possible.

I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the statement based on a matter of concern raised by the Members in this House. As you recall, this House took a decision that led to the halting of the process. The minister in his final appeal requested that the halting that Parliament had ordered should be lifted so that the process can go on since the other activities are already being handled. A Commission has been appointed to handle bribery, corruption and the issue affecting the people with disabilities and pregnant or breast feeding mothers as he has explained.

Therefore, the minister’s request to the House is that the halting of the process be lifted so that the recruitment can go on with those who are there to deal with the gaps that are in place at the moment. 

Honourable members, can we do it this way - Members will say something. Can we do away with this because of the issues that have been raised by the minister? This matter came not from a committee; it came straight from the concerns of the Members. Our own committee has not been able to look at this issue in a more comprehensive way. Probably, that is why the minister’s statement is also long; trying to capture things, even those that were not requested. 

Wouldn’t it be proper if we referred this matter to our committee to come back in a short time so that-  The way it is now, we might not achieve much in a debate but if the committee came back in a few days, then we could consider the minister’s request which he will make again to the committee for the lifting - We could come back and then handle this in a more comprehensive way. Today is Tuesday; can we handle this next week on Thursday so that we can bring back this in a comprehensive way? 

Honourable minister, you can give a more fair detail to the committee and then, they will come and advise us on how to proceed on whether you should now go on with the recruitment or not. We can sort out all those things next week on Thursday. I think that would be proper.

Honourable members, the matter stands referred to the committees on Defence and Internal Affairs and Gender, Labour and Social Development. I hope the chairpersons are here so that they can handle this quickly and come back on Thursday next week to enable us debate on this matter and consider the minister’s request. It is so ordered.

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have directors of Dennways International Uganda Limited the factory that got burnt in Rukungiri Municipality. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. They are represented by hon. Ronald Mugume and hon. Sezi Mbaguta. Please, join me in welcoming them. We join them in lamenting the thing that happened to them and we see how Parliament can help.

We also have pupils and teachers of St Andrews Kisoga Primary School represented by hon. Peace Kusasira, Woman Representative of Mukono. I think there is another Member who represents this people also, but it is recorded here. They have come to observe the proceeding. Please, join me in welcoming them.

We also have chairpersons of Nakasero Parish, Kampala Central. They have come to observe our proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are all welcome. (Applause) Thank you.

LAYING OF REPORTS OF PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATIONS ABROAD

REPORT OF THE DELEGATION FROM PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TO THE 38TH ACP PARLIAMENTARY ASSEMBLY 29TH ACP-EU JOINT PARLIAMENTARY ASSEMBLY HELD IN FIJI

3.13
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to make a correction to the Order Paper as to the papers I am laying today. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am the only one who can amend the Order Paper. (Laughter)

MS AKOL: I would like to propose an amendment, Mr Speaker, the papers I am going to lay today are for the 37th ACP Parliamentary Assembly that was held in March in Brussels and not the 38th ACP-EU JPA which was held in Fiji.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, the correction is accordingly made; so, lay the one for Brussels.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table a report of the delegation from the Parliament of Uganda to the 37th ACP Parliamentary Assembly and the standing committees of the ACP-EU JPA, which was held in Brussels, Belgium on 17th to 25th March 2015. I beg to lay, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Those reports do give some guidance on some of the issues we have with our co-operations with the European Union. We will find an appropriate time to look at them properly to see how they can help us in moving forward with these matters.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE TOBACCO CONTROL BILL, 2014

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you recall that I requested that the Members who are processing this Bill and the ministers involved should have done consultation so that we can move faster. We have been doing one clause a day and that is not good for Parliament. Today, I intend that we move quickly and if there is a process that is going to cause delay, I will put matters to vote and move on. Therefore, due notice is given to people concerned with the Bill.

NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, the procedural issue I am raising is, you have said the minister consulted -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I said the minister concerned; I have not talked about any consultations.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Okay, Mr Chairman -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, since I did not say that, let us proceed, clause by clause. (Laughter)

Clause 14

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Chairperson, we redrafted clause 14(6) to read as: “in addition to the penalty prescribed in this section, court shall order the seizure, forfeiture and destruction of tobacco products that do not conform to the requirements of this section.

The justification is that there is more than one requirement in this section because when you read the section, it talks about many things. The requirements apply to the tobacco product, which embodies a unit package or outside packaging and labelling of a tobacco product. Therefore, the tobacco product is captured in all the above prescription, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, thank you. That is the improvement on clause 14 (6) and you remember the debate we had in sub-clause 6. There will be no further debate on this. We will take a decision.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, there is some improvement by the chairperson but the basic point on clause 14 is about packaging and labelling. There is nowhere, unless we have to change because materials - Unless they are talking of talking of packaging and labelling materials.

There is nowhere, unless we have to change, they are talking about packaging and labelling materials. If they mean the items inside, we cannot say you can forfeit them. In reality, sub clause 6 should be deleted because it is talking about the material inside and not the labelling and packaging. 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Chairman, when you talk of packaging, it means that something is being disguised. When you are not in consonance with the Ministry of Health regulations, it means that it is subject to be destroyed. 

You cannot hide a product under poorly packaged material and then you claim that it should be deleted. That means that even the product that is poorly packaged should be destroyed. This is because you are supposed to abide by the rules and regulations set by the Ministry of Health. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, when we legislate, we do it in a way that when it is interpreted, it does not lead us to absurdity. Take an example of this; Tobacco has been packed, the little sticks have been wrapped wrongly, the outside packets and the bigger ones have also been packed wrongly. 

Does it need any legal sense for us to go through the process of removing the big and small packets, the wrapping on the cigarette and then separating the cigarette from the packing? Is that what we want to legislate? Would that not lead to absurdity in legislation? 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, you are now making it clearer. It looks like what must be stopped is that which is supposed to be packaged and that which is supposed to be labelled. That leads to one question; in case such a person wants to continue producing such packaging materials, shouldn’t we also destroy the product? Then we also have a law that allows us to grab the packaging materials of that type so that it does not spread all over the country and the area that we want to limit. 



MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want Members to just look at it this way. If you found one tonne of wrongly packaged material, is it possible that there was a mistake? It cannot be a mistake. It was intentional. If it is one or two packs, then that could be taken as a mistake.

The reason we are bringing this is to deter people from doing things intentionally. When you confiscate goods and find tonnes of kilogrammes of tobacco, which are wrongly packed, it cannot be accidental.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it is a court process. It is not that you get something and you immediately act on it. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We spent a lot of time on this particular clause. I am aware that we had already passed the other clauses 1, 2, 3 and 4. Right now, we are at 6.  It is important for us to know that we had already agreed on how cigarettes should be packaged and what kind of information should be on the cover sheets. 

Therefore, unless we are not serious - but if we are really serious in controlling tobacco smoking and ensuring that manufacturers abide by the requirements as passed, the minister will make a statutory instrument on the packaging and labelling. What has been proposed should stand that these products that do not conform to the clauses as per this section should be seized or destroyed.

Mr Chairman, I would like to propose that you put the matter to vote and we move on. We have spent a lot of time and a proposal on the redrafting –(Interjections)– yes; the issue was on the redrafting. The mover of this Bill has already come up with an amended or better version. This is what we should move on with. Thank you.  

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. When you look at the intent of this Bill, you will realise that the focus is more on restricting importation than exports. Therefore, the point, which the honourable from Padyere raised may not arise. The access to the packaging materials may not be possible.  This is because you only have a product, which has been packed. 

Therefore, the person or the company, which, for example, packed their product in Kenya, Tanzania or whichever country, the confiscation or forfeiture of packaging materials may not apply. We are looking at the product, which is already packed. The issue is about restricting importation other than exportation.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put the question that the honourable member for Budadiri West has proposed that sub clause 6 be deleted. We will start with that. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I will now put the question to the amendment as proposed by the mover of the Bill. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am not on sub clause 6 now. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I now the put the question on the amendment as proposed by the mover of the Bill? I put the question to the amendment now proposed by the mover of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you still have an amendment in clause 14? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, clause 14; we had looked at sub clause 1 up to 5. Now we are going to 6. In sub clause 2, we had wanted to raise the warnings to be at 80 per cent. 

I have seen that if we make it 80 per cent, there has to be a stamp from UNBS. UNBS must certify that product has passed the test. URA also has to stamp on those cigarettes. The product has to have its name and company. 

If we do it that way, we reduce it. That is when the fake commodities will appear. This is because there will be no stamp from UNBS and even somebody can claim the URA stamp is faint because the space is not enough. 

I would like to move an amendment that the initial 75 per cent, which had been proposed was slightly big. I have seen here that the World Health Organisation talks about 50 per cent. Why again do we change? We have been following the World Health Organisation. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. First of all, we had already agreed on the 80 per cent. Hon. Nandala is, therefore, taking us back and in is the spirit of your guidance that we need to expedite the process, we should not prolong the debate.

Mr Chairman, Uganda will not to be the first to actually propose the 80 per cent or where the health warning will be written, both in text and pictorial.

Thailand has a figure of 85 per cent. For them, on the cigarette package, 85 per cent is reserved for the health warning and then the company can put their information in 15 per cent.

In Australia, theirs is 82.5 per cent; Uruguay, Senegal, which passed their law last year has theirs at 75 per cent. When we pass 80 per cent, we are not the first ones to do this and 20 per cent is adequate for the tobacco company to put their name; sportsman, Marlboro and it will still be visible.

URA or the UNBS can even stamp in the area where the health warning is, that is not a problem. I think in the spirit of moving fast, we need to stick with decision, which was taken earlier and then move on.  Thank you.

MR OTADA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. This is a discussion that I have had with my friend Dr Baryomunsi for some time and I told him, I would like to inform the House that your Bill is very persuasive in as far as it operates within the confines of WHO Framework Convention, which talks of a minimum of 50 per cent and the committee actually, after wide consultations, recommended 60 per cent. Mr Chairman, I, therefore, would like to request this House that 80 per cent – like hon. Mafabi put it, it cannot be put any better. 

We are going to open the flood gate for illicit trade to take place in this country, if we are going to occupy ourselves with the campaign, which campaign will not be conclusive by passing this Bill. It is just to start with. The campaign will have to be a continuous effort by all of us and not to think that the Bill will bring an end to what we are trying to fight. I therefore would like to request that the committee’s recommendations, Mr Chairman, of 60 per cent be carried.

MR MULIMBA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I have been looking at this sub-clause 2 and given what the minister has just said, I do not know whether this Bill is about tobacco ban or tobacco control.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is about tobacco control.

MR MULIMBA: If it is about tobacco control and also aware that companies go to Uganda Registration Services Bureau, register their trade mark, we also know that in trade, one of the biggest aids to trade is advertisement. 

Here we come to legislate and say, that we reduce the trade mark advertisement for which the companies are paying at 20 per cent; then can simply say the companies now go to advertise for the elimination of the very trade, which they are supposed to be promoting.  Mr Chairman – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, on the issue of advertisement, we passed clause 13. You are taking us back to clause 13 and I am not going to allow that.

MR MULIMBA: Mr Chairman, the proposition is about 80 per cent of coverage of warning. It also converse the means that we are actually you are only promoting – you are only bringing down the business you are supposed to be promoting.

Therefore, I would not think that it would be prudent for any company, which goes into business but you now go ahead to promote bringing down the very business, you are supposed to be promoting. I would, therefore, propose that 50 per cent would be a fair deal.

MS KAABULE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. One thing I would like to remind my colleagues who was talking about the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control and I would like to read it verbatim, it says: “each unit package or packets should have these warnings and messages” and sub-clause 4 says “it should be 50 per cent or more of the principle display areas.”

What it means by more is that, we should remind ourselves that this is a Public Health Bill. If it is a Public Health Bill, we should take into consideration the area that we are going to put the pictorials and the health warning.
	
If we are going to leave only 40 percent as you are recommending, remember the pictorials should be large enough, visible and very clear for somebody to see that this is a danger. We should have pictorials – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, the point is made.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think we should not work in isolation. Let us look at other companies and see what they do. Personally, I take beer; Tusker. The Tusker I take, when you look at their labels, they give us a warning about health hazards but it does not take the biggest size of their label.

If I am marketing their goods and you are going to tax them, you are still taxing them; so, when you are giving any health warning, it should be there and has always been there on cigarettes.

If you would like to make a health warning bigger than the labels of the company, then you would not be fair to this company. Where is it seen? We are taking beers and they write the words – you are not going to put there Ssewungu’s throat or some body’s picture showing how cigarettes cause different kinds of diseases. That is not the international standard.

Mr Chairman, much as we would like to control tobacco, let us put into consideration what is done internationally. You are that side and I am this and neither of us takes cigarettes but take a beer. What do you see on the bottles of beer? They warn in very small letters. If you want to read, you read and even give the alcoholic content – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The point is made.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. By the time we made this report, we made extensive consultations with other people whom you represent and the people who produce tobacco.

I would like to tell each of you in this House that by the time we reached 60 per cent, we wanted to be as fair as possible to those who smoke and those who do not. We wanted to be fair because this is the Parliament of Uganda –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, please move to the point.

DR BITEKYEREZO: I would like to move that just maintain what my committee talked about and we substitute 75 with 60 per cent. If you do not mind, please, put a question. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The Chairperson has gone back to 60 per cent which he had proposed and is in the report of the committee, which he proposed as an amendment and has gone back to. We now have 75, 60 or 80 per cent.

MR JOHN OKOT: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am of the view of 80 per cent. You know, if something is really dangerous, it is so. If you are to warn somebody, let them not have an excuse. They should know that they are taking it at their own risk. Therefore, if the warning is clearly spelt out – for example, if you are approaching a bridge and the bridge has broken down, somebody has to warn you. You cannot hide it. Let it be clearly seen that that what you are going to take is dangerous.

To me, therefore, I think we need to go by 80 per cent. (Interjections) We should not hide and we should endeavour to make it very visible, in order to be well understood so that people can decide on their own. You cannot have it as 75 or 20 per cent, later somebody can say that I did not see it well - (Interjections) Besides consultation has been taking place and people have been talking to each other. We are taking views from even the public and that is why we are coming out to say, let it be 80 per cent on the view that somebody just sees it from a far and says this is a risky thing that I am going in for.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, last week, I said, that in drafting and processing laws, we were taught and they quoted a statement for us that “laws are made to pass just like raisers are made to sell.” the purpose of processing a law to this House is that it should pass and if there are hitches to its passage, then think about it. How can it pass?

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. If we are to consider the clauses we passed before we reached where we are, we would not even be talking about giving a warning because we have already prohibited display even at selling point. Now, what purpose are the warnings for? Therefore, for that very reason, I would even think that 50 per cent is enough because these cigarettes are going to be sold under the stalls. We have prohibited, they are displayed and they are going to be hidden. These warnings are only going to be seen by the last person and that is the consumer - I would propose that we do not disguise - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, the Bill proposed 75 per cent. The committee interacted with the members of the public interested and disinterested people and has proposed 60 per cent. When we were here last week, it was moved and we agreed on 80 per cent. Those are the figures we should be dealing with for now.

Honourable members, we need to move. I am going to put the question. Unless people are willing to move forward on this matter, I will put the question.

I will start with 80 per cent and then come to 60 and then we would have gone back to the position in the Bill.

I will now put the question that the percentage in sub clause 2 should be 80 per cent. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, please, let us vote properly. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to. 

Clause 15

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, on clause 15, which deals with sell and display of tobacco and tobacco products;
In Clause 15(1), we propose to delete the words “tobacco” all appearing in line two of the provision. The justification is that we would like to restrict the application of the provision of tobacco products

In clause 15(2), we would like to rephrase the provision to read as follows: 2(a) A person shall not import, manufacture, distribute, possess, sell, offer for sell or bring to this country;
    (a) An electronic nicotine delivery system including the electronic vaporisation device or cartilages with nicotine containing liquid or other substances to be vaporised.
    (b) A water piped tobacco delivery system including the water pipe devices or the water pipe tobacco product or other substances to be used in the water pipe delivery system.
    (c) A smokeless or a flavored tobacco product like Cuba

The justification is due to the increasing health effects of the newly engineered flavoured tobacco products through a water pipe “Shisha” that is scientifically proven to be even more dangerous than cigarette consumption. There is need to ban the importation, manufacture, distribution, possession and sale of water piped tobacco delivery system and all flavoured tobacco products.

In clause 15(4c), delete paragraph c. The justification is a ban on duty-free sale of tobacco products, which are mostly for export only would have little or no impact on reducing tobacco consumption in Uganda.

In clause 15 (5), we would like to rephrase the provision to read as follows; A person shall not import, manufacture, distribute, sell or offer for sale a unit packet of a tobacco product unless a packet is intact and contains at least 20 of cigarettes or 26 cigarillos or 26 of any other tobacco products or 100 grams of a tobacco product.

The justification is:

    1. The insertion of the words “at least” is to ensure that the quantity of sticks of cigarettes prescribed is the minimum.
    2. To discourage the young people from buying cigarettes in singles.
    3. Deletion of the word “tobacco” is to restrict the application of the provision to tobacco products.

In clause 15 (7), substitute 100 currency points with 24 currency points. The justification is to make currency points commensurate with the term of imprisonment.

In clause 15(9), substitute for the word “shall” appearing in line two with the word may.

The justification is to allow the judicial officer use his/ her jurisdiction in applying the provision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, those are the proposals from the committee.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Chairman, the rest of the amendments are okay except clause 15 (c) where they are suggesting deletion of the duty free.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which part of 15?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Clause 15 (c)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is no 15 (c)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: I mean 15 (4)c), where they are suggesting the deletion of duty free item - we are all aware that most of the duty free items are not only for export but they return tobacco products to the country. Therefore, we would like to re-state it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairman, what was the reason for removing duty free? Is it necessary to remove it? That is the issue.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, when you look at clause 15 (4)(c) – we interacted with people who deal in tobacco. When it comes to duty free cigarettes, people who buy from duty free are people who are flying out of the country. If somebody has bought tobacco and would like to go and smoke from somewhere as he or she is flying out of the country, why should you stop him or her? We, therefore, said, they just buy and go away with their cigarettes and smoke from there.  That is why we wanted to delete it.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Chairman, I can concede with that, since they are taking it out side not bringing in to the country –(Interruption)

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the mover of the Bill that, it is not only people who are going out of the country who buy things from duty free shops. Even those who are coming into the country - when you reach the airport, you can go through these duty free shops and buy items and bring them here. What this particular clause that you are proposing to delete says, “a person shall not sell a product as a duty item.”

We are saying, it shall not be free from taxes. That is the proposal and I think, if we are moving in the spirit of this Bill, to protect the present and the future generation and also looking at the other information.

Mr Chairman, you aware that we are coming to the end of the MDGs and we are moving on to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and one of the proposed SDGs 13 (9) states that, countries must ensure that they come up with strong laws against tobacco use. 

If we are going to move in line with what the UN and other countries think, the issue of deleting this clause-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPESON: Honourable minister, the issue is about duty free or no duty free? 

MS OPENDI: We are saying duty free. That is the information I wanted to give, and to request the mover of the Bill to maintain the original position. Thank you.

MR OTADA: Mr Chairman, the minister submitted that if we are moving together in the spirit of this Bill, then this is how we should move. It is clear that we are not moving in the spirit as is envisaged by you, honourable minister. Anyone who reads the provision in section 15 will clearly conclude that we are totally banning cigarettes in this country. (Interjections) That is the net effect of it; take it or leave it. It is I not my Bill; I am just reading it as proposed. It is clear that you are saying that a product, which is legal, licenced by this country.

For example, like BAT which is on the Stock Exchange legally must not display what it is selling. What does that mean?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, please, we are on duty free or attracting duty.

MR OTADA: Mr Chairman, I am just on clause 15, the whole of it as it is, because it still falls under 15 and without restricting myself to the duty free one.

I can concede on the duty free but the whole point is that, we are legislating for banning tobacco in this country and I think it has to be clear because you are either regulating or banning. (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, I rise on a point of order. Last week, we were at pains to explain further the science behind tobacco and literary interpreting what this Bill is about.

We did say that products can be lawful but they can be regulated like guns. The sell and access to guns is legal, lawful but regulated. That is the same principle. 

Is the honourable member in order, having been absent last week, to come here and take us back when we should be making progress. Even when you guided that there is nothing like banning but regulation. And we are considering duty free not banning. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, you should not use the authority of the Speaker to ban debate on the subject (Laughter) The information you want to give the honourable member is that this is still regulation, this is still control, it is not banning and you need to persuade him not use the Speaker to block him. (Laughter)

MR OTADA: Mr Chairman, last week, we were processing a Bill, which is next after this; it is not that I was absent from this House, I was doing some work. Probably, I would like to persuade the mover of the Bill that, could we stand over this clause, look at it a little bit more critically and find a middle ground position for it? 

Otherwise, we are legislating in a manner that the net effect of it, at the end of the day, is banning tobacco sale in this country, making it appear as though it is an illicit product, making it to be sold under that table and yet, you are the very ones who has pronounced clearly the health hazards warning, which should be logical for us to say; “let us now display. After all, we have made it clear how dangerous this product is. You cannot punish someone twice.

You have put a label at 60 per cent and then again say, “sell under the table.” Honourable members, I would like to appeal to your innermost sense of fairness. That is will only be fair if we can find a middle ground position on this matter. (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Chairman, I would like to thank hon. Otada for giving way. It is unfortunate that we have the Minister of Trade here, the Minister for Tourism and they are taking this Bill as a light matter.

Duty free shops – it is an international culture. Honourable members, you have travelled. You think of Uganda being an exclusive country because you are fighting an item, which has been earning you taxes and you say; “In duty free shops, we do not want the sale of cigarettes.” You are chasing away tourists from the country. I would like to assure you that what we are doing right now is bad. 

Last time, I told you that when you go to our hotels in Uganda, whether they are 5 star, there is a floor reserved for smokers. Now you are getting tourists, you are saying, duty free shops -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, is that still information?

MR SSEWUNGU: It is information, I am concluding it. Mr Chairman -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No. you had given information.

MR OTADA: Just to wind up, I would like to appeal to (Mr Mwesigwa-Rukutana rose_) maybe, the learned Attorney-General wants to give me information?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERON: Learned Attorney-General, are you giving information or debating, because you did not say anything?

MR MWESIGWA-RUKUTANA: I am contributing. (Laughter)

MR OTADA: No, I thought you are giving guidance, because Mr Chairman is also my Attorney-General to guide me.  Just to conclude, I would like to request this House that, if we proceed this way, we shall not have proceeded well.
My request is that can we not punish a business, which is paying taxes to this country; a business, which some of us from constituencies that grow tobacco our peasants depend on.

Can we stop being unfair by legislating like this and find a middle ground. And I am saying we stand over the issue of display and we compare notes.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman and honourable members, to decide what we want to put in this law depends on what it is we want to achieve by enacting this law.

The objective of this law is to protect the present and future generations from the devastating health, social, economic and environmental consequences of tobacco use and exposure.

When you say an item should not be sold as duty free, you mean that it should be slightly higher than a duty free item. If our objective is to restrict the consumption of tobacco, then there is nothing wrong with legislating that we do not sell it as a duty-free item. Selling an item as duty free connotes that it is silently lower than it would otherwise sold if there was duty on it. Therefore, let us look back at what we want to achieve; what to do we want? It is not banning but we are saying if you have to take tobacco at least pay – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What about the issue of display? 

MR RUKUTANA: Well display is okay; we have handled that. 

In conclusion, to me, whether we maintain it as duty-free item or not depends on what we want to achieve and what we want to achieve is to reduce the consumption and use of tobacco.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are on the sell and display of tobacco and tobacco products. In clause 15 (4)(c) should it be duty free or not? Can we take a decision on that before come back to deal with the whole clause?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, thank you, very much. I had assumed by colleagues always travel. The moment you cross the customs point, you are an international passenger. That is why in that area they say, all items sold there are duty free and if I cannot get it as duty-free item here and I am going to Kenya, I will get it there. So, there is no reason for you to make something expensive here when a person can get it cheaply at the next stage. I would like to you look at it that way.

I thought the Attorney-General would say - because he was in the ministry of finance - the reason why they allowed those people to deal in duty-free was to enable them compete with other countries with duty-free items. 

In that context, Mr Chairman, items sold as duty-free are not necessarily cheap; sometimes, they are even more expensive; it depends on where you are.

However, the issue of withdrawing tax is to make it cheaper because tax will not have been levied and I agree with you, Attorney-General. So, in this regard, we have no comparative advantage if we do not allow them duty-free items. People will either get them in London or - the only thing we can do is that this duty free should be restricted may be to one or two packets or just not more than a certain amount of packets. Otherwise, we cannot decide to tax ours when they can be got cheaply elsewhere. 

The minister said that people can buy them, yes, that person will be coming from some country and they could decide to buy it from where they come because they know where they are going it is expensive or not allowed. So, unless you are saying that as soon as people arrive and they are carrying cigarettes, they must declare them. We have many travellers like the ministers, buying things at the duty-free shops in bundles and they do not pay taxes because they know that it is very expensive at home. Therefore, this duty free should be allowed for tourists for comparative advantage.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. This time round, Parliament is debating this particular matter in a very confusing way and I would like you to guide me. I do remember very well that this is a Private Member’s Bill. However, the support and defence it is getting from the government ministers is also disturbing. 

The movers of the Bill have already conceded to a clause but the government ministers, who did not bring the Bill to Parliament, still insist we maintain the clause. 

The procedural matter I would like to raise is: Are we proceeding on well when we have the movers of the Bill conceding to a certain clause but the government ministers, who did not bring the Bill, are busy opposing the movers and insisting that we adopt their position as Cabinet yet this is not Cabinet Bill? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is the committee stage; committee of the whole House – (Laughter)– and this Bill is property of the Whole House. It can do whatever it wants to do with it.

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to agree with the position of the committee because when I read the objects of the Bill, I realise that they are not about banning tobacco. 

Honourable members, yes we are seeking to regulate but we also have to be very conscious not to affect other sectors. The laws we pass here have got deep repercussions to other sectors. When you have a tourist who wants to come to Uganda and read this law, they can decide to stop in Nairobi. That means we will have missed out on such tourists.

When we talk about duty free, just like a colleague has advanced the reasoning, somebody will go to Nairobi and Uganda will become a dumping place because we are making the situation and conditions here very difficult. 

I would like to request members, not to reach our biting arms to what we are not intending to. Let us maintain the position of the committee, after all we have already passed that advertising on the packets will be 80 per cent. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to put the question to the deletion of clause 15 (4) (c). I am putting the question for the deletion of that paragraph. I put the question to that paragraph.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to move an amendment on sub clauses 1, 2 and 3. Let me start with sub clause 1. It talks about the Fourth Schedule. I am not so sure that we shall pass the Fourth Schedule as you proposed - I am worried - supposing we delete it, what happens to sub clause 1? 

My proposal is that clause 15(1) is stood over until we are done with Fourth Schedule to this Bill.

The second one is sub clause 2. Mr Chairman, something electronic - what is the problem? No smoking - I am happy that Uganda Electricity Board used to run an advert saying “use power smoke free.” 

Now this time they are bringing cigarette which is electronic in nature and will not produce smoke and as you know, our problem has been smoke. So, why do you want to stop the no-smoke cigarettes yet you know this will encourage smoking? 

Sub clause 2 should be deleted because we should encourage electronic smoking that will not produce smoke for –(Interjection)- let me make my case - with Nicotine, they will smoke it and later swallow it because it only affects them and not the third party this time; it only affects the smoker. 

The third one is in regard to sub clause 3. Mr Chairman, they are saying there should be no display, but what will happen? 

I am in a supermarket buying cigarettes; the salesman is advising me that this one is sweet and the other is hard and the other one is this percentage – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I need members who are interested in this Bill- and I am sure all of you are – to do consultation so that this Bill can move forward. Motion for the House to Resume.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.12
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the Whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.12
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled: “The Tobacco Control Bill, 2014” and passed clause 14 with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.13
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the Report of the Committee of the Whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have a concern with this Bill and also with other Bills that we have been able to pass. 

It is not the responsibility of Parliament to re-draft Bills; either there is a problem with our technical people who draft these Bills or there is something fundamentally wrong with the way we are processing this Bill.

We used to apply a standard where if the amendments to a Bill exceeded 50 per cent, that Bill would be withdrawn, re-drafted and re-introduced. This is because Parliament cannot draft a Bill. Processing Bills this way is more tedious than you will ever understand; it does not make sense to draft laws on the Floor of Parliament. 

There has to be a standard because this almost amounts to introducing an un-gazetted Bill. The sum total of it is that the Bill that will eventually pass will not be the one that will have been gazetted. We need to do something about this; it is becoming a big problem; amendments are more than the Bill. It does not make sense! Out of 49 clauses, we are amending 45 and introducing others; is it still the same Bill? 

So we are going to have to find a way of handling this Bill because it is very difficult to process these Bills the way they are; you can see we handled one clause the whole afternoon. We took two weeks processing 10 clauses. So we need another two months to finish the Bill. 

So what I am directing now is, the people interested in this Bill should sit down and agree on how we are going to proceed – agree on all those issues and resolve them and bring this Bill so that it can pass. This Bill is off the Order Paper until this matter is resolved. (Applause)

4.13
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We shall abide by your guidance – those of us who have interest but I want to add that a number of amendments are consequential amendments – just re-drafting – not very material. But I would also like to make a comment that this is the kind of experience all parliaments face when they are considering a tobacco-control Bill. Like I said there are irreconcilable conflicts between the promotion of public health and the interests of the tobacco industry. This has happened in all parliaments, including in Kenya –(Interjections) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I have allowed the member to speak.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I think it is important for you to benefit from this information. Mr Speaker, for instance, in the Parliament of Kenya, on the day when they were passing this Bill, there was a lot of disruption to defeat quorum; actually, some Members were taken to the beach and so forth. The same thing happened with Senegal and many other countries; this is not restricted to Uganda. But we shall abide by your guidance and sit down to try to harmonise so that we can move faster.

But I would also like to add that this Bill was drafted with the guidance of legal experts, including our own department of Legal and Legislative Services. Anyhow, we shall abide by your guidance and try to make the process – 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have the best interests of the people who have moved this Bill in mind; we cannot process it this way because it won’t work. For one hour, we have been on one clause; it cannot move that way. So let us consult, get back together because I want comprehensive reconciled amendments then we will move and in one afternoon we will finish. But for now- Let us move to the next item.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

4.16
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2015 be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by the Minister of Energy, Minister of State for Health, Member for Adjumani, Member for Vurra County, Member for West Budama North, Member for Bugabula and Member for Bamunanika. Please speak to your motion.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, you will recall that the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2015 was introduced in this House by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and read for the first time on 30 April 2015 and it was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. 

The object of the Bill is to amend the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda in accordance with Articles 259 and 262 of the Constitution. 

It is intended to change the name of the Electoral Commission to the Independent Electoral Commission; to prescribe a procedure for the removal of members of the Independent Electoral Commission, similar to the procedure for the removal of judicial officers; to increase the retirement age for judges and justices; to provide for the Judicial Service Commission to appoint certain staff of the Judiciary; to provide for corporate status for the Inspectorate of Government; to provide for the establishment of city land boards; to provide for a salaries and remunerations board; and to provide for other related matters.

Mr Speaker, the procedure for amendment of all the provisions proposed to be amended by this Bill is prescribed by Article 262 of the Constitution, which deals with amendments by Parliament. This includes approval at second and third readings of Parliament by not less than two-thirds of all Members of Parliament.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the process of amending the Constitution interests and involves very many stakeholders. The second reading of the Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, 2015 is not intended to foreclose receipt of ideas on the subject matter of the Bill. Therefore, Government will continue to welcome ideas and proposals from honourable Members of Parliament during the anticipated debate. Government will also continue to be receptive to proposals for additions or deletions from the Bill, subject to the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please allow me recognise pupils and teachers of Covenant Day and Boarding Primary School in the public gallery this afternoon. They are represented by hon. Jack Wamanga-Wamai and hon. Connie Galiwango. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers of Kubusa Secondary School, represented by hon. Wafula Oguttu and hon. Justine Lumumba Kasule. They have come to observe the proceedings too. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

We also have pupils and teachers of Nsujjumpolwe Islamic and Orphans’ Education Centre, represented by hon. Amelia Kyambadde and hon. Sarah Nakawunde. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

I am sorry, honourable minister, please proceed.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, the proposals intended to improve this Bill are welcome and we shall take very serious note of them. Therefore, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read the second time and do pass. As I said earlier, the Bill was referred to a committee and the committee has a report. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you say that it be passed? Did you say that it be read the second time and be passed?  (Laughter)

MR RUKUTANA: Be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, because we did not want to pass it at this stage. 

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I appreciate the motion but last Thursday, a list of Members was read on the Floor and I have realised that in the composition of the Members, one of my Members, hon. Brenda Nabukenya from DP, is missing. I am wondering how the name disappeared because I am the one who posts and removes them. I do not know how the name of my member disappeared from the committee. 

Before we proceed, I would like to know whether the people who signed this report are actual members and who approved them because the membership can only be approved by Parliament. My composition was very accurate. I made my submission to the Speaker and it was read on the Floor of Parliament but now one of my members is missing from the list. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it happened to be I who read the names of the members of different committees and by some coincidence, I still have that list. On the legal committee – I think I do not have that list. However, when the committee was being constituted, the final list was submitted here and there was consultation because the legal committee had more than 30 members and yet the rules dictate that they should be between 15 to 30 members. 

The Speaker, Rt. Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, consulted with the whip of the Democratic Party and they agreed on the withdrawal of the name of hon. Brenda Nabukenya from the list. So, that is how the name was removed. The communication was later brought and I did communicate here the final list of the members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs of 30 people. It was a fully consultative process and if the DP Whip did not inform the Opposition Chief Whip, then that may be a matter for internal reorganisation and information flow. That is what happened. So, can we proceed?

Honourable members, this matter was referred to the legal committee and that is the motion. Let me propose the question for your debate. The motion that I now propose for your debate is that the Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, 2015 be read the second time. That is the motion for your debate. As we kick off, we will hear from the legal committee, which interacted with people on this matter. They will report and then thereafter we can proceed with the debate on this matter. Chairperson of the legal committee; do we have two chairpersons? (Laughter) Chairperson, are you waiting for something? (Laughter) Don’t you have the report?

4.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): I thought that something had been removed but I have it. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is the committee report of the sessional Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2015.

The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2015 was read for the first time at the 27th Sitting of the Third Meeting of the Fourth Session of Parliament on 30 April 2015. The Bill was subsequently referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for scrutiny. 

Mr Speaker, permit me at this stage to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee, the submissions contained in the three files and also the majority and minority reports from the committee. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Speaker, Chapter 18 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides for the amendment of the Constitution. Article 259 provides as follows: “(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may amend by way of addition, variation or repeal, any provision of this Constitution in accordance with the procedure laid down in this Chapter. 
(2) This Constitution shall not be amended except by an Act of Parliament- 
(a) the sole purpose of which is to amend this Constitution; and 
(b) the Act has been passed in accordance with this Chapter.” 

The Chapter also specifies: 
(i) 	Amendments that require a referendum (Article 260); 
(ii) 	Amendments requiring the approval by the district councils (Article 261); and 
(iii) 	The quorum required for Parliament to pass Constitution amendments (Article 262).

The proposals contained in the Bill are only those that may be passed by Parliament as prescribed by Article 262 of the Constitution namely, “supported at the second and third readings by votes of not less than two thirds of all Members of Parliament.”

The committee extended an invitation to all interested parties through the media and meetings were held with all those that indicated interest in making submissions on the Bill. In the process of scrutinizing the Bill, the committee met and received memoranda from the following stakeholders:
1. 	Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs;
2. 	Electoral Commission;
3. 	Uganda Law Society;
4. 	Democratic Party;
5. 	Justice Forum – JEEMA; 
6. 	Forum for Democratic Change;
7. 	Law Reform Commission;
8. 	Family Life Network;
9. 	Kituo Cha Katiba – Centre for Constitutional Development;
10. 	Maragoli Community in Uganda;
11. 	Hon. Aleper Simon;
12. 	Hon. Tinkasimire Barnabas; 
13. 	Hon. Opolot Jacob;
14. 	Hon. Lulume Bayigga;
15. 	Foundation for Human Rights Initiative/CCEDU;
16. 	Free and Fair Elections Campaign; 
17. 	Political parties not represented in Parliament;
18. 	National Resistance Movement Organisation;
19. 	The Human Dignity Foundation;
20. 	Law Development Centre;
21. 	Centre for Health, Human Rights and Development (CEHURD);
22. 	Uganda Women’s Network (UWONET);
23. 	Legal Aid Service Providers’ Network (LASPNET);
24. 	Inter-Party Organization for Dialogue (IPOD);
25. 	Dialogue and Democracy Training Centre;
26. 	FIDA-Uganda;
27. 	Centre for Constitutional Governance;
28. 	Centre for Social and Economic Rights;
29. 	Uganda Health Consumers Association;
30. 	Uganda Joint Christian Council;
31. 	Prof. V. Baryamureeba;
32. 	Inter-Party Youth Platform;
33. 	Hon. John Mulimba;
34. 	Mr Ssebulime Willy; 
35.	Mr Nkubi Richard;
36. 	Mr Robert Atuhairwe;
37. 	Mr Isaac I. Lubega;
38. 	National Alliance for Change;
39. 	The Conservative Party;
40. 	M/s Kwesigabo, Bamwine and Walubiri Advocates;
41. 	The Paluo/Chope community in Uganda;
42. 	The Bayindi community in Uganda;
43. 	The Uganda-Banyarwanda Community;
44. 	Hon. A. N. Makubuya, the Minister of Justice in Buganda Kingdom;
45. 	The Industrial Court of Uganda; and
46. 	Prof. Gordon Wavamunno.


Regional Meetings

The committee held public meetings/workshops in the following districts:
    1. Masaka;
    2. Ntungamo;
    3. Kasese;
    4. Kabarole;
    5. Iganga;
    6. Mbale;
    7. Kapchorwa;
    8. Moroto;
    9. Gulu;
    10. Lira;
    11. Pader;
    12. Kitgum;
    13. Nakasongola;
    14. Masindi;
    15. Nebbi; and
    16. Arua.

It should be noted that due to time and resource constraints, the committee was not able to travel to all the districts in the country.

Regional Benchmarking

To better understand the implications of the proposals, the committee sent delegations to the Republic of Kenya and the United Republic of Tanzania. The visits helped the committee learn lessons on the independence of the Electoral Commission, Judicial reforms, determination of emoluments paid to public officials, the electoral process and related matters. The rationale for choosing these countries for the committee’s benchmarking, apart from the fact that they are within the East African Community, was that they are undergoing constitutional and electoral reforms as well.

Specifically, Mr Speaker, the rationale for choosing the Republic of Kenya was that it recently promulgated a new Constitution in 2010. The rationale for choosing the United Republic of Tanzania, on the other hand, was that it is an election year for them and they are also in the process of amending their Constitution. However, the process of amending the Constitution in the United Republic of Tanzania has been put on hold until after elections.

Scope of Work of the Committee

The committee, guided by the House, received submissions and proposals for amendments to the entire Constitution from various stakeholders. The committee received proposals specific to the Bill and also received submissions touching matters/provisions outside its scope.

Mr Speaker, the objective of the Bill has been alluded to by the minister when he was introducing it for second reading. So I now move to observations.

Observations

This section of the report states the constitutional provision being amended, the effect of the amendment on other constitutional provisions, the stakeholders’ views on the proposed amendment, a comparative analysis of similar provisions in other jurisdictions, an analysis of the proposed amendment, and the recommendation by the committee on the proposed amendments. 

Clause 1

Clause 1 of the Bill seeks to amend Article 60 of the Constitution as follows: 
    (a) by substituting for clause (1) the following:
“(1) There shall be a Commission called the Independent Electoral Commission, which shall consist of a chairperson, a deputy chairperson and such other members as Parliament shall by law prescribe, all of whom shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament.”

Constitutional Provision

Article 60(1) of the 1995 Constitution of Uganda reads as follows: “(1) There shall be an Electoral Commission which shall consist of a chairperson, a deputy chairperson and five other members appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament.”

Mr Speaker, the effects of the proposed amendment are: 
    a) change of name from “Electoral Commission” to “Independent Electoral Commission”; 
    b) the number of members of the Electoral Commission shall be determined by Parliament, by law. 

Effect on other provisions of the Constitution: Consequential amendment will be to the headnote of Article 60 of the Constitution and articles 61, 63(2), 64(1), 65, 67(1), 74(1) (c), 81(2),(4)and(5), 103(2)(a) and (7), 104(1), 105(6), 181(1), 255 and 263(2)(b).

Stakeholders’ Proposals regarding the Proposed Amendment to Article 60

The Electoral Commission

The Electoral Commission proposed that the name of the Electoral Commission should be “the Uganda Independent Electoral Commission” or the “the Independent Electoral Commission of Uganda.” The justification was that there was need to emphasize its identity as Uganda’s election body.

They also proposed to have the number of commissioners fixed in the Constitution rather than have them determined by Parliament. The justifications were: 
(a) 	that the other constitutional commissions, such as the Uganda Human Rights Commission, Judicial Service Commission, Public Service Commission etc., have their membership fixed in the Constitution; and 
(b) 	to enhance its independence.

The Uganda Law Society (ULS)
    a) The ULS agreed to have the name of the Electoral Commission changed to “the Independent Electoral Commission”. 
    b) They also said that the commissioners of the Independent Electoral Commission should serve for a period of seven years only and not be eligible for reappointment.
    c) They said that the commissioners should be outsourced by a selection committee or panel who recommend names for persons to be appointed by the President.
    d) The commissioners should be personally held liable for failure to take the necessary caution to hold a free and fair election. 
    e) Lastly, the Independent Electoral Commission should work with ex officio members, being representatives from the various political parties. 

The Law Reform Commission

Mr Speaker, below are the proposals from the Law Reform Commission:
    a) They agreed with the proposal to change the name of the Electoral Commission to include the word, “independent”.
    b) They proposed to have other aspects to strengthen the independence of the Electoral Commission such as putting in place an independent process for appointing persons as commissioners.
    c) They proposed to have a selection committee or panel to recommend people for the appointment by the President as commissioners. 
    d) They proposed that the appointment to the selection committee should be transparent and competitive and should be based on merit and preferably, through a process where the public may participate. 
    e) They proposed that the qualification for persons to be appointment as commissioners should also be laid out in the Constitution. 
    f) Finally, they agreed with the proposal to have the number of commissioners determined by Parliament by law.  

Opposition Political Parties 

These included the Forum for Democratic Party (FDC), the Democratic Party (DP), JEEMA and the Conservative Party (CP). 

    a) They agreed with the change of the name from Electoral Commission to National Independent Electoral Commission. 
    b) They, in addition, proposed that clause 1 should be amended by substituting it with a provision to read as follows: “(1) There shall be an Electoral Commission that shall consist of the following: 
        i) The chairperson who shall be a person qualified to be a Judge of the High Court of Uganda; 
        ii) The deputy chairperson who shall be a person qualified to be a Judge of the High Court; 
        iii) Nine commissioners appointed by the Judicial Service Commission.”
    c) They further proposed that a new clause 1(b) be inserted,    immediately after clause 1(a) to read as follows: “The members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Judicial Service Commission.” 

The Dialogue and Democracy Training Centre
Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Dialogue and Democracy Training Centre proposed that the number of the other members of the Electoral Commission should be specified in the Constitution and the number of commissioners increased from the current five to seven members. 

Citizens Coalition for Electoral Democracy in Uganda 

These welcomed the amendment to change the name of the Electoral Commission to the Independent Electoral Commission. They argued that this will be in line with Article 62 of the Constitution, which obligates the commission to uphold independence in the performance of its functions. However, it reasoned that without reviewing the current mode of appointing commissioners, the name change would merely be cosmetic. 

They proposed that the independence of the Electoral Commission should be guaranteed through a more transparent manner of appointment, security of tenure of commissioners and their powers as well as financial independence. 

They also proposed that the provision should also prescribe the qualifications required for a person before he or she is appointed a commissioner. They further proposed that the composition of the Electoral Commission should reflect the diversity of skills and social demographics, including legal, communication and corporate management knowledge. 

They further proposed that the appointment of commissioners should be made more transparent through advertising and interviews conducted by an independent body such as the Judicial Service Commission, and names submitted to the President for nomination and thereafter approval by Parliament. 
 
The National Resistance Movement 
This group agreed with the proposal to change the name.

FIDA – Uganda: 

They agreed with the proposal to change the name of the Electoral Commission. However, they observed that a change of name is insufficient to guarantee its independence.
 
They further observed that there is need for substantive changes to the composition, criteria and process of selection, appointment and removal of commissioners, and term of office to make the Electoral Commission independent as was recommended by the 1994 Report on the Uganda Constitutional Commission.  

They further proposed that the Electoral Commission should be made up of an equal number of women and men, not including the chairperson who may be female or male. 

National Alliance for Change 

The National Alliance for Change proposed that appointment of the members of the Electoral Commission be by the President and that the Public Service Commission be the gazetting, advertising, interviewing and selection body of electoral commissioners for onward transmission to Parliament for approval.

They also proposed that the chairperson and at least two other commissioners should be Judges of the High Court or retired Judges, with no less than fifteen years of legal experience for the chairperson and 10 years for the other two.  The rest of the commissioners could be from any other disciplines but qualified to be appointed Permanent Secretary of a government ministry.

The Law Development Centre

The Law Development Centre agreed to the change of the name of the Electoral Commission to the Independent Electoral Commission. However, they were of the view that what is required is not a mere change of the name of the Electoral Commission but an enhancement of its independence through a transparent process of appointment by preferably the Judicial Service Commission. The positions should be openly advertised, interviews conducted and the successful party sent to the President for appointment.
 
They also proposed that the qualifications of commissioners should be clearly spelt out in the Constitution. 

Regional Public Meetings 

All the regions consulted agreed with the proposal to change the name because the current name, Electoral Commission, does not convey the body as an independent, impartial and fair referee that can freely preside over elections and referenda. They also proposed that it was important to consider the appointment process and terms of service of the commissioners as well as the secretariat staff at all levels to enable openness and transparency.

Analysis 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we would like to report that most of the stakeholders were in agreement with the proposal to change the name. Many of the stakeholders were of the additional view that much as the independence of the Electoral Commission has to be explicitly recognised in its name, a change in name is insufficient. The independence of the Electoral Commission is enshrined in Article 62 of the Constitution, which requires that the Electoral Commission shall be independent and shall, in the performance of its functions, not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority.

Apart from the above constitutional provision, Uganda is a signatory to a number of international treaties, protocols and non-legal documents obligating it to put in place, among others, independent electoral institutions. Uganda is a signatory to the African Charter on Democracy, Election and Governance, 2007, which among others obligates signatory states to establish and strengthen independent and impartial national electoral management bodies.  

More so, Uganda consented to the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) Declaration on democracy, political, economic and corporate governance, which enjoins signatories to, among others, strengthen and where necessary establish appropriate electoral administration and oversight bodies in their respective countries and provide the necessary resources and capacity to conduct elections which are free, fair and credible. 

Furthermore, Mr Speaker and honourable members, the African Union Declaration on the Principles Governing Democratic Elections adopted by the heads of state and government at the 38th Ordinary Session of the Organisation of African Unity on the 8th Day of July 2002 in Durban, South Africa, enjoins signatory states to, among others, create impartial, all-inclusive competent accountable electoral institutions staffed by well-trained personnel and equipped with adequate logistics. 

In addition to the above, the African Union as well as other international and regional associations and bodies have come up with principles and guidelines on the independence of the election management bodies to be considered in establishing an election management body. They include: 

1. Appointment and Composition of the Electoral Management Body (EMB)

This tenet requires that the electoral commissioners are hired through a transparent public appointment process that enlists wider stakeholder consultation and a more inclusive approval mechanism that instils public confidence in the capacity of the commissioners and their ability to operate autonomously and professionally. This kind of process is designed to fulfil principles of a merit-based selection, dependent on a competitive application process. 

This recruitment procedure ensures public participation in the appointments process and dispels any would-be claims of bias and favouritism by the appointing authority. Beyond identifying a professional team, this process strengthens the credibility and legitimacy of the commissioners and portends well with the public’s trust in the institution of the electoral management body.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, do you intend to read the whole report? 

MR TASHOBYA: I think it is important.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To read word by word? Okay; we will still rise at 6 O’clock. Please, proceed. 

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Speaker, this is what we found out in the different jurisdictions that we considered in this Bill:

In the Republic of Kenya, the new constitutional framework reviewed the appointment process of the commissioners and entrenched a competitive merit-based open recruitment procedure for all Commissioners of the Independent Election and Boundaries Commission. The recruitment process is handled by a highly specialised selection panel, comprising of seven persons who are nominated as follows: 
(a) 	two persons, a man and woman, by the President; 
    (b) two persons, a man and woman, by the Prime Minister;
    (c) one person by the Judicial Service Commission; 
    (d) one person by the Kenya Anti-Corruption Advisory Board; and 
    (e) one person by the Association of Professional Societies of East Africa. 

The panel invites applications from qualified individuals with clear qualifications outlined, conducts public interviews and thereafter shortlists three names for the post of Chairperson of the Commission and 13 for commissioners, which it recommends to the President. The President selects a chairperson and eight commissioners from the list, who are thereafter presented to Parliament for subsequent vetting and approval. 

In the Republic of Rwanda, the National Electoral Commission is provided for under Article 180 of the Constitution of Rwanda and is appointed by the President. The President nominates seven names to the Senate for approval. The seven commissioners are drawn from different political parties and civil societies in Rwanda. At least two of the seven members must be lawyers and at least 30 per cent must be women. 

In the United Republic of Tanzania, the Constitution, under Article 74, establishes the National Electoral Commission of Tanzania. The commissioners are appointed by the President. The chairperson and the vice-chairperson must be Judges of the High Court or the Court of Appeal of Tanzania. The other members must be chosen from the Tanganyika Law Society and the other four members must have experience in the conduct or supervision of parliamentary elections or other qualifications considered necessary by the President for the effective performance of the Commission’s functions.  

In Burundi, the Independent National Electoral Commission – (Laughter) - is established under Article 85 of the Burundian Constitution. It is composed of five people appointed by a presidential decree –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, may I be protected from hon. Ssekikubo? I thought there is one in Burundi. In Burundi, the Independent National Electoral Commission is established under Article 85 of the Burundian Constitution and is composed of five people appointed by a presidential decree after the members have been ratified by the National Assembly and the Senate with a 75 per cent majority each. 

In Ghana, Article 43 of the Constitution of Ghana establishes the Electoral Commission of Ghana which consists of the chairperson, two deputy chairpersons and four other members of the commission who are appointed by the President in consultation with the Council of State. The Council of State is a body of prominent citizens, analogous to a council of elders in the traditional political system, which advises the President on national issues. 

In South Africa, the Constitution establishes the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) under Article 190. The IEC is composed of five members, one of whom is a Judge and appointed by the President on the recommendation of the National Assembly, following nominations by the National Assembly Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, which is equivalent to a parliamentary committee. The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs examines a list of at least eight nominations submitted by a panel consisting of the President of the Constitutional Court as the chairperson and representatives of the Human Rights Commission, the Commission on Gender Equality and the Public Prosecutor. 

In Uganda, the Electoral Commission is established under Article 60 of the Constitution, consisting of a chairperson, a deputy chairperson and five other members appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament. This appointment process is in line with the best practices since the commissioners are nominated by the President before being vetted and approved by Parliament. 

The Appointments Committee of Parliament scrutinises the nominated persons’ academic qualifications and suitability for positions for which they are nominated before being approved.  Indeed, in the past, any member of the public who may have had any misgivings about a presidential nominee has written to the Appointments Committee and these views have been investigated and given due consideration.

2. Qualifications of Commissioners

Given the sensitivity of electoral matters, the laws providing for these matters must provide clear qualification requirements to guarantee that persons appointed have the necessary experience, qualifications and independence to execute their duty. The law must categorically lay out ascertainable quantitative and qualitative qualifications in respect of age, citizenship, academic credentials, professional background, work experience and issues of political orientation. This will inherently address the question of perception of bias or impartiality by those appointed as commissioners and aptly deal with the professional demands of the commission. 

In the United Republic of Tanzania, the electoral management body is composed of professionals with diverse skills and qualifications. The chairperson and the deputy chairperson have to be Judges of the High Court or Court of Appeal who have held such a position for a period of not less than 15 years while the other members are drawn from professional bodies such as the Law Society of Tanzania. 

In Ghana, members of the electoral management body must be persons qualified to be Members of Parliament of Ghana. In Rwanda, Article 11 of Law 31/2005 relating to the organisation and functioning of the Electoral Commission requires that a person to be appointed as a commissioner must be a person of integrity and must be a holder of a Bachelor’s degree from a university or from a state recognised higher learning institution. 

Mr Speaker, in Kenya, Section 6 of the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission Act requires that the chairperson of the Commission shall be a person qualified to hold office of a Judge of the Supreme Court. For the other members of the Commission, a person is qualified for appointment if they hold a degree from a recognised university or have relevant experience in electoral matters, management, finance, governance, public administration and law.  

In Uganda, Article 60(2) of the Constitution requires that members of the commission shall be persons of high moral character, proven integrity and must possess considerable experience and demonstrated competence in the conduct of public affairs. To this end, Uganda is compliant as far as prescribing qualifications for members of the Electoral Commission. Indeed, the current Electoral Commission is composed of professionals, including doctorate holders in the field of languages, a lawyer, an engineer, an accountant and a seasoned politician. This diverse array of skills ensures that the Electoral Commission is professionally run and is highly qualified in public management. The vetting by Parliament ensures this. 

3. Term of office

The term of office of the members of the electoral management body must be long enough to encourage professionals to apply for these posts but short enough to prevent complacency and abuse. The duration of the term of the members of the electoral management body must be balanced with the need to attract professionals as well as ensuring institutional continuity. 

There are dangers associated with short-term renewable terms of office for the commissioners in electoral management bodies. One of the dangers is that commissioners tend to view the potential reappointment as an incentive to make politically convenient decisions that will ultimately provide them with a safety net of a reappointment by the appointing authority. To avoid the dangers associated with reappointment, it is important to give a relatively lengthier timeframe of appointment, like seven years, like it is for the Uganda Electoral Commission but entrench a legal caveat against non-renewal of appointment after expiration of the commissioner’s term of office.

The following table provides a comparative overview of the length of tenure and term of office for the electoral commissioners in East Africa. In Burundi, members of the National Electoral Commission have three-year terms which are renewable without restriction. Comparatively, Burundi maintains the most liberal terms of office for its commissioners. In Kenya, members of the IEBC are eligible to one term of six years. In Rwanda, commissioners hold office for a term of three years but renewable once. In Tanzania, members of the National Electoral Commission are appointed to a single term of five years.

Mr Speaker, in Uganda, Article 60 (3) of the Constitution requires electoral commissioners to hold office for seven years but their appointment can be renewed for one more term. Uganda complies with this tenet owing to the fact that commissioners serve for a pre-determined term of office. Even where they are reappointed, their reappointment is not automatic but subject to vetting and approval by Parliament. At this point, Parliament vets the performance of the commissioners during the preceding term to satisfy itself of the suitability of the member for reappointment.    

4. Security of Tenure

Security of tenure for members of electoral management bodies must be guaranteed. Security of tenure is aimed at ensuring that members of electoral management bodies can make decisions without fear of being dismissed or mistreated. To ensure security of tenure, members of the electoral management bodies must be protected from arbitral acts of the appointing authority or those in power. This means, therefore, that the security of tenure of electoral management bodies must be enshrined in the enabling law, which may prescribe circumstances under which those members can leave their offices. 

In Kenya, for instance, Article 251 of the Constitution of Kenya lays down a procedure for removal of a commissioner. A person desiring to remove a commissioner has to petition the National Assembly, which then considers the grounds of the petition and refers the matter to the President. The President appoints an independent tribunal to expeditiously investigate and report on the matter. The tribunal investigates and makes recommendations to the President, who has to act on the recommendations of the tribunal within 30 days from the day he or she receives the tribunal report. 

Mr Speaker, in the United Republic of Tanzania, Article 74 of the Constitution of the United Republic of Tanzania requires that Electoral Commissioners can only be removed from office by the President for failure to discharge their functions either due to illness or misconduct. In Ghana, once appointed, members of the Electoral Commission of Ghana cannot be dismissed except on grounds of infirmity or insanity after certification by an independent medical board. Such guarantees safeguard members from possibilities of any undue removal from office by the Executive or any other stakeholders that could easily have direct interest in the electoral affairs. 

In South Africa, Section 7 (3) of the Electoral Commission Act requires that members of the election management body of South Africa can only be removed from office by the President on the grounds of misconduct, incapacity or incompetence and after a finding to that effect by a committee of the National Assembly, upon the recommendation of the Electoral Court. The recommendation to remove a member of the election management body must be adopted by a majority of the members of that Assembly by a resolution, calling for that Commissioner's removal from office. 

In Rwanda, electoral commissioners can be removed on presidential orders. (Laughter) In Uganda, security of tenure for electoral commissioners is guaranteed under Article 60(8) of the Constitution, which requires that a member of the commission may only be removed from office by the President only for the reasons provided thereunder, which are similar to those of other constitutional offices. These reasons are: inability to perform the functions of his or her office arising out of physical or mental incapacity, misbehaviour or misconduct or incompetence. 

This has been further entrenched in the proposed amendment, clause 1(b), which requires that the question as to whether a member of the Electoral Commission should be removed from office has to be referred to an independent tribunal to investigate. Article 65 of the Constitution also grants the electoral commissioners powers to appoint staff of the Commission which enhances its independence. 

5. Conditions of service

Mr Speaker, international best practice requires that the conditions of service of the electoral management body should be guaranteed, to ensure that the body can perform its functions without difficulty. In most cases, the salaries and remuneration of members of the electoral management bodies is entrusted in the hands of an independent body or determined by Parliament. This not only assures the electoral management body of their benefits and salaries during their term of office but also protects them from any undue influence. 

In the Republic of Kenya, conditions of service of members of the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission are determined by an independent body, which is, the Salaries and Remuneration Commission established under the Salaries and Remunerations Act, 2011. In Ghana, the conditions of service of commissioners are benchmarked to those of the High Court Judges. In South Africa, the conditions of service of commissioners are determined by the President after consultations with the Commissions on Remuneration of Representatives. 

In Uganda, Article 66(1) of the Constitution requires that Parliament ensures adequate resources and facilities are provided for the Electoral Commission to enable it perform its functions effectively. Furthermore, Article 66(3) of the Constitution guarantees the administrative expenses of the Electoral Commission such as salaries, allowances and pension are charged on the Consolidated Fund. 

It should be noted that clause 11 of the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2015 proposes to put in place a Salaries and Remunerations Board which shall determine the salaries of all public officers and other persons whose salaries or allowances are paid from the Consolidated Fund. This will enhance their independence by ensuring that their salaries and allowances are determined by an independent body.  

6. Funding of the Electoral Commission

The laws governing the funding of the electoral management body should establish an appropriate, secure and transparent framework that enables the institution to effectively execute its mandate. The law must offer the Election Commission structural leverage in determining its priorities and adequate budget.

In Kenya, section 18 of the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission Act establishes the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission Fund to which monies appropriated from Parliament and other sources can be deposited for purposes of meeting the financial needs of the Commission. In Ghana, the legislature has no power to alter or reject any part of the Electoral Commission’s proposed budget. Its funding is a separate line item in the national budget, released directly to the Commission by the Treasury.

In Nigeria and the Seychelles, some parts of the Electoral Commission’s budget cannot be altered by the Executive or the Legislature. Costs to general elections, voter education and voter registration should be considered for placement under the protected category. 

In Uganda, the Constitution in Article 66 grants the Electoral Commission a self-accounting status. Indeed, the Odoki Commission observed thus: “One factor that can easily be overlooked but which can be detrimental to the independence and impartiality of the Electoral Commission is the lack of resources to carry out its functions”. It is important that the Government should provide all the necessary resources. 

To underscore the importance of availing the Electoral Commission with adequate resources, the Commission proposed that there should be a constitutional provision to that effect. This was actually provided for under Article 66 of the Constitution which, among others, requires that Parliament provides adequate resources and facilities are provided to the Commission to enable it to perform its functions effectively. 

7. Powers of Electoral Management Bodies

The electoral law must grant the electoral management bodies strong powers relating to management and regulation of elections. These include security, candidates/political parties’ coverage in the media, conduct of candidates, use of money resources in campaigns and so on. Where the laws are not of a specific nature, the manner in which the listed areas are managed could have a bearing on whether an election is considered as free and or fair.

Mr Speaker, the Kenyan Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission Act, 2011 is more explicit and provides express authority to the commission. For example the Act, inter alia, provides the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission powers to order the arrest and prosecution of Cabinet ministers, their assistants and other government officials who use official vehicles for their campaigns and impound such vehicles and or punishments/resources. 

It also grants powers to the commission to order the arrest, prosecution and or punishment of a person who breaks electoral laws. The electoral law must define the commission’s investigative and sanctioning powers in specific terms. The actions and duties which the electoral management body is empowered to perform must also be drafted in a definitive, exact and plain manner.

In Uganda, Article 61 of the Constitution mandates the Electoral Commission to ensure that regular free and fair elections are held. Furthermore, various electoral laws such as the Electoral Commission Act (Cap. 140), the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 and the Presidential Elections Act, 2005 generally grant the Electoral Commission power to ensure free and fair elections. 

From the above criteria, the current Electoral Commission of Uganda largely meets the benchmarks for an Independent Elections Management Body. The current electoral management body should be allowed to fulfil its mandate of ensuring that free and fair elections are held. The committee observed that there is a sufficient, constitutional and legal provision for conducting credible, free and fair elections. 

Recommendations

The committee recommends that Article 60 of the Constitution be amended as proposed in the Bill.
(b) By inserting immediately after clause (8) the following —
 “(9) 	Any question for the removal of a member of the Independent Electoral Commission shall be referred to a tribunal appointed by the President, and the President may remove the member if the tribunal recommends that the member should be removed on any of the grounds specified in clause (8) of this Article.

(10) 	Where the question for removal of a member involves an allegation that the member of the Independent Electoral Commission is incapable of performing the functions of his or her office arising from physical or mental incapacity, the President shall, on the advice of the head of the Health Services of Uganda, appoint a medical board which shall investigate the matter and report its findings to the President with a copy to the tribunal.

(11) 	Where a tribunal is appointed by the President under clause (9) of this Article in respect of any member of the Independent Electoral Commission, the President shall suspend that member from performing the functions of his or her office.

(12) 	A suspension under clause (11) of this Article shall cease to have effect if the tribunal advises the President that the member suspended should not be removed.”

Effect of the Proposed Amendment

Whereas the Constitution provides the grounds upon which a member of the Independent Electoral Commission should be removed, the proposed amendment seeks to put in place a procedure through which the member may be removed. 

Stakeholders’ Proposals

The Electoral Commission
The Electoral Commission observed that the proposed amendment, specifically the proposed Article 60(9), was not in line with the object of the Bill and needed to be realigned with the object. 

The object of the Bill was to prescribe a procedure for the removal of members of the Independent Electoral Commission, similar to the procedure for the removal of judicial officers. In that regard, the Electoral Commission opined that clause (9) falls short in achieving that objective and advised the committee to reconsider it. It therefore proposed that the removal of a commissioner of the Independent Electoral Commission should take the same steps as that adopted in the removal of a judicial officer. 

The Law Reform Commission

The Law Reform Commission agreed with the proposal to have the removal process of a commissioner established in the Constitution. They reasoned that this will ensure the independence of the commissioners. The National Resistance Movement agreed with the proposal.

Citizens Coalition for Electoral Democracy in Uganda (CEDDU) welcomed the proposed amendment as an important procedural safeguard for commissioners against possibility of any undue interference or removal from office by the Executive. 

The Law Development Centre agreed that the removal of commissioners should be similar to the removal of members of the Judiciary as provided for under Article 144(2),(3) and (4) of the Constitution.  

Regional Meetings

The majority of citizens that interacted with the committee welcomed the proposed amendment as an important procedural safeguard for commissioners against possibilities of any undue interference or removal from office by the Executive. 

Where commissioners are appointed and can easily be dismissed by the head of the Executive - that is the President in most countries - they easily become susceptible to political pressure.

Analysis

Under Article 60(8) of the Constitution, the President may remove a member of the commission for any of the reasons specified. However, there is no due process provided for the removal of the commissioners. The proposed amendment seeks to streamline the process of removal of the Electoral Commissioners. 

Therefore, a process that involves appointment of a tribunal to investigate and make appropriate recommendations for the removal of the electoral commissioners is necessary. This would guarantee security of tenure for the Electoral Commissioners, thereby enabling them to make decisions without fear of arbitrary removal from office or victimization in any way. 

This process would further strengthen the independence of the Electoral Commission in that the President can only appoint a tribunal after an independent body has investigated and found it appropriate that a Member of the Electoral Commission should be further investigated, with a view of making a recommendation as to whether such a member should be removed or not.  

The committee recommends that Article 60 of the Constitution be amended as proposed in the Bill.

2. Amendment of Article 72 of the Constitution

Article 72 of the Constitution is amended:-
    (a) By substituting for the headnote the following “Right to form political parties or political organizations”

Effect of the proposed amendment

The proposed amendment intends to allow persons the right to form political parties or political organizations. It should be noted that the body of Article 72 of the Constitution already allows a person to establish a political party or organization. Therefore, this amendment is intended to bring the headnote in line with the body of that Article and make it clear. 

Stakeholder’s proposals

The Electoral Commission agreed to the proposal and the Citizens Coalition for Electoral Democracy in Uganda, supported the proposed amendment.

The Dialogue and Democracy Training Centre were of the view that the headnote falls short in describing the content of the Article; that it only provides for the right to form political parties and organisation yet the Article provides for regulation of political parties including financing and functioning, the right to stand for election and the regulation of the manner of participation in and financing elections. 

They therefore proposed that the headnote be amended to provide for the right to form political parties and organisations, the right to stand for elections and regulation of political party financing and financing of elections. 

The Opposition comprising of the FDC, DP, JEEMA and CP supported the proposal and in our analysis, we think that the proposal will make the provision clearer. 

The committee agrees to the proposal and recommends that it should be adopted. 

(b) By substituting for clause (4) the following:-
“(4) A person may stand for election as a candidate independent of a political party or political organization if that person is supported by the signatures of at least 1,000 registered voters in the constituency, in the case of members directly elected to represent constituencies or district and in the case of district women representatives.”

Current Constitutional Provision 

Any person is free to stand for an election as a candidate, independent of a political organization or political party.

The effect of the proposed amendment

The amendment essentially requires that for a person to stand as independent Member of Parliament, he or she has to be supported by at least 1,000 registered voters in the constituencies. 

Stakeholder’s proposals

The Electoral Commission voiced concerns over the proposal requiring a person who intends to contest as an independent member in an election to be supported by 1,000 registered voters from the constituencies in which he or she intends to stand. It questioned whether the same requirement would apply to persons standing at local government level.

The commission also questioned why persons sponsored by political parties or organisations are only required to be supported by 20 persons, yet independent candidates are required to present 1,000 signatures. 

The Law Reform Commission

The commission sought clarification as to whether the requirement applies to independent presidential candidates, independent Members of Parliament or local council candidates. 

The commission also noted that this provision infringes on Article 21 of the Constitution, since it has the effect of treating different persons differently by setting different standards and applying them to candidates vying for the same constituency. 

The Opposition - FDC, DP, JEEMA and CP disagreed with this amendment to Article 72 (4) of the Constitution since it is discriminatory and contrary to Articles 21 and 29 (1)(a),(d) and (e) of the Constitution and therefore should be deleted. 

The CCEDU found issue with the proposed amendment reasoning that the requirement that independent candidates be supported by signatures of 1,000 registered voters in the area they intend to stand, is an affront to Article 21 of the Constitution which calls for the equality of all persons before the law. 

They therefore proposed that all candidates be required to produce 10 signatures before being nominated. 

The Dialogue and Democracy Training Centre proposed that this amendment be dropped by the committee. They argued that the proposed amendment is restrictive and unfair and it doesn’t facilitate the growth of democracy. The fact that party members are opting to run as independents should be enough motivation for political parties to have internal reforms and transparent process and procedure. 

FIDA rejected the proposal made by Government to require 1,000 signatures from independent candidates. FIDA reasoned that it is discriminatory against the independent candidates and forces them to associate with political parties and infringes on the right to privacy of the voters, who would be indirectly forced to reveal the candidate they support yet secret ballot is constitutionally protected under Article 68(1) of the Constitution. 

The Law Development Centre rejected the proposed amendment since it is discriminatory in nature. 

Analysis

The above amendment appears to discriminate against the independent candidates, as far as subjecting them to collect 1,000 signatures yet candidates backed by political parties collect only 20 signatures. 

This would be viewed as being contrary to Article 21 1),(2) and (3) of the Constitution. Specifically, Article 21(1), (2), (3) reads as follows:- 
“
    (1) All persons are equal before and under the law in all spheres of political, economic, social and cultural life and in every other respect and shall enjoy equal protection of the law. 
    (2) Without prejudice to clause (1) of this Article, a person shall not be discriminated against on the ground of sex, race, colour, ethnic origin, tribe, birth, creed or religion, social or economic standing, political opinion or disability. 
    (3) For the purposes of this Article, “discriminate” means to give different treatment to different persons attributable only or mainly to their respective descriptions by sex, race, colour, ethnic origin, tribe, birth, creed or religion, social or economic standing, political opinion or disability.”

Mr Speaker, a candidate who chooses to stand for elective office independent of a political party or organization has expressed an opinion that he or she will not belong to any political party or organisation. Therefore, to require that the independent member should collect 1,000 signatures to support his or her candidature yet the same does not apply to candidates sponsored by a political party or organisation would be discriminatory and contrary to Article 21 of the Constitution.   

The committee recommends that the proposal be dropped with the justification that it is discriminatory. 

3. Amendment of Article 81 of the Constitution.

The proposed amendment to Article 81 is as follows:-
(a) By substituting for clause (2) the following;
“Whenever a vacancy occurs in Parliament, the Clerk to Parliament shall notify the Independent Electoral Commission in writing within ten days after the vacancy has occurred; and a by-election shall be held within sixty days after the Independent Electoral Commission has received notification of the vacancy from the Clerk to Parliament.”

The current constitutional provisions read as follows:
“Whenever a vacancy exists in Parliament, the Clerk to Parliament shall notify the Electoral Commission in writing within ten days after the vacancy has occurred; and a by-election shall be held within sixty days after the vacancy has occurred.”

Effect of the Amendment

The amendment requires that a by-election for a Member of Parliament is to be held within 60 days after the Independent Electoral Commission has received notification of the vacancy from the Clerk to Parliament. Currently, the Constitution requires that a by-election for a Member of Parliament is held 60 days after the vacancy has occurred. 

Stakeholder’s views

Law Reform Commission agreed with the proposal and asked for its adoption since it will give the Electoral Commission sufficient time for conducting a by-election. 

The Forum for Democratic Change (FDC), DP, JEEMA, CP; they found this development unique and untenable. In their view, enlarging the period under which the constituency shall be unrepresented is to disfranchise the voters of their constitutional rights of their representation. 

Citizens Coalition for Electoral Democracy in Uganda (CEDDU) welcomed the proposed amendment since it recognised that there is need to provide adequate time for the Electoral Commission to organise a by-election. 

Analysis

The mischief has been that sometimes, by the time the Electoral Commission is notified by the Clerk to Parliament, the time within which to conduct the election is not sufficient to hold a by-election. 

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the proposal be adopted.

(b) A proposal to insert immediately after clause (2), the following:
“Where the seat of a Member of Parliament is declared vacant by a court —
    (a) the Registrar of the Court shall transmit to the Clerk to Parliament a copy of the judgment of the court within 10 days after the declaration; and
    (b) the Clerk to Parliament shall notify the Independent Electoral Commission in writing of the vacancy within 10 days after receiving the judgment from the Registrar of the Court.”

The Effect of the proposed amendment
    1. The effect is that it requires the Registrar of the Court that has declared a Member of Parliament’s seat vacant to transit the judgment of court to the Clerk to Parliament within 10 days after declaration. 
    2. The proposal further requires the Clerk to Parliament to notify the Independent Electoral Commission of the vacancy within 10 days after receiving notification. 

The stakeholders’ views from FDC, DP, JEEMA and CP

The Opposition disagreed with the proposal, reasoning that the current provision is sufficient and should be retained. They reasoned that whenever a vacancy appears in Parliament through the court process, the successful party extracts a decree and serves it to the Clerk. Nowhere can a judgment be enforced without extracting a decree. This amendment is therefore unnecessary. 

Citizens Coalition for Electoral Democracy in Uganda (CEDDU) was of the view that the time for notification of the Electoral Commission should be standardised at 10 days. 

The Law Development Centre rejected the proposed amendment reasoning that it is the Clerk to Parliament’s role to keep Parliament in order and any vacancies are notified to the Electoral Commission. It should therefore be the duty of the Clerk to extract judgments from different courts but not the registrars of the court. The current proposed amendment would turn the registrars of court into process servers.  

The Law Reform Commission welcomed the proposal for the registrar of court to send a copy of the judgment to the Clerk. However, the commission also proposed that judgment sent to the Clerk to Parliament be the certified true copy of the judgment.  

Analysis

The proposed amendment is necessary to provide the time limits within which the registrar should inform the Clerk and the Clerk to inform the Independent Electoral Commission of the occurrence of a vacancy in Parliament. 

Bearing in mind that the Electoral Commission will be required to gazette the vacancy, carry out candidate nomination, oversee campaigns, prepare electoral materials, display voter registers as well as conduct the polling and declaration of results, the proposed amendment is necessary and required to enhance its efficiency. 

In Kenya, for instance, Article 101 (2) of the Kenyan Constitution requires the Speaker of the National Assembly to, within 21 days, communicate the occurrence of a vacancy to the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission and to the party to which the member belonged.  

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that this proposal be adopted.

4. Amendment of Article 83 of the Constitution

The proposed amendment to Article 83 is as follows:- 

(a)In clause (1), by substituting for paragraph (g) the following:

“If that person leaves the political party or political organisation for which he or she stood as a candidate for election to Parliament to join another political party or political organisation or to remain in Parliament as an independent member, or otherwise ceases to be a member of the political party or political organization for which he or she stood as a candidate for election to Parliament.”

Mr Speaker, Article 83 (1) (g) provides as follows:
“If that person leaves the political party for which he or she stood as a candidate for election to Parliament to join another party or to remain in Parliament as an independent member.”

Effect of the proposed amendment

The proposed amendment requires that a Member of Parliament shall vacate his or her seat if that person leaves the political party or political organisation for which he or she stood as a candidate for election to Parliament to - 
    (a) join another political party or political organisation; or
    (b) to remain in Parliament as an independent member; or 
    (c) otherwise ceases to be a member of the political party or political organisation –(Interjection)

Mr Speaker, I am reading the provision of the clause. May I be protected from hon. Ssekikubo so that I can read my report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That name keeps coming up and we are about to carry out some investigations.

MR TASHOBYA: Otherwise ceases to be a member of a political party or political organisation for which he or she stood as a candidate for election to Parliament.

Stakeholder’s proposals

CCEDU appreciated the spirit in which this amendment is proposed, which is to promote party discipline and cohesion within the political parties or organisations.

CCEDU is nonetheless equally mindful of Article 1(4) of the Constitution, which accords the people the right to determine who represents them in Parliament. CCEDU therefore proposes that a Member of Parliament who ceases to be a member of a political party or organisation for which he or she stood remains a Member of Parliament unless he or she has been recalled by the electorate. 

Law Reform Commission 

The commission also agreed with the proposal but cautioned that it might be sub judice at the moment since there is an on-going matter in court. (Interjection) These are the views of the Law Reform Commission.

The Dialogue and Democracy Training Centre

The centre proposed that this amendment be dropped. The justification is that most political parties are still struggling with building internal democratic systems. Many of the current processes and procedures are not transparent and agreed upon by the members. This also applies to processes and procedures upon which a person may be expelled from a party. This kind of amendment should only be made under a proportional representation system where one comes to Parliament through the party list. However, under our direct elections and the first and past post system, MPs are even elected by voters who do not belong to their political parties. It would be unfair to have such people lose their seats. 

Law Development Centre 

The centre rejected the proposed amendment since it has the effect of curtailing a person’s right to associate and join a political party or organisation of their choice. Furthermore, the power to choose leaders should, at all times, remain with the people to decide who to govern them out of their will and consent. 

Comparative Analysis

The following countries have similar provisions in their legislation. In Rwanda, Article 78 of the Constitution of Rwanda requires that: “A deputy who, during his or her mandate, either resigns from his or her political organisation or resigns from the Chamber of Deputies or is expelled from the political organisation to which he or she belongs in accordance with the provisions of the law governing political parties or joins another political organisation, shall automatically lose his or her seat in the Chamber of Deputies.” 

In Kenya, Article 103(1)(e) of the Constitution requires that: “A member of the National Assembly will lose his or her seat if, having been elected to Parliament as a member of a political party, the member resigns from that party or is deemed to have resigned from the party as determined in accordance with the legislation contemplated or as an independent candidate, the member joins a political party.” 

In South Africa, Article 47(5)(c) of the Constitution of South Africa requires that: “A member of the Nation Assembly loses his or her seat if he or she ceases to be a member of the political party that nominated that person as a member of the Assembly.” South Africa has a system of proportional party representation where the party lists are used to elect the members to the House depending on the votes the party garnered during the general elections.

In East Timor, Article 16 of the Constitution of East Timor provides that: “A member of Parliament elected to the National Parliament on a list presented by a political party or a coalition of parties and who, after his or her election, transfers himself or herself to another party or is dismissed by his or her party in accordance with the internal procedures of the latter, shall forfeit their seat.”

In Senegal, Macedonia and Sri Lanka, a Member of Parliament loses his or her parliamentary seat if he or she resigns or leaves a party in which he or she was elected to Parliament or is dismissed by the party. However, where a member loses his or her seat as a result of being dismissed by his or her party, in these countries the seat belongs to the party to which a person who lost it belonged since membership is on a party list system. 

In the United Republic of Tanzania, Article 71(e) of the Tanzanian Constitution requires that: “A member of Parliament ceases to be a member where a member of Parliament ceases to be a member of a party to which he belonged when he was elected or appointed to be a member of Parliament.” 

The committee, while agreeing with the principle in the amendment, proposed that a constitutional provision require political parties or organisations to follow a transparent and fair process in disciplining their members. This is to be provided for in an Act of Parliament.

The committee agrees with the proposal and recommends that Parliament prescribes a procedure to be followed in disciplining members within the political parties.
 
(b) By inserting immediately after clause (2), the following:
“(2)(a) Clause (1)(g) and (h) shall not apply to an independent member joining a political party or political organisation or a member leaving a political party or organisation within 12 months before a general election to participate in activities or programmes of a political party or political organisation relating to a general election.

Mr Speaker, the effect of the proposed amendment will allow members elected to Parliament as independents or on a party ticket to join another political party or organisation 12 months before a general election without losing their parliamentary seats. This means that a member may leave a political party to join another political party or organisation or an independent member may join a party without losing his or her parliamentary seat. (Applause)

Stakeholders’ proposals

The Law Reform Commission

Although the commission agreed in principle with the proposal, it cautioned that it might cause a challenge since election dates are hardly fixed 12 months to a general election. They further argued that it might be a challenge if the dates are fixed less than 12 months to the elections. 

Opposition parties (FDC, DP, JEEMA, CP, Federal Alliance)

The Opposition parties supported the amendment but argued that the period within which members are permitted to cross the Floor should be reduced to six months before a general election. 

FIDA Uganda

FIDA rejected the proposed amendments to Article 83 of the Constitution. They proposed that this Article should remain as it is presently. They reasoned that Article 83 of the Constitution was purposely included in the Constitution and was intended to encourage internal party democracy, critical so that members may expressly themselves openly and freely on any matter without fear of victimisation. 

Analysis

Mr Speaker, an individual is free, under the Constitution, to associate with persons he or she desires. If this is looked at from the lenses of a Member of Parliament and/or his or her constituents, such a member is free to associate with political parties or organisations as he deems fit. 

It should be noted that a Member of Parliament may have changed his or her mind after belonging to a party for four years. Such a member should be given an opportunity to cross to another party or become independent and be able to exercise his or her right to participate in a subsequent election. (Applause) 

Given that already where a vacancy appears in Parliament six months before a general election, it cannot be filled, the 12 months are sufficient for purposes of enabling a member participate in the parties’ primary elections. There is, however, need to clearly state in the law the effect of the crossing of parliamentary activities especially the seating arrangement, participation in parliamentary activities, allocation to committees and the directions of whips over such a person.  

The committee recommends that:
        1. The proposal be adopted with the justification that 12 months allows sufficient time to allow the members to participate in the party primaries of the parties to which they have crossed.
        2. The 12 months period be pegged to the end of the term of Parliament and not the date of the general elections, which varies from one election year to another.
        3. This provision be applied to all elected leaders at all local government levels.

5. Amendment to Article 131 of the Constitution

Article 131 of the Constitution is amended by substituting for Clause (2) the following: “When hearing appeals from the decisions of the Court of Appeal sitting at the Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court shall consist of seven members of the Supreme Court.”

Mr Speaker, the current constitutional provision is that, “When hearing appeals from the decisions of the Court of Appeal sitting at the Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court shall consist of a full bench of all members of the Supreme Court and where any of them is not able to attend, the President shall, for that purpose, appoint an acting justice under Article 142(2) of this Constitution.”

Effects of the proposed amendment

Mr Speaker, the proposal establishes the quorum for the Supreme Court while hearing constitutional appeals from the Constitutional Court to be seven members. 

Stakeholders’ proposals

Citizens Coalition for Electoral Democracy in Uganda (CCEDU) 
CCEDU welcomed the proposed amendment since it will help clear case backlog at the Supreme Court.

The Law Reform Commission

The commission welcomed the proposed amendment. 

Opposition political parties (FDC, DP, JEEMA, CP, Federal Alliance), also welcomed the amendment.

FIDA Uganda 

FIDA supported the proposed amendment as it strengthens the independence and impartiality of the Judiciary by removing the provision of temporary Supreme Court Judges in constitutional petitions, which is susceptible to abuse or perception of abuse. 

Mr Speaker, in our analysis, the proposed amendment will enhance the independence of the Supreme Court by establishing the quorum of the Supreme Court on second appeals. This means that the position of the acting justice will not be tenable in Uganda.  

The committee recommends that this proposal be adopted.

6. Amendment to Article 144 of the Constitution

Article 144 of the Constitution is amended:
(a) 	In clause (1)(a) by substituting for “seventy years” the words “seventy five years” and
(b) 	In clause (1) (b) by substituting for “sixty five years” the words “seventy years”.

The current constitutional provision

Article 144(1) of the Constitution provides that: “A judicial officer may retire at any time after attaining the age of sixty years, and shall vacate his or her office -
(a) in the case of the Chief Justice, the Deputy Chief Justice, a justice of the Supreme Court and a justice of Appeal, on attaining the age of seventy years; and
(b) in the case of the Principal Judge and a judge of the High Court, on attaining the age of sixty-five years.”

Effects of the proposed amendments: 
    (a) The Chief Justice, the Deputy Chief Justice, the justice of the Supreme Court and justice of Court of Appeal would have the retirement age shift from 70 years to 75 years.
    (b) In the case of the Principal Judge and a judge of the High Court, the retirement age will rise from 65 years to 70 years. 

Stakeholders’ views

The Law Reform Commission
    1. The Law Reform Commission was of the view that an avenue should be provided for justices and judges to continue to offer services after attaining the age of retirement as this would address the concerns that are proposed in the amendment.
    2.  The Law Reform Commission also proposes that the title of acting Justice of the Supreme Court, acting Appeal or acting Judge of the High court only applies to situations where a justice or judge sits on a quorum in a Court of Appeal where he or she is not a permanent member. 

Opposition Political Parties (FDC, DP, JEEMA, CP, Federal Alliance)
The Opposition believe that this is a specialised skill that takes long to develop and propose that in both benches, the retirement age should be set at 75 years of age. 

Citizens Coalition for Electoral Democracy in Uganda (CCEDU)

Whereas the proposal to increase the retirement age may be well conceived to enable them serve longer, it is CCEDU’s concern that this proposal does not go to the root of addressing the concerns presently faced by the Judiciary. 

CCEDU therefore recommends that the current retirement age be retained and instead, more investments be made in the administration of justice through increase of judicial training, better remuneration and adoption of merit based promotion to the higher bench.  

FIDA Uganda 

FIDA did not support the proposals made to amend Article 144 (1) (a) relating onto retirement from the bench. FIDA recommended that the current position be retained. 

The Law Development Centre 

The Law Development Centre was of the view that if the age of justices is to be altered, it should be lowered so that younger judicial officers can join the bench. (Laughter)

The Centre for Public Interest Law, Uganda  

Whereas the Centre for Public Interest Law, Uganda agreed with the principle in increasing the retirement age of judges, they recommended that the difference between the mandatory retirement age for judges and that of justices be scrapped. Instead, the Constitution should require all judicial officers to retire at the age of 75 years.

Mr Speaker, in our analysis, we noted that the retirement age for all other civil servants is 60 years. Senior judicial officers need to retire from the strenuous judicial work when they are still relatively energetic to pursue other work either in private or public life. 

Most stakeholders were of the view that the retirement age for judges should not be altered. 

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the status quo be maintained and the proposal be dropped with the justification that increasing the retirement age would make growth in the Judiciary more difficult for young lawyers.

7. Amendment to Article 147 of the Constitution

Article 147(1) of the Constitution is amended by substituting for paragraph (d), the following: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution to review and make recommendations on the terms and conditions of service of judges, other judicial officers and staff of the Judiciary appointed in accordance with Article 148(a) of this Constitution….”

Mr Speaker, the current constitutional provision provides that, “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution to review and make recommendations on the terms and conditions of service of judges and other judicial officers.”

The effect of the proposed amendment is that it would require the Judicial Service Commission to review and make recommendations on the terms and conditions of service of staff of the Judiciary appointed in accordance with the Constitution. 

Stakeholders’ views

The Law Reform Commission welcomed the proposal since it will enhance the independence of the Judiciary. 

Opposition Political Parties (FDC, DP, JEEMA, CP, Federal Alliance) welcomed the proposed amendments. 

CCEDU welcomed the proposed amendment since it will improve the performance and accountability of such staff. 

In our analysis, the majority of the stakeholders were in agreement with the proposed amendment. However, if this proposal is adopted, it will require the amendment of section 5 of the Judicial Service Act, Cap 14 to include Article 148(a) as one of the functions of the Judicial Service Commission.
 
The committee recommends that the proposal be adopted.

8. Insertion of a new Article 148(a)

Chapter 8 of the Constitution is amended by inserting, immediately after Article 148, the following: “148(a) Appointment of staff of the Judiciary. Notwithstanding Article 172(1)(b), the Judicial Service Commission shall be responsible for the appointment, discipline and removal of such staff from the Judiciary as may be prescribed by Parliament by law.”

The effect of the proposed amendment is that it is intended to grant the Judicial Service Commission powers of appointment, discipline and removal of staff of the Judiciary. 

Stakeholders’ views

Opposition Political Parties (FDC, DP, JEEMA, CP, Federal Alliance) welcomed the proposed amendment. 

CCEDU also welcomed the proposed amendment. 

In the committee’s analysis, we found that stakeholders agreed with the proposed amendment. However, if this proposal is adopted, this provision will require the amendment of the Judicial Service Act, Cap 14 especially Section 7 thereof to make provision for how the staff will be recruited, disciplined and their terms of service. Currently, staff in the Judiciary are appointed by the Public Service Commission. 

The committee recommends that the proposal be adopted.

9. Amendment to Article 223 of the Constitution

The proposed amendment to Article 223 of the Constitution is as follows: “1(a) The Inspectorate shall be a body corporate with the capacity to sue and be sued in its corporate name.”

The effect of the proposed amendment is that it intends to make the Inspectorate of Government a body corporate with capacity to sue and be sued in its corporate name. 

Stakeholders’ proposals

The Opposition political parties (FDC, DP, JEEMA, CP and Federal Alliance) welcomed the proposal.

Law Development Centre 

The Law Development Centre was of the view that the proposed amendment should be dropped since the current constitutional provisions of the Inspectorate of Government are good enough.

In the analysis of the committee, we found that although the proposed amendment is intended to bestow unto the IGG corporate status, this provision conflicts with Article 119 of the Constitution, which requires the Attorney General to be the advisor of Government and represent Government in courts in all legal proceedings in which Government is a party. It should be noted that the IGG is a Government department, which is represented in civil matters by the Attorney General. 

The committee recommends that the proposal be dropped with the justification that the Office of the Attorney General is competent to represent the Inspectorate of Government in court.

10. Insertion of a new Article 241(a)

The proposed amendment to Chapter 15 of the Constitution is as follows: 
“City land boards
(1) 	There shall be a city land board for each city.
(2) 	Parliament shall, by law, prescribe the membership, procedure and terms of service of a city land board.
(3) 	The functions of a city land board are -
(a) 	to hold and allocate land in the city which is not owned by any person or authority;
(b) 	to facilitate the registration and transfer of interests in land; and
(c) 	to deal with all other matters connected with land in the city in accordance with laws made by Parliament.
(4) 	In the performance of its functions, a city land board shall be independent of the Uganda Land Commission and shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority but shall take into account national and city council policy on land.”

The effect of this amendment is to establish city land boards in all cities in Uganda. The city land boards will exercise powers ordinarily exercised by the district land board.  

Stakeholders’ proposals

The Opposition political parties (FDC, DP, JEEMA, CP, Federal Alliance objected to this amendment and instead prefer the amendment of the head note under Article 240 of the Constitution since cities and districts have the same status. 

The Law Development Centre welcomed the proposed amendment. 

Mr Nester Kiingi and Ms Kalyesubula Winnie proposed that the proposed amendment be dropped because it is sub judice owing to the fact that they instituted a case against KCCA for disbanding Kampala Land Board and the matter has not been decided upon by court. They aver that the effect of the proposed amendment would abolish Kampala District Land Board and replace it with another entity called the City Land Board.   

In our analysis, this amendment is a consequential amendment to the Constitution after the 2005 amendment, which introduced Kampala Capital City Authority. There is need to create city land boards, which are akin to the district land boards. 

On the issue of whether the proposed amendment will be sub judice, regard is made to the provisions of Rule 64(1) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure, which prohibit a member from referring to any particular matter, which is sub judice. Rule 64(2) defines a sub judice matter to be one which refers to active criminal or civil proceedings which in the opinion of the Speaker, its discussion is likely to prejudice its fair determination. 

In determining whether a matter is sub judice, one must be mindful of the requirements of Rule 64(2) and (5) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. Specifically, Rule 64(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament envisage that -
    a) the matter is active; 
    b) the matter was instituted before a parliamentary committee or the House began investigations into it or opened debate on it retrospectively;
    c) the proceedings of the House or the committee will affect or have a bearing on the decision of the presiding officer in the matter during trial.

It should be noted that the question as to whether a matter is sub judice is determined by the Speaker under Rule 64(5) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure. In that regard therefore, we propose that the Speaker makes a ruling on the matter. (Laughter)

The committee recommends that the proposal be dropped with the justification that it is sub judice.

11. Insertion of Article 247(a)

The Constitution is amended by inserting, immediately after Article 247, the following:

“Salaries and Remunerations Board
(1)	There shall be a body known as the Salaries and Remunerations Board.

(2)	The Salaries and Remunerations Board shall consist of a Chairperson, a Deputy Chairperson and such other members as Parliament shall by law prescribe, all of whom shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament.

(3)	The Salaries and Remunerations Board shall be responsible for determining the salaries and allowances of all public officers and other persons whose salaries or allowances are paid from the Consolidated Fund.

(4)	A member of the board may be removed from office on any of the following grounds:
    a. Inability to perform the functions of his or her office arising from infirmity of body or mind.
    b. Misbehaviour or misconduct.
    c. Incompetence.
(5)	A member of the Board shall vacate office if he or she is under a sentence of death or a sentence of imprisonment exceeding nine months without the option of a fine imposed by a competent court.
(6) 	In this article, ‘salary and allowances’ includes gratuity and benefits.”

Effects of the Proposed Amendments
The proposed amendment, Mr Speaker, intends to establish a Salaries and Remunerations Board with the responsibility of determining the salaries and allowances of all public officers and other persons whose salaries or allowances are paid from the Consolidated Fund. 

It appears that the body will be in charge of determining the salary and allowances of persons whose salaries are drawn from the Consolidated Fund and not the Public Service, ministries, departments or agencies that have been exercising such mandate in the past. 

Stakeholders’ Proposals

Law Reform Commission

The Law Reform Commission welcomed the establishment of the Salaries and Remunerations Board since it will address the current disparities in the salary structure of different Government institutions. 

The commission, however, advised that there is need to harmonise this provision with Article 85 on the determination of emoluments of Members of Parliament. 

The commission proposed to delete the word “vacate” appearing in Article 247(5) and replace it with the word “cease”.

The commission also proposes that the qualifications of the officers of the board should be provided.

The commission also proposed that members of the board should vacate office on conviction for an offence involving moral turpitude, the gravity of the sentence imposed notwithstanding. 

Opposition political parties (FDC, DP, JEEMA, CP, Federal Alliance)

The Opposition opposes the creation of the Salaries and Remuneration Board, which shall be a redundant body whose creation is just to look at salaries. 

According to those parties, Government should rather empower and put this function under the Public Service or institute an independent inquiry to study all Government salaries and recommend to the Public Service Commission to harmonise the salary structure in the country.  

CCEDU welcomed the proposed amendment since it will ensure uniformity of allowances, salaries and benefits of all public officials. 

Comparative Analysis with other jurisdictions 
Kenya has a Salaries and Remuneration Commission established under Article 230 of their Constitution. This commission composed of persons appointed by the President are nominated from across the different commissions in the Kenyan Constitution as well as the Senate and trade unions. 

The functions of the commission is to, among others, inquire into and determine the salaries and remuneration to be paid out of public funds to state officers and other public officers, keep under review all matters relating to the salaries and remuneration of public officers and advise the national and county governments on the harmonisation, equity and fairness of remuneration for the attraction and retention of requisite skills in the public sector. 

Mr Speaker, in Trinidad and Tobago, the Salaries Review Commission is established in accordance with Section 140 of the Constitution of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago. The commission consists of a chairman and four members who are appointed by the President after consultation with the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition. 

Section 141(1) of the Constitution provides for: “The Commission to review from time to time, with the approval of the President, the salaries and other terms and conditions of service of the offices falling within its purview.”

Analysis of the Committee
The establishment of a Salaries and Remuneration Board will have the following legal consequences:

It will have the effect of determining the salaries of Members of Parliament contrary to Article 85 of the Constitution. Article 85 and Article 87(4) requires that salaries of Members of Parliament and staff of Parliament are to be determined by Parliament respectively, subject to Article 93 of the Constitution. 

Therefore, the determination of salaries and allowances by the Salaries and Remunerations Board of salaries of Members of Parliament and parliamentary staff would affront that provision and would be unconstitutional.

With regard to the above therefore, the committee proposes that the Salaries and Remunerations Board should be limited to determining the salaries of public officers except those which are determined by Parliament.  

Recommendations 

We recommend that the proposal be adopted subject to Articles 85 and 87(4) to exclude Members of Parliament and staff of the Parliamentary Commission. (Laughter)

The committee further recommends that this board be engaged on a part time basis except for the chairperson and the deputy chairperson who should be permanent.

General Recommendations
There is need for a comprehensive constitutional amendment process.

Mr Speaker, the committee received submissions from Government and private institutions, civil society organisations and individual members of the public as listed in the methodology. 

From the consultative meetings, it became evident that there was popular demand that the Constitution required major amendments beyond the amendments that were proposed by Government in the Bill before the committee. The committee has attached a copy of a compilation of the views collected touching on matters outside the scope of the Bill.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a compilation of the proposed amendments of the Constitution outside this proposed Bill. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those proposed amendments. 

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Speaker, the committee noted with concern that the failure by the Government to introduce the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2015 to Parliament in time made it impossible for the Ninth Parliament to deliver in time the constitutional and electoral reforms to the people of Uganda ahead of the 2016 general elections.

The committee recommends that a Constitution Review Commission be set up to process the proposals received by the committee outside the scope of this Bill.

The committee recommends that the Bill be passed into law, subject to the proposed amendments. 

Mr Speaker, the report is duly signed by 22 members out of 30 members of the committee thereby meeting the requirements of our Rules of Procedure. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker, and honourable members, for according me the opportunity to present this report. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there a minority report, Chair? 

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Speaker, may I request my colleague, hon. Paul Mwiru to present -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there a minority report? 

MR TASHOBYA: Yes, I have already laid it on the Table, Mr Speaker. With your permission - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is for me now. Once you have accepted that there is a minority report, that is sufficient for us to proceed. 

MR TASHOBYA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I think we should congratulate the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee for doing their best to deliver within this time. They had made an undertaking that they would make it by the 10th of this month. By the 10th, they were already compiling the report so I congratulate you. At least it is back here and it is for us to take the station. 

I am also informed that there is a minority report, which is bigger than the majority report by a few pages. It is about the same number of pages. This House has already agreed that they should be read word by word. Looking at the time now, we will not be able to proceed to receive it. 

I think this is digestion material for this evening. Tomorrow when we come back, we will receive the other report. I am going to talk to the Prime Minister to see if the Prime Minister’s Question Time can be waived tomorrow for us to achieve two things: one, receive the minority report and two, conclude debate on the State of the Nation Address.  

We will be finishing that tomorrow as well so if you want to contribute on that, please, tomorrow will be the appropriate time because it will not go beyond tomorrow. On Thursday, we can start this debate on the motion for second reading of this Bill. If that is okay, honourable members, we will go by that proposal and see. Do you want us to start sitting in the morning tomorrow? I see the Prime Minister rising. Tomorrow is Cabinet.

6.22
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Wednesday is the Cabinet day and it is unusual that it is ever missed. In our planning, I think that should be taken into account. I thank you. 

6.23
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula-Oguttu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In the Business Committee we agreed that when the reforms come, we would meet morning and afternoon. We had even wanted to meet on Fridays and Mondays but we opted for morning and afternoon. I hope we are starting that now. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, since we have not received the minority report and since I have now said that there will be no Prime Minister’s Question Time, which means that we have one hour additional, for purposes of tomorrow, I think let us start at 2 O’clock. On Thursday, we can do a full day and see if we can do Friday morning. I think that would be proper. 

The House stands adjourned to tomorrow 2 O’clock. Thank you. 

(The House rose at 6.24 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 22 July 2015 at 2.00 p.m.) 

