Tuesday, 9 July 2013

Parliament met at 2.24 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. This is to report to you that the Business Committee sat last Thursday, on the 4th of July, and charted out the programme of business for the First Meeting of the Third Session as well as approving the calendar of parliamentary business for the Third Session. 

The calendar, as you are already aware, is an important planning document that contains the projected business that is to be considered during this Session as well as providing information on the period of meetings and recess. In due course, the Office of the Clerk will avail you these documents to enable you to prepare accordingly.

Hon. Members, it was proposed in the Business Committee that we apply the procedure used in the previous sessions in handling the debate in reply to the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency, the President. Because the address of the President is presented in broad terms on policies, programmes and legislative business of Government, it is not useful for Members to raise their specific constituency issues and needs during this debate. 

Such concerns would be better addressed in the sectoral committees where the Members are free to attend and participate in any of their meetings on the ministerial policy statements, on the budget and receive responses arising from their presentations from the ministers and their technical teams.

Under that arrangement, the mover and seconder of the motion will make their contributions to be followed by the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament. Thereafter, the hon. Members agreed upon in the political party caucuses will speak on behalf of their parties. This arrangement will add value to the debate on the State of the Nation Address as repetitions of Members’ contributions will be avoided.

This, however, means that not all the Members will have the opportunity to speak. Hon. Members, even where we give two or three minutes, still not all the Members speak. So, we might as well improve on the quality of our debate in terms of the sequencing and depth of those speeches. However, some more Members will be able to speak and make their contributions at the debate on the Budget. 

Hon. Members, I have heard on the mass media that the fasting period, Ramadhan, for our colleagues from the Islamic community is due to commence tomorrow. I wish them a successful Ramadhan and may they attain nearness and closeness to God so that he can become a reality in their lives. I further pray that the Almighty God provides them with resources to go through this period. 

We will endeavour to stop all our proceedings by 6 O’clock to enable our colleagues be with their families in this festive season. So, we need to make sure that we use the time we have up to 6 O’clock. This has also been reinforced by a request from the Parliamentary Imam himself.
Hon. Members, on behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, I wish to extend our congratulations to His Excellency, President Salva Kiir Mayardit and the Government of the people of South Sudan as well as His Excellency James Wani Igga, the Speaker of the South Sudan Legislative Assembly, and the entire Parliament for celebrating the second Independence Anniversary today.

Hon. Members, I have received notification from two Whips, that is from the UPC Whip and the Government Chief Whip, on designation of Members and chairpersons. I accordingly announce the designation of hon. Kayagi Sarah Netalisire as Chairperson for the Standing Committee on HIV/AIDS. Is she in the House? That is from the Government Chief Whip.

I also read the following; as provided for in the Rules of Procedure of Parliament under Rule 176(2), the UPC Party wishes to withdraw hon. Joy Ruth Acheng from the Sectoral Committee on Physical Infrastructure and relocate her to that of the East African Community Affairs. So, it is accordingly requested and acknowledged by the House. Do we need to take a vote on these issues? Do we normally take votes on this? I have not done it before. I put the question to these proposals.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have been approached that there are some urgent matters to be raised. On one particularly urgent matter, I have been approached by five Members; Member for Mukono Municipality, Member for Kasambya, Member for Mityana North and Member for Buwekula. All of them are raising the same issue and I think the responsible minister is here. So, I will ask one Member who is going to lead them to raise this matter now.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have given us a report from the Business Committee of Parliament. However, there is another committee of Parliament, the one on Appointments whose reports we do not receive. We only read in the papers that the Speaker has disagreed with MPs. The procedural issue I am raising is whether this Parliament is not entitled to a report from that committee of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I am sure you are conversant with your Rules of Procedure. The rules cover reports from that committee. I am sure that in due course, the Speaker will make the necessary report. Thank you. (Ms Nambooze rose_)

Yes, Member for Mukono and she speaks for those Members I have mentioned so that we can save time because we have to –

2.37
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A number of colleagues and I, as you announced, wish to raise a matter of national importance about the spreading strikes by taxi drivers in the country, which has paralysed transport in the different parts of Uganda and the ad hoc way that the Ministry of Works and Transport is handling this matter.

The drivers’ strike started as a result of a number of issues, which include:
The statutory instrument, which was recently released by the Ministry of Works and Transport that contains a number of traffic offences laid against drivers especially the fact that the drivers are now supposed to go for re-training by an agency called “The Uganda Driving Standards Agency” (UDSA), which will issue them a certificate for a clearance to obtain a badge from the Ministry of Works and Transport in order to operate a public service vehicle. Among the things UDSA does is to make the drivers sit for a written examination at a fee of Shs 250,000.

We all know the category of the people who drive public service vehicles. These drivers have found this exercise very unfair, most of them being uneducated members of our society.

The drivers have also been forced to undergo a medical examination, specifically at Mayo Clinic, a private clinic but where they are supposed to reveal all their medical details. The drivers have also found this very unfair especially given the fact that information about their health status has been put in the hands of private doctors.

Mr Speaker, –(Interjections)– I beg for protection, especially from the Member for Mbarara Municipality.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member for Mbarara Municipality is always calm. (Laughter)

MS NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE: Mr Speaker, it is the contention of the drivers that as stakeholders in this business, they were not consulted when the responsible minister was designing this statutory instrument. According to them, the instrument gives way to a public agency and the agency, UDSA, got the contract without any advert being published. It just emerged one day and got to enforce these regulations on the drivers.

The second complaint is about the amount of money required for this training and the issuance of a certificate to drivers, which ranges from Shs 250,000 to Shs 750,000 per driver.

The drivers are also striking because of the penalties. It is true it is this Parliament that urged Government to come up with prohibitive measures against traffic offenders. However, some of the offences are unrealistic. For example, today, a taxi cannot carry a student returning from school with a mattress. This means the offences created by the instrument do not take care of people who travel with luggage, yet, this is a common practice, which we cannot stop. For example, you cannot expect a person moving with one mattress from Kampala to Masaka to hire a pick-up truck to take it to that destination.

The other complaint by the drivers is that they are fined many times for a single offence in a day. For example, a driver moving from Mbale to Kampala will be fined by a traffic officer in Jinja but when he meets another traffic officer at Namanve, they also penalise them.

Lastly, drivers are also complaining about local government taxes. For example, a taxi operating between Kampala and Mbale, will pay Shs 120,000 per month to KCCA, Shs 45,000 at Bweyogerere for Kira Town Council, Shs 105,000 at Mukono for Mukono Municipal Council, Shs 45,000 at Lugazi for Lugazi Town Council, Shs 90,000 at Njeru for Njeru Town Council, Shs 180,000 at Jinja for Jinja Municipality, Shs 150,000 at Iganga for Iganga Municipality and Shs 90,000 at Bugiri for Bugiri Town Council. But also, the same driver will pay Shs 130,000 at Mbale for Mbale Municipality. This makes it a total of Shs 960,000 paid in local governments’ fees for this driver per month. Mr Speaker, drivers find this very unfair.

Lastly, we also want the responsible minister to clarify on the operations of the organisation called “Boda-Boda 2010” headed by a one Abdul Kitaka, which charges Shs 20,000 from each “boda-boda” rider in the country and fining those riders who have not registered with it, a fine of Shs 80,000 whenever they arrest them without their identification cards. Can the minister tell this House whether this is also another Government institution dealing with “boda-boda”?

As a result of these and many other issues, Mr Speaker, drivers in various localities have gone on strike. The issue here is that the responsible minister is dealing with this issue in an ad hoc manner. When the drivers in Jinja strike, the ministry will move to Jinja and will talk to the drivers there. The next day, they will move to those in Mityana and the other day, you will see them in either Mukono or Masaka.

Why is the ministry dealing with this matter in an ad hoc way? Does the country have a public transport policy? Is there a possibility that these new Traffic and Road Safety Driving Tests and Special Provisions for Drivers of Public Service and Goods Vehicles, 2012, can be recalled for review so that we do not impose an institution on people who are already qualified; on people who already have their driving permits issued by a Government agency, but now being taken to a private agency for retraining? I am told they are supposed to be retrained after every year, which, as I have said, includes a written examination.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Nambooze. We have had a debate on this subject about three times now. Let us hear from the responsible minister and if we find gaps, we will raise more issues.

2.46
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank hon. Betty Nambooze with her colleagues who sat and discussed seriously before they brought up this matter to be discussed on the Floor of Parliament.

Before I respond to what she has talked about, I want to say that we must realise that the carnage on our roads is among the worst in the world. So, as the person in charge of that sector, I cannot sit back while Ugandans and non-Ugandans living here die on our roads because of our drivers’ misbehaviour. We must and we will ensure that sanity prevails on our roads.

Since I joined this ministry, I have signed three instruments, all to ensure sanity prevails on our roads. The first was about reflectors because very many people were dying on the roads due to either poor or non-existence of reflectors. I am sure that if these were bought and installed, our people would be saved.

The second was for those driving PSV vehicles – buses, taxis and “boda-boda”. These drivers and riders carry many of our people, yet they are careless. That is where hon. Nambooze is citing some of the issues of annual retesting, practically and by examination. All this is to save the lives of Ugandans. And there are many other issues in that.

The last one is this express penalty which I brought in good faith because drivers were complaining that they waste time going to the police and then to court and then the court is not there. It is within my powers to put in place express penalties and this is what I did. 

Mr Speaker, it is absolutely wrong for hon. Nambooze to say that we are handling this in an ad hoc way. That is wrong. We went on the radios, in general, the spokesperson of my ministry was on television and she talked about this. Then we went particularly where people had not understood. We had to go physically to areas in the East where they are starting from to explain to them in small numbers so that they may understand. So it is not ad hoc and I want hon. Nambooze to know that this is not true.

She has complained about training. I am really surprised that somebody can complain about retraining when we are always here talking about capacity building and saying, “Take them for retraining.” And these are people in charge of your lives. When a Member comes here and condemns retraining, Mr Speaker, it becomes a serious matter. 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, there is a tendency that is growing in this House, especially by colleagues on the Front Bench on the other side; one of emotionally mobilising Parliament not to listen to cries of Ugandans as it happened during the strike by the traders. The hon. Minister starts by dismissing each and everything and putting drivers in the same category as the traders. It is only you, all the time, that are right and all the others are wrong.

But the point of order I am raising is that the hon. Nambooze did not – and I heard and followed her submission - at any one time suggest that training and retraining was wrong. She only asked why people who have been qualified by competent government agents are being subjected to private tests by a company other than the one that issued them driving permits. And if you want to note, the best training you can get is on the road -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The point of order.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: So, the point of order I am raising is that is the hon. Minister in order to impute bad motives on the side, not only of hon. Nambooze because you said a number of colleagues approached you who are concerned about the on-going strike, dismiss each and everything and even mislead Parliament that the complaint is by hon. Nambooze and that she does not want drivers retrained? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister the impression has been improved for you so deal with it now. (Laughter)

MR BYANDALA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. When hon. Nambooze was speaking, she said, “These people were trained and then you are retraining them.” But I was coming to the second part. If only hon. Ssemujju had been patient, he would have heard me talking about the second issue that he is talking about. In my instrument, it is better than what my colleague may be thinking - that these people driving PSVs will be annually tested, practically and for theory.

My ministry is also responsible for the syllabus and licensing of driving schools and we have done this. This had never been done and now it is there; there are a few licenced driving schools. So, any Ugandan is free to go to any licenced driving school -(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you need to tell me who you have accepted.

MR BYANDALA: I will allow my friend. (Laughter)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for giving way. I wanted to find out from the minister whether he has looked at the syllabus of those driving schools. I happened to have got my driving license from abroad but when you see what goes on in these driving schools here, there is a lot to be desired. And this is partly why we have a lot of accidents in this country. People go there, they do not know the rules, they do not know the road signs and they are given driving licenses. And what happens on the roads –accidents! So you should get interested in what takes place in those schools, Mr Minister, so that we can improve and see that licenses are given to qualified people who have undergone real training. 

When you talk of the theory, are they given questions? You go for a driving test in Nakawa and they ask you, “What is this sign?” And they give you a driving licence. That is the biggest problem we have in the country, Mr Minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let the minister finish then we plug in the gaps. 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank my colleague from Mbale Municipality. He said he got a licence from abroad - thank you very much. But we have a syllabus here and it contains all you have talked about: road signs are there. You should appreciate that we have come from zero and we are somewhere. We have shared with our colleagues in other countries, even within the region, and it is quite adequate.

The other issue by hon. Nambooze was about the medical examination. Mr Speaker, in our instrument, nowhere do we say, “You go here.” I have not written anywhere that you must go here. If there is a problem in the implementation by the Police, we can look into it but there is nowhere we say you must go to Byandala and Sons Clinic. 

And of course it was very unfortunate that my colleague hon. Nambooze said we brought this instrument without consulting the stakeholders. That is absolutely wrong. My staff moved around, we held several meetings and people were consulted. We have no culture of bringing things affecting people without consulting them. 

Hon. Nambooze has also complained about the penalties. These penalties are not taxes that everybody will pay. These penalties are voluntary. If you do not commit the offence, it will not come to you. But they must be deterrent –(Interjection) - yes my brother hon. Kassiano.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the hon. Minister for allowing me to seek this clarification from him. A while ago, you said the penalties were voluntary. But our concern is that if you can remember in yesterday’s DailyMonitor newspaper, the taxi drivers of Busia already said they were going to pass these fines on to the end user of their services. They have hiked the fares. So, how can you say this is going to be voluntary when the ordinary Wadri who is going to board this matatu is going to be forced to pay this? What checks do you have to make sure that these fares are not skyrocketed beyond their – 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, my colleague, hon. Wadri. These people were confused. They were taking a penalty as a tax and that it is across the board. This is voluntary, if you commit a crime that is when you pay it. They were just arguing off tangent and confusing the public.

MR KASOLO: The minister has just told this Parliament that he consulted this Parliament and all the stakeholders. Now, he is telling us that those people are not aware; they cannot differentiate between a fine and a penalty. So, is he in order, Mr Speaker, to confuse this Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It would be most regrettable if the minister should attempt to confuse this Parliament but I think, hon. Members, let the minister finish. If there are gaps, then we plug in.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Those of you who have been to school know that people fail exams. So, my colleague there is saying that there are those who do not understand, therefore, to say they were not there is wrong.

The next thing my hon. Nambooze said was about the luggage. In the instrument I signed, it is very clear and it is dangerous loading. If you are going to load dangerously, honestly, why should we support that? 

Then hon. Nambooze went on and said a driver commits a crime in Kampala, then he is got in Jinja, Mbale and Moroto. The purpose of a penalty is for what you have committed. If you have committed an offence, you correct it. Why should you commit an offence and then continue with it? What should be done is that when you commit a crime, you pay a penalty, then you correct yourself. Otherwise, if we leave them alone, then someone will commit crimes the whole day.

The other issues raised by hon. Nambooze were the local government taxes. I will ask my colleague, the Minister of Local Government - I am not an expert in local government taxes. He will come and assist us on this; so, is the Boda-Boda 2010.  You know, Ministry of Works has never licensed any of these. This is an issue of KCCA. I think the Minister for the Presidency can assist us. In my ministry, we do not license “boda-boda”. So, I do not know anything about it.

Finally, we have a national transport policy in the ministry. Thank you very much. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if we are to go through all the matters, then the order paper will derail the business of the day - (Members rose_) - the Speaker is still speaking. We might need to find a way to deal with this in a more systematic way and a systematic way would be that we might have to have a committee look at this matter so that it comes to us after talking to all the stakeholders. That way, we can have a reasonable coverage of the subject. I think that will be a better way of handling it. All the Members want to make a contribution on this; we cannot resolve this matter now, here. So, it came as a matter of urgent public importance.

I think now we can formerly request the Chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to take up this matter and the Clerk should give instructions to the committee, that I have directed that they get interested in the matter and brief Parliament accordingly, after listening to all the stakeholders and the MPs who have raised this matter.

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You did rule on this same matter the other time and I happen to have been among the people who went to Jinja to meet the taxi drivers in the same spirit. However, when we were there, the state minister was giving a different impression from what the minister is giving.

Now that you have ruled, when we were there, the state minister said that he had given one month because he had considered that there was no sensitisation to the drivers. So, I am seeking guidance from you, whether the regulations are going to be operational as the committee starts work or they are going to be suspended in the interim as the committee finishes its work because it is within the mandate of the minister who made the regulations.

To avoid the politics involved, the minister was saying this law was brought by the Opposition led by hon. Alaso, supported by hon. Mwiru; when they are here, they say something different that Government brought the law. So, I am seeking your guidance, Mr Speaker; in the interim, are we going to suspend the application of the regulations as the committee looks into the matter or people are going to pay the price?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we had legislated ourselves out of that function by giving that responsibility to the minister to act through a statutory instrument. That is what we did. We did never even reserve the right to approve the statutory instrument. So, the statutory instrument is in operation. It is within the discretion of the minister to continue with it or not. I am urging this committee to act fast because it is a matter of urgent public concern, so that they can brief Parliament on this matter quickly.

3.05
MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Pursuant to Rule 39 of the Rules of Procedure, permit me to raise a matter of public concern. One of the oversight roles of Parliament is to check expenditure from the Consolidated Fund.

On 26th February, hon. Ssekikubo raised concerns about the unexplainable court award of Shs 12.9 billion to the applicants in the Severino Twinobusingye vs the Attorney-General/ Parliament constitutional petition of 2011. The Deputy Attorney- General was present when this concern was raised. Hon. Ruhindi agreed with the presenter of the concern that the award by way of taxation was indescribably astronomical and lacks explanation.

He assured this House that he appealed that scandalous unexplainable decision. To many of us, that award was a conspiracy to scare off people who are protesting against corruption in the oil sector, including many others like those mentioned. This amount of money is unexplainable. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the question was; have they appealed? You are now debating, please, save time.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: The question is have they appealed? If so, what is the file number that went to the Supreme Court and when was it filed? We need this information as urgently as possible because we have a duty to check expenditure of the taxpayers’ money from the Consolidated Fund. I thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think both the offices - the Attorney-General and the Deputy are not here. Can we have that undertaking that this information will be relayed to the responsible office? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, would you pass on this? 

3.08
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members, on Thursday, this information will be availed to us here.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I thank you. Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence because I am in a very difficult situation, as the chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurance to follow up some of these commitments made by the ministers. 

A week ago, this Parliament resolved that three accounting officers should be relieved of their duties and the Prime Minister committed himself that they will bring a list of three new other accounting officers but now, a week has passed and no one is talking about it and we may get to the budgetary processes.

So, Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence, if you could get a firm commitment, since the one week has passed, about the exact date when the list of the three new accounting officers will be brought to save us from Bigirimana, Dr Kagoda and Asuman Lukwago who have feasted on public funds.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Government Chief Whip.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: I thank you very much, honourable member, for raising this. But I remember how we concluded this. It was the Minister for Finance who is even in the House now, who said he would give us information. (Applause) So, I want to invite him to come and give us information.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Finance, please, tell us.

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, it is true I committed myself to be back to this House by –(Interjections)- no, no last week Thursday because we talked of the end of last week. Unfortunately, when I went back to the ministry, legal issues were raised and therefore, I had no choice but to first seek a legal opinion from the Chief Government Legal Advisor. The mistake, which I accept and apologise to you for, was not to have come back and made this statement on Thursday. [MS NAMBOOZE: “Resign now.”] If ministers are to resign on issues of this type, then you will have no Cabinet tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, when remarks are made off record, you bring them on record when you respond to them. Please, proceed.  

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would beg that you give me a little bit of time. I will come back here because I cannot dictate how quickly the Solicitor-General or the Attorney-General will be able to give me an answer. I will come back here - and I promise. [HON. MEMBERS: “When?”]

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I remember in that very chair, it was a parliamentary resolution. Actually, the Members of Parliament did not want to pass the Vote-on-Account saying they could not give money to these permanent secretaries who have been implicated in mishandling public funds and so, we reached a compromise that we would pass the Vote-on-Account but on condition that these three accounting officers will not be holding public funds and the Speaker then on the Chair advised that at one point, Mr Tandekwire was the Clerk to Parliament but he was not necessarily the accounting officer and the accounting officer was Mr Kaija and you committed yourself – you duped Parliament. So, Mr Speaker, what I am seeking from you – (Laughter) 

ME SSEMUGABA: Thank you, hon. Odonga Otto, for giving way. Mr Speaker, to my knowledge, even as per now, the Permanent Secretary of Energy and Mineral Resources is not the accounting officer, according to the list they gave us. What is wrong with these others whom Parliament pronounced themselves on?

MR ODONGA OTTO: So, Mr Speaker, I would expect and I do not know what we can do in the circumstances - because it is all in your hands but I would expect something concrete that we get a definite day that the minister can come and tell us all these issues. Otherwise, I do not want to move a motion without notice that you will no longer be heard in this House because we have come from far - from various constituencies and you cannot bring us to Parliament and make empty promises. In fact, this is typical behaviour of conmen. There are over 300 Members of Parliament here -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member for Aruu, some of the words might be crossing the line. (Laughter)  Please, wind up.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I have withdrawn that word but the minister has heard. (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, my colleague for giving way. The clarification I would like to seek from you and through the Speaker is what would be so difficult a legal matter in the appointment of an accounting officer that has taken the ministry these very many days? Would the minister be glad to share with us so that the House can resolve those legal issues since the Attorney-General is also a member of this House? Would he not? 

Hon. Odonga Otto, I am seeking clarification from you whether it is very difficult to resolve the legal issues, whether the matter is in court or it is very difficult a matter that appointment under Section 8 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act would be difficult to designate another person as an accounting officer.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I think that it is the minister’s call. These are not issues we just say, “next time.” So, I rest my case here and I would request the minister to respond to the issues raised, specifically, by hon. Oboth through you, Mr Speaker.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker and hon. colleagues, I do not want to prolong this debate. We will come back here on Thursday with a final answer. Today is Tuesday and on Thursday, we shall come here with a final answer. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, on Thursday. In the Public Gallery, this afternoon, we have students and teachers of Progressive Secondary School, Kitintale, Kampala, represented by hon. Fred Ruhindi and hon. Nabilah Sempala. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. 

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

3.17
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, this is a personal explanation moved in accordance with Rule 46.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, order.

MR KWIZERA: I wish to make a statement to clear the unfounded and malicious information that was posted online yesterday 8th July 2013 in the Chimpreport registered as Chimp Media Ltd and owned by Giles Muhame and reported by Michael Teva. The same information was conveyed through the bulk sms of MTN. 

An article on the Chimpreport had claimed that I had borrowed money from a money lender and had been arrested for failure to pay and honour my commitments. I wish to state that the contents of the said article are not true as I am a law abiding citizen who believes in the rule of law. I wish to further state that I have not borrowed money from any money lender. Therefore, I wish to inform all my colleagues, the people from Kisoro and other concerned people from Uganda and abroad that the news that was conveyed is false and that at no time has there been any judgement expedited against me as alleged.

I wish to state that I have instructed my lawyers to pursue this matter legally with the view of seeking redress for tarnishing my good image and good standing in society. I have verified this online media organisation and it is not regulated by any authority and has continued to misinform the public, and this requires the immediate intervention of Government. I thank you for listening to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Member, for clarifying those matters to the House. You owe it to the House and you have done just that. Thank you very much. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

BRIEF TO PARLIAMENT TO BORROW UA 72,940,000 FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND (AFDB) OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP (ADB) TO FINANCE THE ROAD SECTOR SUPPORT PROJECT 4 (RSSP 4)

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table a proposal to borrow Units of Account 72,940,000 from the African Development Fund (AFDB) of the African Development Bank Group (ADB) to finance the road sector support project 4. I wish to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, is that what we were expecting? - because the Order Paper says, “Brief to Parliament.” Is this still a loan request? Can we clear that? Clerk, is it a brief to Parliament or is it a loan request?

Hon. Members, ordinarily, a “Brief to Parliament” means the request has already been made because this is a brief to Parliament and not a loan request. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I am going by the words on the order paper.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, what is on the order paper is “Brief to Parliament” and the words on the document you have just laid is also “Brief to Parliament.” “Brief to parliament on the proposal to borrow to borrow UA 72,940,000 from …”

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, this is a brief for the purpose of seeking the authorisation of Parliament –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, the document that has been laid before Parliament is a brief to Parliament on the proposal to borrow UA 72,940,000 from the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank Group to finance the road sector support project 4. Let the records capture that and it stands committed to the appropriate Committee on National Economy.

Hon. Members, there is a matter that is urgent and we have two Bills preceding but we need to start the process on the debate on the State of the Nation Address. So, I am going to use my prerogative per the rules to alter the order paper to bring up item seven. So, please, announce item seven and we proceed with it. If we finish, then we can move on to the next items.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON THURSDAY 6TH JUNE 2013

3.23
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I rise to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to applaud His Excellency the President for the clear and precise exposition of government policy contained in the Address on the State of the Nation on Thursday, 6 June 2013, under Rule 47 ofthe Rules of Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, what is the motion?

MS BOONA: The motion is that “Thanks of Parliament be recorded for the Clear and Precise exposition of Government Policy contained in the Address on the State of the Nation by H.E the President to this Parliament on Tuesday, 6June 2013.” The motion reads:

“WHEREAS Article 101(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda requires the President to deliver to Parliament an Address on the State of the Nation;

AND WHEREASHis Excellency the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, in compliance with the constitutional provisions delivered the State of the Nation Address at the Uganda International Conference Centre, Serena, Kampala on the 6th  day of June 2013,

AWARE THAT the State of the Nation Address gave a broader projection on areas of strategic significance to Uganda, in particular, ensuring a peaceful country, socio-economic transformation of a society and economy and the integration,both economic and political of the African Continent –” (Ms Nambooze rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order or procedure? Which one is it?

MS NAMBOOZE: Procedure. Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising is about the citation of our Rules of Procedure. Hon. Boona has cited Rule 43 as the rule under which she is moving. I have read Rule 43 and it reads, if you allow me, Mr Speaker, “As soon as the question is answered in the House, any Member beginning with the Member who asked the question… –“

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is just on supplementary question. You do not have to read the whole text. 

MS NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE: It is on supplementary questions, Mr Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising is, can we move with the motion under this rule? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The hon. Member might have used the old rules. The citations have since changed. So, please, do the necessary. (Laughter) Hon. Member, proceed under our Rules of Procedure. (Laughter) 

MS BOONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and apologies to the House. 

“COGNISANT of the fact that in his address, the President highlighted the key strategic bottlenecks that Government would give priority to ensure positive socio-economic transformation; 

FURTHER COGNISANT of the fact that the bottlenecks to socio-economic transformation identified in the State of the Nation Address included; ending ideological disorientation, building the state pillars to ensure that the state is capable of governing people and protecting them, developing human resource through education and improved health for all, promoting private sector-led economy, which is a more efficient vehicle for enterprise identification and growth; developing the infrastructure especially electricity, railways, roads, ICT and others; modernising agriculture; modernising services and integrating the African market to assist the private sector and ensuring democracy;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:
    1. That Parliament of Uganda expresses its gratitude to His Excellency, the President for the clear and precise exposition of the State of the Nation Address.
    2. That Parliament commits itself to the promotion of the great ideas, values and qualities cherished by the President in the State of the Nation Address.” (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by the hon. Member for Samia-Bugwe North and the Member for Kyankwanzi and the minister in charge of Luwero. Yes, even the hon. Member for Namutumba District. So, the motion is duly seconded; so, please, justify your motion.

MS BOONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will try to justify the motion. I take this opportunity to thank my party for choosing me and entrusting me with the duty to move this motion – (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. This is a national Parliament of Uganda, duly constituted and performing one of its constitutional duties – to analyse the State of Nation Address. Is it in order for the mover of the motion to behave as though it was a partisan motion and we were in an NRM caucus? Is it in order for her to move in such a manner? What is she talking about? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, gratitude is a debt and each time a person feels it in their heart to pay that debt, they pay. And in this case, the honourable member is simply saying that out of the large number of NRM members, she was the one chosen by her party. Please, proceed.

MS BOONA: Thank you, for your wise ruling, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank my party for choosing me and entrusting me with the duty to move this motion that this House do record a vote of thanks to His Excellency, the President, for an informative and precise address on the state of the nation for the opening of the Third Session of the Ninth Parliament.

Allow me to congratulate the Members of this House whose parties recently designated them to committee leadership positions and I thank all of you for the duties you perform for this nation. In a special way, I commiserate with the people who lost their dear ones in the fuel tank crisis and the family of the late Remmy Wamala, our own.

Article 101 of the Constitution of Uganda mandates the President to perform the role he performed on the 6th of June at Kampala, Serena Hotel. And in this motion, I am going to highlight the key issues that I, as the mover, feel that we should support emanating from the President’s address. The address was short, brief and direct and the President has always maintained his consistency in talking about socio-economic issues that drive this economy to greater heights. In that address, he mentioned 10 key bottlenecks to our economic development, in Uganda and in Africa. And as Ugandans, we need to come to grips with these bottlenecks and see how we can remove them in order to achieve economic development.

The President’s speech dwelt mainly on five issues. The first one was on human resource development and I think on this, it is our duty to look at health, which was his key issue. And on the issue of health, His Excellency dwelt much on infant mortality and maternal mortality. He told the nation how these rates have reduced. For the children, routine immunisation has removed the six killer diseases and recently, a new vaccine against human papilloma virus and pneumonia virus has also been added to the list. 

Mr Speaker, it is true that although we are talking about the success of the babies’ and mothers’ survival, the President also mentioned challenges in this sector. For example, we know that we have a low rate of contraceptives and we also know that some of the health centres are not yet fully staffed as we would need. We also know that the drug supply chain has some bottlenecks which must be overcome. And according to the President’s address, when you look at those challenges, it is pertinent that this Parliament finds ways of getting to grips with them. We still have HIV/AIDS, malaria and anaemia which all affect our children and mothers.

Other challenges in our hospitals, especially to do with maternal deaths – we know there is emergency obstetric care, which has been introduced and has reduced the death rate – formerly, it contributed to 80 percent of the maternal deaths in the country. We also have skilled attendance to mothers – this has improved but there is still a challenge. Family planning services are available in all our health centres – health centres III and IV – but there is a challenge that many of our mothers are not interested in that service. And we are aware that in last year’s budget, we increased the budget to the health sector and the main purpose was to look at the wellness of the mother and baby in the delivery process. And it is also important to know that there are programmes that involve male involvement in the whole process of a mother going to the antenatal clinic and all those services. And it is also important to know that many of the regional hospitals have already received cancer screening services. All these are examples of how the mothers’ and babies’ lives have been improved in the process of reducing the maternal and infant mortality rate.

The challenges I have mentioned are our duty and I wish to ask this Parliament that as we support the motion, let us look at these challenges and see how we can move on. 

There is another greater challenge of early marriages and our cultural tendencies, which hinder the mother from getting to the hospital in time to save her and the baby. As the President mentioned in his speech, if we could reduce accidents on our roads, we would also reduce the deaths of the people who go through this every day. If you go to Mulago now, what you would see in the hospitals -

Mr Speaker, still on the issue of health, the President also advised us to collectively add careful living, personal discipline, nutrition and hygiene for the purpose of improving the lifespan of the people of Uganda.

I have mentioned the challenges and as we move on in the debate, we shall all be interested in knowing, for example, how quickly we are going to have health insurance in place for the purpose of improving our health.

The next important point he had was human resource development in education and skills acquisition. The President, in his address, dwelt much on the successes in the Education Sector especially to do with the new loan scheme that is available in the Budget that was read. This is above the ordinary funding that our university students are getting and I think we should hail the President for this because he has persistently shown us how UPE, USE and skills development in our technical schools have improved job creation.

It is important to note that although the President dwelt much on USE and UPE for which we need to hail him, he also brought in an issue concerning the corruption that exists in the Education Sector. He decried the loopholes of corruption and the need to be diligent in implementing the said loan schemes he was talking about; UPE, USE and technical education. 

It is also important to note from his speech that he was aware that when we look at our education system in the villages and even in the towns, we need more classrooms, more staff and above all there is a problem of salaries for teachers, which is constantly in the mind of this House.

I wish, however, to commend the Minister of Education, hon. Jessica Alupo, for disbursing 100 percent of the UPE and USE funds in the last financial year and on time too. This was done at the beginning of the term instead of the quarterly disbursements, which in the past were out of step with the calendar as we were moving year by year.

The third important item in the address to the nation was job creation. As Ugandans, it is important to know that our job market has, at the end of it all, not been able to absorb all the students that graduate from our education systems. However, we know that with improved investments, jobs have been created and for this we need to thank the President.

I cannot read this because I am not supposed to be reading and that is what I am trying to avoid - (Interruption)

MR MBAGADHI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the mover of this motion to clarify to us because she has said that the Ministry of Education -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you rose on a point of order.

MR MBAGADHI: I am building the point. She has said that the Minister of Education, hon. Jessica Alupo, disbursed money to UPE schools. Is it in order to say that the Minister of Education is the one who disburses money and not the Ministry of Finance? Is she in order?

THE DEUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please, proceed.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was talking about Education. When it comes to the Ministry of Finance, I will talk about that. I cannot read the jobs created in various sectors because - (Interruption) 

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been listening to the hon. Member and mover of the motion very attentively and she was thanking the Minister of Education for having disbursed the USE and UPE funds 100 percent in the last financial year.

I am in direct touch with the schools in my district. I also happen to serve in one of the schools in the capacity of a director and this school has never received the funds. They only released funds for the second quarter and up to now, these schools are still demanding for money from the Ministry of Education.

Therefore, is the hon. Member in order to convince and deceive this House that the funds were disbursed 100 percent in the last quarter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, that could have come in your debate on the motion but now that it has come, it has come in the form of information to the mover of the motion. It is not a point of order. Please, you have got the information, proceed.

MS BOONA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The largest job creator is the manufacturing industry and this information is available from UBOS. Since I am speaking to the motion, I am not allowed to read it verbatim.

On economic performance, we wish to hail the President because this country was able to reduce inflation, which was at 30 percent last year, to 3.6 percent in 2013 and every Ugandan is aware of that. The Gross Domestic Product rate is now at 5.1 percent and most importantly, there is improved management of monetary and fiscal policy. This is what has managed to bring inflation down from 30 percent to 3.6 percent.

I would like this House, looking at what the President addressed the nation about, to remember that there is something very important, which we should hail him for and that is investment. I wish to thank him for his persistence in attracting and retaining investors in this country, be them local or international. He is asking this Parliament to ensure that we amend the Investment Code to criminalise malicious sabotage of investment in Uganda because when there is an obstruction or delay in investment, it in turn obstructs and hampers job creation, production for domestic consumption, export and the tax base of this country.

On oil, the President asked Parliament to support the addition of the pipeline to the oil refinery provided this country can justify it. And for this, we know that Island Gas will enhance our electricity in the long run. I would like to hail the President for this. 

Finally and most importantly, let me talk about corruption. The Government should be applauded for setting up the right bodies – we have the CID, Auditor-General, IGG and the relevant functional committees in this Parliament that are fighting corruption. We should look at the current investigations at the Prime Minister’s Office and the Ministry of Public Service – these investigations need to be backed by this Parliament.

The laws we make should be able to criminalise corruption. For example, the country is crying about the five year jail term that was given to Geoffrey Kazinda, but we need to realise that that is what we have in our laws. If the laws talked about for example, ten years, maybe he would have been awarded ten years. As Parliament, we need to beef up our laws so that ill-gotten property can be confiscated with stolen funds being repaid by those found guilty of corruption.

Mr Speaker, the President should be hailed on information about agriculture. The challenges and bottlenecks existing in the agriculture sector notwithstanding, the President highlighted the positive measures mentioning what has to be done to revitalise agriculture. We hail him for that. 

As you may know, in many of our constituencies, there has been increased production of coffee, tea and cotton in terms of value addition. The President reminded us about the agricultural zoning strategy. It is high time, Parliament set this in motion.  I also wish to call upon Parliament to support the President in his effort to fight over fishing, pollution and encroachment on Lake Victoria. This is important because our earnings from fish have declined from $196 million to now $142 million as he informed us during the State of the Nation Address.

As Parliament, we need to support the Minister of State for Fisheries because we witness some of these practices of over fishing and pollution in our areas. As a country, we need to ensure that these mishaps do not continue.

I also wish to thank the President for mentioning the veterinary “accident.” I call it an accident because the veterinary staff should have informed us about this tick-borne disease. So, we need to ensure that this does not spread to human drugs. 

Let me wind up with the transport sector. As Members of Parliament, I know some of you have seen the road network improve –[MEMBERS: “No”. As we talk, Government has allocated Shs 1,219 billion towards the road and railway networks. That is a fact. For example, we now know that 10 major roads including the Gulu-Atiak Road are being worked on, Arua-Koboko-Kaya Road is being constructed. People who come from Kisoro will agree with me that Kampala-Kisoro Road is being worked on. We have already had the Northern Bypass and Mbarara is about to get the Mbarara Bypass –(Interjections)- the Entebbe Highway is already on course.

Mr Speaker, I wish to conclude by saying that it is by humble request that, regardless of the political party one subscribes to, we need to propose remedies to overcome challenges that hinder our progress towards a creation of a First World economy. From the figures given by H.E the President, of 5.1 percent GDP growth and of inflation having improved and foreign exchange reserves being at Shs 33 billion, the future is bright.

Our rural population, however, must have their attitude towards work improved because, as David Blair wrote, striving for success without hard work is like trying to harvest where you did not plant. Therefore, I would like to call upon Members to join me in supporting this motion. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Member, for Mbarara District. Okay, let us now hear from the seconder of the motion, the hon. Member for Samia Bugwe North.

3.54
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion to thank the President for his clear, precise and elaborate exposition in his State of the Nation Address and for fulfilling his mandate as required of him by Article 101 of the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure of this House.

I would like to begin by looking at the opening remarks of the President. He said, “I greet you and thank you for the positive things you have been doing since I last addressed you on 13 December 2012.” I find this a positive beginning because he was being cognisant of the fact that Parliament, particularly has been doing quite a lot especially in the performance of our oversight roles. On that note, I thank Members of Parliament for the good role they have played in executing their oversight function, especially, in the areas of the fight against corruption.

I also would like to link these opening remarks to the ones the President said last – “I want to thank Members of the accountability committees, PAC in particular, chaired by the hon. Kassiano Wadri and other oversight committees of Parliament for coming out very clearly to fight corruption.

In the last paragraph, the President talked about addressing Parliament on this particular topic. But I also want to thank Government for creating an enabling environment to fight this vice. For example, by setting up institutions of Government like the Anti Corruption Court, the IGG, which is now fully constituted, the Office of the DPP, though it still has some challenges, the recent appointment of 26 Judges – I think that cannot go without applause –(Applause)– the strengthening of the Auditor-General’s Office – I hope all of us are aware that in the current budget, the Minister of Finance proposed to improve the budget for the Auditor-General’s Office to enhance its ability to fight corruption.

I want to thank Government for the many cases that have so far been tried by the Anti Corruption Court. As you may know, we have had a number of cases that have been – and particularly, I want to thank the President for ordering a forensic audit in the Office of the Prime Minister and Ministry of Public Service, which opened up all those scandals. I am sure the due process is taking its toll. Those are no mean achievements. They demonstrate the fact that there is will on the side of Government to combat this vice. However, in the address of the President, he did mention that all of us have to work as a team and I think what remains as a challenge now is how institutions handle it. I want to cite examples. These are challenges all of us must ensure are fixed.

Recently, there was an accounting officer from one of the West Nile districts who was charged with corruption and Shs 290 million was alleged to have been misappropriated. The sentence was five years’ imprisonment and a refund of the money. In another earlier case, where we had Teddy Sezi Cheeye, the loss was Shs 100 million, it was six years’ imprisonment and no refund. In the case of Kazinda, the very famous one, Shs 50 billion was in question, five years in jail and no refund. 

I now get to where the President said all of us must tackle this matter collectively. It is a question of institutions. However, all of you clearly see that from the point of the laws - the legal infrastructure which we have - if it is the same laws which are operating, handing down a sentence of five years and a refund to somebody who misappropriated Shs 290 million and then the other one who misappropriated Shs 50 billion gets five years and no refund, you can now see that we have a big challenge to tackle as Parliament. 

It is in this regard that I want to call upon all of us, irrespective of the political divide, to support the private members Bill as moved by hon. Ssimbwa, to pass quickly the Anti-Corruption Bill to deal with those who are stealing Government resources. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker, I want to go to the economy and here I want to thank the Government for tackling the macro-economic indicators, some of which, if not all, determine and give confidence to the investors; and which relate to production, employment, income and economic growth. 

In 2011, by the month of August, this country was suffering double digit inflation which discouraged investors, demoralised growth and reduced employment. However, Government came up with rather radical and pragmatic efforts and slapped serious policies - although at one time the Governor of Bank of Uganda mentioned that Parliament was rumbling when we had a comment on this. But in this regard, I want to salute Government and the Governor, Bank of Uganda for the radical policies which were put in place to bring down prices, stabilise prices and managing inflation now to 3.6 percent. 

Mr Speaker, this inflation is sometimes caused by external shocks although some of the causes are internal. But I am proud of my Government for trying to manage those that are caused by internal shocks. As we speak now, there is a lot of consumer confidence because of price stability which also increases the purchasing power. There is a lot of investor confidence because they know the economy is now stable. The moment there is speculation in respect to indicators of inflation, you get investors discouraged from investing in a particular economy. So, for this matter, across the political divide, we should thank Government and Bank of Uganda for ensuring and maintaining inflation at as low as 3.6 percent. 

On infrastructure, the President was categorical when he said we should not waste any more time in dealing with infrastructure development, particularly energy. All of us know that to transform this economy from where we are to a middle income economy, we must industrialise. We cannot industrialise without production of hydro-electricity and other sources of cheap power. But in this respect, the President was categorical when he said Karuma, which is going to produce 600 mega-watts, is about to commence. He mentioned Ayago which is also going to produce 600 mega-watts; Oriam which is going to produce 319 mega-watts; Kariba which will also be built and will produce 288 mega-watts; Isimba which will produce 188 mega-watts; to mention but a few. The expected total of mega-watts to be produced in this economy will be approximately 2,500 mega-watts. That measured against the current demand, both domestic and industrial, Uganda stands a chance to propel herself to a middle income country sooner than later.

I want to go to the share of sector by sector contribution to the GDP. One of the fastest growing sectors is the service sector which now stands at 52 percent contribution to GDP. The other sectors which are struggling include agriculture, where we all know we have a challenge. Like I said, in his remarks the President said all of us must put our hands together. It should be this Parliament now to appeal to Government to increase the share of budget allocation to the agriculture sector so that we can realise transformation of the 68 percent members of this economy who live predominantly on agriculture to also transform themselves. 

But this has to be a multi-sectoral approach because as much as we want to improve agriculture, we must also be looking at improvement in respect to value addition. It is also in this regard that this Parliament should support Government in increasing funding to the energy sector, particularly in transmission. We should be focusing on ensuring that we achieve rural electrification for value addition to areas which require value addition.

I want to thank the President: He was categorical when he talked about infrastructure development. He said Government is going to vote money for infrastructure development to production areas and I think honourable colleagues should look at the road sector, the railway, energy, with the focus on value addition and improvement of areas of production. 

It is also very important, when we are discussing issues of the economy, to address ourselves to the issues of employment elasticity. We are aware that the current labour force growth per annum stands at 2.5 percent while the overall employment elasticity is only 0.4 percent. These are some of the challenges which I wanted to single out - 0.4 percent - and yet we have a GDP growth of 5.2 percent. Now, in order to catch up with the ever increasing labour in the market, those skilled, semi-skilled and those qualified at graduate level, need to focus on job creation.

But I want to thank the Government for adopting a policy of a private growth led sector economy. In his address the President urges Parliament to give a lot of support to the private sector to create a conducive environment for investment. When he said that he would like to see Government fight those who sabotage investors, he was spot on. 

I also want to thank Government for being deliberate on upping the capacity of Uganda Registration Services Bureau and consequently, decentralising registration of business such that we reduce on the real cost of registration of business. We support registration of business as a way of promoting investments and thereby tackling the issues of job creation or employment elasticity.

Mr Speaker, my colleague who moved the motion talked about promotion or human resource development especially in the area of education. I want to dwell a little on the issue of health; I want to appreciate Government for all the efforts that have been put in place to ensuring that some of the major diseases especially non-communicable diseases, which could be prevented through immunisation, have really been brought to the barest minimum. We no longer even have issues of polio outbreaks, issues of kwashiorkor are also now very minimal and like the President said, if we can integrate in this policy nutrition, we can curb and achieve all this.

Uganda in the past, apart from the very recent, has registered very serious achievements in respect to immunisation. I think the problem, recently, was due to the delivery system, which caused some problem to some people in the health sector.

However, Mr Speaker, I also want to urge the Minister of Health to become proactive in respect to quality assurance. As all of you know, honourable colleagues, in this economy, you have both private and public service providers. But most of our private service providers, I think, are operating below average, hence resulting in deaths, which would have been prevented, for example, the one which occurred to our sister Remmy. I would like to call upon Government to become extremely proactive and particularly, the Ministry of Health to equip and wake up the sector of quality control such that we can have some reasonable quality health care, which is really offered to Uganda by private service providers.

In the State of the Nation Address, the President highlighted areas, which are critical and I want to thank him for having been consistent particularly in the area of socio-economic transformation. 

I would like to end here by calling upon honourable colleagues from across the divide to support this motion and as we put in our own effort to ensuring that a few challenges, which I highlighted here in the statement and also, which I have enumerated are dealt with accordingly. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Member for Samia Bugwe North, for seconding the motion. Thank you, Member for Mbarara District. Hon. Members, please, join me in welcoming, this afternoon, students from Washington Seattle School of Law, who are in the public gallery. They are here to observe the proceedings of Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

Hon. Members, I propose the question for debate, the motion is that: “Thanks from the Parliament of Uganda be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government Policy contained in the Address of the State of the Nation by His Excellency the President to this Parliament on Tuesday, 6 June 2013.” That is the question that I propose for you to debate and to start our debate, I will have the response from the Leader of the Opposition, which response will take about one hour and forty five minutes.

4.13
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I make my presentation, I would like to find out who the Leader of Government Business is, such that I can hand him a copy of this document.

It is my duty and honour, on behalf of the entire Opposition and the voiceless, to address you, in response to the State of the Nation Address delivered by H.E. the President to this august House on Thursday, the 6th of June 2013.  

But first, allow me recall our fallen brothers and sisters of this House, comrades who toiled with us here, and have since departed from us during last year. Hon Cerina Nebanda Arioru and Hon. Dr Stephen Mallinga were fighters who did their part and we will particularly miss them in this august House, for what they were and what they stood for. Therefore, through you, Rt Hon. Speaker, I request that we stand up and observe a moment of silence in respect of our fallen colleagues.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I thank you so much and I call upon us to always stick together, in both hard times as well as good times. If we do not appreciate ourselves, no one will, especially during times of need. That is why H.E. the President did not have time for such “nonsense”, during his address to Ugandans.  So, let us pick some lessons as we serve our country.

In the wisdom of the framers of the 1995 Constitution, the State of Nation Address is a mechanism for promoting accountability and good governance. They meant it to define the character of the nation and the desire to build a better society for all the people of Uganda. It was meant to be a bold plan to be implemented by all actors, according to the timetable laid down by the head of state. 

It is, therefore, a promissory note to the nation by the President, stipulating Government policy and challenges facing the nation for the coming 12 months and beyond. This gives him an opportunity to deliver programmes that will help deal with challenges that confront citizens. The State of Nation Address should be an honest analysis of the crises we face, showing where we are coming from, where we are going and how we will reach there.

Unfortunately, that stately-occasion has been greatly watered down.  It has lost its original intention and meaning to many of us and Ugandans at large. It has since turned into an occasion without constitutional accountability and governance import.  The President now takes it as his time to show people and remind them, how far he and a few others have come as entities, rather than telling us what is in store for our children. It is a time for posturing and showing-off colours, rather than accounting and envisioning. (Applause) That is why, for many serious people, that occasion has become a golden opportunity to sleep away. (Interjections) That is why we, in the Opposition, sometimes prefer to walk away, rather than pretend to be attending to some serious  business, whereas not.

This year, the President showed total disregard to the problems facing our nation. We expected the head of state to tell the nation how far his Government had gone in fulfilling the numerous pledges. For example, the President had vowed to:

    i) distribute money in a kiyekera (guerrilla) way to tarmac the 19 roads under category A on the UNRA list. This was to be enhanced by borrowing from NSSF and foreign banks;

    ii) table a law to punish severely those who endanger our future on account of corruption, selfishness and opportunism;

    iii) substantially increase development spending against recurrent expenditure.

Mr Speaker, no such account was given. Instead, people accused with criminal greed were simply handed ridiculous sentences while they walked away with taxpayers’ money scot-free. Just like the President Museveni’s Kiremba cow, Uganda is now heavily infested by ticks and jiggers, who have taken it upon themselves to dig into every public penny as if this country was their paternal estate. 

To put the record straight, for the last seven years, the Ugandan economy has been characterised by –
    i) poor service delivery, evidenced in critical sectors such as health, education and agriculture, leading to mass unemployment and insecurity in the country;

    ii) increased corruption and accumulation of wealth by a few individuals at the expense of nation building;

    iii) underdeveloped private sector, with only 25 percent of our population engaged in the formal sector, while the rest remain in the informal sector;

    iv) unprecedented rise in wealth disparities, with benefits of economic growth going disproportionately to the wealthiest 20 percent of the population, leading to heightened levels of poverty, hunger, school drop-outs and unemployment;

    v) declining performance in the agriculture sector, yet it contributes 20 percent of GDP, 48 percent of export earnings, provides the bulk of raw materials for industry, and employs over 73 percent of the population. (Interjections) This is UBOS statistics and that is a Government agency for your information.  

The signs and symptoms of the difficulties we face are manifested in different ways. The recent loss of lives of many poor Ugandans on the Northern Bypass, trying to scoop fuel for survival, is just one of the examples of the tough times citizens face.  May their souls rest in eternal peace!

The political uncertainty

Mr Speaker, the President spent good time on national security, ranked it high among the major issues on his desk. The NRM-led Government defines security in terms of acquisition of sophisticated arms, storage of large quantities of teargas and muzzling of independent voices. They believe that with those in place, citizens will have peace, and be able to have good sleep. That is why Defence was previously allocated Shs 947.993 billion in the financial year 2011/12, and another Shs 913.959 billion in financial year 2012/13.  

On the other hand, the Ministry of Health, received a meagre Shs 217.377 billion in financial year 2011/12 and only Shs 268.151 billion in financial year 2012/13, while State House got 204.4 billion in financial year 2012/13. 

The youth have said that they are tired of sleeping. They have grown up and got married and they now need jobs to take care of their families. There is also growing discontent amongst the population for want of equity, relevant education and an economy that sees all citizens through the same lenses. But the NRM-led Government insists that Ugandans must clap for the security, peace and the sleep, never mind that the same are now being reversed through military policing and economic denial.

Uganda Police continues to take supplementary allocations in each schedule brought to Parliament. Yet, at least 30,000 police officers live in terrible conditions as described before. In November 2012, wives of policemen residing in Kireka, Mbuya and Naguru barracks attempted to demonstrate against these conditions demanding better services, but their own husbands were forced to brutalise them and stripped them naked. (Laughter) That situation today has not changed. So, we question any talk about security, when our own police officers have no security for themselves and families.

The President bundles all this in what he calls “ideological disorientation” yet the same NRM-led Government is the party responsible for this. There is enough evidence showing ministers, legislators and many others, dressed in army fatigue undergoing systematic ideological disorientation in Kyankwanzi - (Laughter)- as if they belong to a communist dictatorship. By the time they return to Kampala, most of them will have abandoned and sworn never to try again, all the critical thinking they went with. (Laughter)

State institutions in this country have been stripped of their legitimacy and denied the mandated functionalities intended in the Constitution.  Several run-ins between Parliament and the Executive are clear testimony to this – whether on parliamentary recalls or approval of budgets and appointments. The courts have been raided by the military, court orders are disregarded, the Treasury has become a private purse of a few individuals and the Bank of Uganda is now valued at Shs 750 billion, implying that the Bank of Uganda is under liquidation. For your information, during the financial year 2011/12 – page 91 of the Bank of Uganda report – B.O.U made a loss of over Shs 600 billion. This year, the projection is even worse. Imagine, where is this country heading!

As if that is not enough tragedy, the Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA) is being run like someone’s private quarters, in total disregard of the laws. Where are the systems, transparency and institutional frameworks? Why shouldn’t the NRM-led Government allow these institutions to function properly? Why should the military be involved in the running of constitutionally mandated institutions, including meddling in elections? Why does the NRM Government fear true democracy? When the President stakes his own dead body on national issues, that confirms to you how personal interests have overthrown the Constitution of Uganda.

We continue to witness violation of media rights in this country, where the Police and other security agencies continue to abuse and suppress media freedoms. On 20May 2013, two major media houses were raided by the Police and closed down for 10 days and declared “crime scenes”. Their crime was publishing a letter from Gen. Sejusa that was requesting for an inquiry into the alleged plot to kill senior officers opposed to the “Muhoozi Project.” The journalists who protested the closure of these newspapers and radio stations were tear-gassed. So, where is the difference between Amin’s 1970s and these times, which supposedly ushered in a fundamental change?

Mr Speaker, the ills of this country will not go by just wishing them away or by the mere passage of time. They need action. Corruption does not need a special address from the President; it needs action. Politically-backed fraudsters and swindlers must be smoked out. Why should they be allowed to masquerade as whistleblowers? If, indeed, the NRM has handled bigger problems than a bunch of public servants, why has this sickness refused to cure? This government has lost the moral authority to lead due to the long list of corruption scandals and electoral frauds that have marred its rule. 

That is why we agree with the Deputy Speaker, hon. Jacob Oulanyah, who, while addressing NRM cadres in Nwoya District recently, is quoted to have said: (Expunged)

Well said, hon. Deputy Speaker, but our concern is, if a strategy or policy does not work, why has this Government not changed its strategy in fighting corruption?  (Interruption)

MR OKOT-OGONG: Mr Speaker, I have attentively listened to the Leader of the Opposition and I am following him word by word and there is a statement that is attributed to you, that you said in a place that has been mentioned but I am intrigued because this statement has no backing, there is no source, we are wondering whether it is true or not. Is it in order, therefore, for a Member of Parliament to bring a heavy statement referring to the Speaker without this coming out with clear evidence and without appropriation? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is indeed an act of disrespect for the institution of the Speakership not to have verified these particular facts with the person who is alleged to have made this statement. This statement was not confirmed with the person alleged to have made it and the person who spoke on this occasion actually spoke in a local language called Luo. Therefore, it is in doubt as to whether the Member who has made this quotation was capable of doing the translation from Luo to English.  (Laughter) It is not proper to draw the Speaker into debates of this nature. 

MS OTENGO: Mr Speaker, it is good that you are the one in the Chair and you have told us that actually, what he has said is an allegation. I request that he withdraws it so that it does not go on the Hansard. Actually, withdraw it with an apology. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition, it would have been courteous for you to confirm these statements with the person who was alleged to have made them but in the absence of that confirmation, please, do the needful.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I said, “He is quoted to have said” –(Interruption)

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Member withdraws and apologises and have this expunged from the Hansard. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there is a motion. I have ruled on the issue of what the Member should do with the statement that is not crosschecked with the person who actually happens to be in the Chair, therefore, putting the reputation of the Chair in issue and there is a motion that this matter be expunged from the records of the House. I put the question to the motion for expunging of that particular matter from the Hansard.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, despite the fact that this motion was put to vote and since it has been carried, I wanted to know, based on precedents, whether such a motion would be put to vote without debate, especially given the fact that there are Members who were itching to debate this motion. The procedural matter I am raising is whether a motion can be passed without being seconded. And secondly, whether a motion and under what circumstance of this nature, could be passed without debate, particularly given that there were individuals in this House, who were prepared to contribute to the motion. I beg to be guided, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, that is the direction of the Speaker. It is within the Speaker’s discretion to act in such a manner that is deemed necessary for the fair conduct of the debate. (Applause) Hon. Member, proceed. 

MS OSEGE: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure in accordance with Rule 68. Not that I intend to challenge the Speaker’s powers but I did not hear a Member of this House who moved a motion and to me, it appeared like the Speaker moved the motion and decided to have a vote cast on it. Is it procedurally right that the situation has gone the way it has even with Rule 68 in place?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, as Speaker of the House, there are authorities that the Speaker has in the good conduct of the House and the orderly conduct of business. There are discretionary powers that the Speaker has; I have exercised those powers in the circumstances in accordance with this. I am now going to ask the Leader of the Opposition to proceed with his presentation.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, tomorrow, I will bring you a newspaper called Rupiny and lay it on Table. It is a government-owned newspaper. Secondly, Mr Speaker, I never intended to – (Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, I think this House is live on air. We are here being watched by the nation. You have spoken and this country respects your Office and you are here by right and by responsibility. Is it in order for the Leader of the Opposition, having been guided by you and having been warned, not once but twice, (Interjections) and the Members on his side – even not recognising that constitutionally, ex-officio Members are entitled to talk on the Floor of this House? Is the honourable member in order to demean your Office by talking contrary to the ruling you made? And is he in order to continue even making that statement as the Leader of the Opposition?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Office of the Deputy Speaker is a constitutional office incapable of demeaning. So, nobody can demean that office. Please, proceed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, our concern is; if a strategy or policy does not work, why has this government not changed its strategy in fighting corruption? Our belief is that this is impossible, because those that should change it have gotten too entangled in the game, and the solution cannot lie among them.  And whoever fronts alternatives must first flee and leave the country, before they can speak, and brew political uncertainty for the country.  We will not accept this!

Electoral Reforms 

Mr Speaker, we are moving towards 2016 general elections. The elections we have had in this country since 1996 have been disputed, hostile elections characterised by rigging and violence. This country yearns for general elections in which all Ugandans have confidence right from the start; a general elections held under laws acceptable to most Ugandans and conducted by Electoral Commission that enjoys the trust of the country and not seen as partisan and agents of the President or the ruling party.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure and I seek your indulgence to enable the Minister in charge National Guidance or the Government Chief Whip to explain why hon. Nandala’s presentation has been switched off by UBC. And secondly, particularly in Gulu and most of the districts in North, they have switched off the electricity right now. Can I seek a response from the person representing Government in this House, as to why a national state broadcaster can switched off at such an important time that the Leader of the Opposition is responding to what the President said? I seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does anybody from the government have a response? Is it to your knowledge?

4.48
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (MS JUSTINE KASULE LUMUMBA): Mr Speaker, I have received the information given by hon. Otto but we do not run the radio here in Parliament. Let me go and find out and come and give an explanation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, can we listen to the response to the State of the Nation? The hon. Member is speaking to the House and this is the time that we agreed on that he should speak. Please, hon. Member, would you like to proceed?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise to move a motion that the response of the Leader of the Opposition be deferred until an appropriate time, preferably tomorrow so that the whole country can understand what the Opposition is saying and that in the circumstances, we proceed to conduct other business like passing the other Bills. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this House is not in charge of the broadcasting world. Please, I am chairing this House and I want us to act properly. This House does not give directions to any broadcasting house. They do it within their own programming as they deem fit. If we, as Parliament, start directing institutions to cover Parliament when we do not have a television or radio of our own, would we be acting properly, hon. Members? 

Really, should we be directing broadcasting houses to cover us? [Hon. Members: “Guidance”] This is the guidance I am giving. Hon. Members, would you like to resume your seats, please? The Speaker is still talking. Would you like to resume your seat, Member for Kumi County?

UBC is a Government broadcasting institution but it is not under Parliamentary Service. Suppose they do not cover us tomorrow? Are you going to direct them to cover us? If you want to stay the debate on this matter; the presentation of the Leader of the Opposition on this subject, it should be for another reason not because Parliament will direct UBC to cover us. We cannot direct UBC to cover us.

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to inform the House that when hon. Odonga Otto raised the issue, I happened to have the number of the director and called him. I asked, is UBC on or not? He said, “Switch on the TV. It is on live and I am watching the Speaker talking.” So, it is on.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, we are conducting serious business in this House and we are talking about the destiny of Uganda. If it turns out to be that what was raised on the Floor of this House is untrue, I think serious action should be taken against the Member.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Concerning UBC and the radio covering Parliament live, as you are aware, this House appropriates money and we pay for this. Colleagues, if you look at the Parliamentary Commission budget, it is not a favour. We pay for every minute and, therefore, any action by UBC to disconnect us is an aspect of corruption. They must be able to explain because we pay for every hour.

MR WANGOLO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Regarding the situation we have now, we are aware that we are in the House. Hon. Odonga Otto’s statement that TVs are off is a shame. All TVs are on and, therefore, is it in order for hon. Ekanya to continue lying to Parliament and Ugandans watching that TVs are being switched off? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am not watching any television now, so I cannot rule on that. Chairman of Committee on the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, an issue has been raised about the parliamentary budget.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to correct an impression created by hon. Ekanya because I chair the committee that is responsible for Parliamentary Commission. We definitely do not appropriate money for UBC or any other station to broadcast us. That is besides the merit of whether they have disconnected us or not. But as Parliament, we do not appropriate money to any radio or TV station for our broadcasting. 

The point I wanted to raise with you and to seek your guidance on is that, you have rightly said that we do not manage or control broadcasting houses in the broadcasting of our work. Even where I come from, UBC goes on and off and Parliament is sitting all the time. Will Parliament be suspending work? We should not only look at today but the future also. Shall we break off every time there is a fault or a break in transmission by UBC or any other station?

With the guidance you had given, we should proceed. If there is reason to believe that some foul play has been done, it can be pursued with the relevant ministry but that should not stop the operation and debate of Parliament.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, when hon. Odonga Otto, the MP for Aruu county, raised this issue, he said either the Chief Whip or the Minister in charge of Information and National Guidance should explain. I want to inform you that UBC is on and it has not got off. It is on even right now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have just been informed by the Clerk-at-Table that information coming from the Clerk’s Office says that in Kampala UBC is on but they cannot speak for Gulu.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of guidance. There is a motion that was moved and supported. But I still wonder why you did not call for a vote. I am saying this because the reasons that were advanced are quite pertinent. I also keep wondering, supposing it were the head of state delivering a State of the National Address and the televisions and radio stations were switched off, would he have continued?
 
The guidance I am seeking is, there was a motion moved and supported that the Leader of Opposition’s response, which should be listened to by the whole country, be deferred until tomorrow because as we all know, UBC switches off at 5.00 O’clock and it is now coming to 5.00 O’clock. I beg to move.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are rules governing motions moved without notice. I need to agree to it – the honourable Member for Masaka Municipality might be sitting in a position that he is not designated to, are you comfortable with that position?

MR MPUUGA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, continue. Honourable members, if the deferring of the delivery of the Statement by Leader of Opposition is due to some other reason, I will understand that. Otherwise, if it is because we want to direct UBC to cover us, that wouldn’t be proper. The motion was proposed without notice; I did not approve of it. But if it is in the interest of the Members that the presentation by the Leader of Opposition continues tomorrow, so be it. I mean if that is what Members want, that will be it. 
 
DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There is a Member of Parliament who is not in this House, but who sent me a message that he was watching proceedings on UBC Television. When this matter came up, I called him. He has confirmed to me that UBC Television is on air and that he is watching the proceedings. But even if it were off air, I don’t think the debates in this House are dependent on whether television stations are doing live broadcast or not. 

But I also want to confirm what hon. Stephen Tashobya has said that the Parliamentary Commission does not budget for television coverage of House proceedings and that is contrary to what hon. Geoffrey Ekanya had raised. Otherwise, I move that we continue with the proceedings by listening to the statement by Leader of Opposition as he concludes his reply to the State of the Nation Address by H.E, the President.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of Opposition, you are live on air. Please proceed and conclude.
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker and Rule 217 (2) says thus: “Broadcasting of the proceedings of the House shall maintain such standards and fairness as adopted from time to time by the House.” Government can have freewill to do what they please, rather than being exposed by grim poverty demographic realities. We demand for an immediate population census to guide national planning.

Agriculture

In the past 10 years of the NRM Government, agriculture has been growing at an annual growth rate of one to three percent compared with an annual population growth of 3.3 percent over the same period. This trend creates a food insecure population due to decreasing productivity. In our previous responses, we have given comprehensive proposals to improve agriculture and move Uganda forward. We do not want to repeat them in this response -

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, with due respect to the Leader of the Opposition, I have reliable information that UBC is on but without sound. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, would you like to proceed? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, there is no permanent situation. In our previous responses we have brought comprehensive proposals to improve agriculture and move Uganda forward. We do not want to repeat them in this response because that record is there for Members and Government to refer to.  But it is shameful that people still die of hunger today, while many children are malnourished and stunted. 

We must stop burying our heads in the sand and restore cooperatives.  We must advocate for inclusive growth which is agricultural growth, employment generation and poverty reduction; improve the social sector (education and health) and reduce regional and other disparities. SACCOs and NAADS are nothing beyond NRM campaign tools. The so-called services-led economic growth will not lead us anywhere unless they are properly anchored and linked with the sector, which is still a backbone of this economy.  NAADS was a milk cow for NRM and we demand for a forensic audit for NAADS to expose the mega corruption scandal of the century!  

Investment and Business

The President again threatened to cause an amendment to the Investment Code to criminalise malicious sabotage of investments in Uganda. Rather than run into legislation, the President should weigh-in on his cronies who keep manipulating investors. What the investors want is to work where there is less interference by the state and an assurance of political stability for them to put their huge sums of money. 

The cost of doing business in Uganda has remained high and it became worse recently, as reported by the recent Global Competitiveness Report of 2012/2013. Uganda is ranked for ease of starting business at the 144th position, compared to Kenya at 126th, Tanzania at 113th and Rwanda at the 8th position. This is what we have sown by our own acts. Our business environment is riddled with corruption, nepotism, frequent clamp downs of the media houses and other interferences at the highest levels. The cadre police have consistently announced the presence of terrorists and imminent attacks from them by parading all sorts of military hardware on road junctions. These and many other gimmicks only serve as disincentives to foreign investors who prefer investing in the peaceful countries.  

Energy and infrastructure

Once again the President emphasised the need for energy and infrastructure as critical for development. However, his proposals were not SMART at all- (Interjections) - listen. The President says, Karuma will be built (600 megawatts); Ayago will be built (392 megawatts); Kiba will be built (388 megawatts) and Isimba will be built (188 megawatts); and the railway will be built. When will these be built? What are the committed timeframes and resources? How can the President give out a US$3 billion Karuma Project to one company without competitive bidding? Isn’t this corruption of the highest order? How will he fight corruption when he is the same person encouraging it?

While the roads sector has taken the lion’s share of the budget for the last four years, our roads remain in a sorry state, even after the longest serving minister of the sector was removed. This year the President only says some of the roads will be built by use of our own resources and others by financing from outside. What does such a statement mean to the peasant from Kanungu whose only bridge that connects him or her to the outside world collapsed in May 2012? (Laughter) Or the peasants from Butambala, Kibaale and Mukono districts where the Mpigi-Maddu, Kyenjojo-Hoima and Mukono-Katosi roads respectively, have appeared on the lists of the roads to be tarmacked for the last 10 years? We believe these allocations are ceremonial allocations to enable the President and his people to access that money for other purposes.

Unemployment

Uganda is characterised by a young unemployed population. As the President admitted while speaking at the Golden Jubilee celebrations at Kololo, youth unemployment now stands at over 83 percent. This is not only a security risk, but also the cause of massive poverty the country wallows in.  

Whereas Government recognises this problem, no tangible interventions have been put in place. Government has instead hoodwinked the youth with a youth venture capital fund whose accountability we are yet to get. The President is known to have resorted to carrying money in sacks and paper bags to distribute to the youth himself. The President also one time dreamt of a student’s grant scheme, as a solution to unemployment – and he announced it. How can student loan-bonding create employment for the youth? How can you ask a youth to produce a land title before getting a loan when his/her parents have never owned a land title? I am sure when President Museveni came from the bush he had no land title.
 
Mr Speaker, for the last decade of UPE, young people are being taught to cram 20 percent of their curriculum in order to pass exams. What is needed in our view is greater training in entrepreneurship. Government should partner with successful entrepreneurs to talk to and inspire the youth. In addition, we should ease financial access for them, and celebrate business role models, instead of war heroes. 
 
Empty Visions

We have seen many pledges in Vision 2020, 2025, 2030 and now 2040. In Vision 2020, Uganda’s target was to eliminate the river blindness disease in the selected districts by 2015, and the rest of the country. Vision 2030 promised to turn around the fortunes of five million productive Ugandans to ensure they earn Shs 20 million annually.  Today, it is Vision 2040, projecting to transform Uganda from a peasant to a modern and prosperous country within 30 years by:

i)	establishing a hi-tech ICT city modelled on Silicon Valley in the United States;
ii) 	building five strategic cities in Hoima, Nakasongola, Fort Portal, Moroto and Jinja;
iii)  	building four international airports;
iv) 	establishing an iron ore plant in Muko, Kabale;
v) 	establishing large irrigation schemes in various parts of the country;
vi)	 re-establishing the phosphate industry in Tororo;
vii)	building a standard gauge railway with high speed trains, possibly underground, like those in the UK;
viii)	building nuclear power plants in Uganda;
ix) 	building multilane national road network;
 
After nearly 30 years in power, the NRM now recognises that Uganda is still a peasant country, and that it now requests for another 30 years to transform it into a modern and prosperous country. This is the sad reality of the fundamental change! Ugandans need to be told the truth. Ugandans are never involved in this business of dreaming, just like the National Development Plan, which has now fallen in the footsteps.  What happened to the Shs 20 million per year per household promised in 2006?
 
Social Sector  

Mr Speaker, health and education play a vital role in improving productivity and economic growth. Education is widely agreed to affect economic outcomes. It is also agreed that health affects education. The wealth of any nation can be measured by the health status of its citizens. Whenever families lack money, it is health and education that are the first to be given up. Since the two are interrelated and are important contributors to economic growth, Government must invest in them adequately.
 
However, in his address, the President suggested that the challenge in the health sector is attributable to male midwives, forgetting that in the current system, where thousands of doctors and nurses positions are unfilled, patients are increasingly turning to private facilities and witch doctors.
 
When the President proposed to slap an 18 percent VAT on water, he forgot that we had a reason for removing it in the first place. It is a matter of health, sanitation and rights. Government must seriously review this proposal.  Health policies must be revisited to address the chronic problem of shortage and remuneration of health workers. It makes no sense to continue constructing structures without personnel, equipment and drugs. 
 
Uganda has been at the forefront of pushing for the EAC. But   without quality education, Ugandans will not reap the benefits that will accrue from the EAC and other regional and global partnerships. Youth education must be strategically re-modelled to make it relevant to this century and beyond.
 
National Power and the National Agenda

Mr Speaker, as I come to the conclusion of this statement, I wish to mention this. Firstly, we must remind ourselves that “Power belongs to the people”. It is our responsibility, as Parliament, to ensure that this power remains with them. It is delegated to us by our electorate to be used for purposes that promote their good, not anybody’s good.  We must use it to allocate resources without fear or favour.  We must expose those who misuse these powers.  We have to ensure that Government departments responsible for delivering services have resources and enabling legal and implementation frameworks. 
 
Mr Speaker, we can only do this when we refuse to be bullied into silence; when we refuse to act victims and when we define ourselves rather than allowing others to define our lives.
 
Mr Speaker, you were elected to represent your constituents. However, it would appear some of us here have turned their allegiances to their party leader, even when it contradicts with the interests of their electorates. We don’t want to see, in the upcoming budget debates and appropriations, Members backtracking on matters that are close to the hearts of citizens, as though the Holy Spirit has appeared to them. (Laughter). This will be neglect of duty at its highest and we hope we stand the test of time. 
 
We should remain energised by the words of Martin Luther King who said: “Some of us who have already began to break the silence of the might, have found that the calling to speak is often a vocation of agony, but we must speak.” We must speak with humility that is appropriate to our limited vision, but we must speak. That is where national power lies. (Applause)
 
Secondly, many of us here are just about to waste away our time. Our time here is meant to add value and cause change in the wellbeing of citizens. However, our view as the Opposition is that as a country, we are getting off-track and we have lost our course. There is, therefore, an urgent need to re-table the national agenda for fresh validation. There are things we must rethink and this House must lead in rekindling the debate around these matters:-

    i) Parliament

Mr Speaker, there are things that are happening in the Appointments Committee which are causing concern to the public and on this side of the House. The frequent visits and meetings with the President are undermining the independence and credibility of the Appointments Committee and Parliament as a whole. (Applause)
 
The President should be advised to let Parliament perform its duties without influence and manipulation. Appointments Committee is a vetting committee and not a rubber stamp for the President.(Applause). We request the President to leave the committee do its work following the laws of Uganda, which we have all sworn to uphold. So, it would be wrong for us as Parliament to also bend laws for purposes of pleasing the President. The public will hold us accountable.

    ii) State House and President’s Office staffing

We have noted that there are many staff on the list of State House and Office of the President who are not doing any work but just serving the NRM party interests. These are in the names of presidential advisors/assistants: For example, Prof E. Mushemeza of the Electoral Commission of NRM and one councillor, Santa Oketa. What do they have to do with public service staffing? This is abuse of office and corruption. In due course, we shall present a list of such people who are paid illegally from the taxpayers’ money.

(iii)   Funding of Political Parties: 

Mr Speaker, we passed the Political Organisations Act in 2005 to fund the political parties. Up to now, seven years, this has not been operationalised. This is total lack of commitment to democracy. Other political parties have been suffocated while the NRM party is being funded indirectly through State House. We demand that the funding of political parties be implemented immediately this financial year.

(iv)  National Policy vs Implementation

There is an observed mismatch between policy setting and their implementation.  Some policies that are intrinsically good have been deliberately misapplied on the ground. A few examples might be useful here:

(a)  Decentralisation. The aim of the Constitution and the Local Government Act, 1997 was to improve service delivery through the transfer of decision making power to the local governments. But, has this power been effectively transferred?
 
HON. MEMBERS: No.
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Do local governments actually determine their priorities? Why does central government continue to set indicative planning figures for local governments? Why is it that only about 20 percent of national budgets are directly sent to local governments, yet that is where over 80 percent of the population lives? Is this decentralisation real devolution of powers or is it a mere delegation of central government functions and directives to local governments?
 
Why is Government increasingly recentralising some of the functions? Has service delivery improved under the so-called decentralisation?
 
Mr Speaker, you have carried out a number of parliamentary outreaches in different parts of this country, you are witnessing the pain local governments are going through regarding this re-centralisation.

(b)    Affirmative action: While the objective was to “remove women from the kitchen”, women have remained glued to the kitchen - (Interjections)- Mr Speaker, as soon as the few women who were making the loudest noise were given seats in Parliament and Cabinet, the traditional woman has remained the ultimate bearer of the effects of economic mismanagement. What we have earned is a bigger Government. Matters critical to the common woman, such as health and water are receiving lip-service; to-date, 16 women, every day- and even recently one staff of Parliament died in labour. 

Beyond garnering votes from them, where are deliberate and effective programmes to lift the plight of the rural woman? Where are they? We talk about gender aggregation and analysis in budgeting; does just the number of women attending a village meeting lift their standards of living even when they do not open their mouths at those meetings? Moreover, there is also need to rethink the affirmative action seats in Parliament. In a country where districts are born every other day, is it still tenable to have district women representatives? There is need to use another efficient and cost effective formula that can ensure women representation and participation. (Interruption)

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. First of all, to remind the Leader of the Opposition that this is a constitutional matter that he is toying with and to even prove to him scientifically that he has never understood the creature “woman” and, therefore, he cannot ably represent any woman and that it is women who will represent women. Is he, therefore, in order to state that there is any other method he is going to use for representation of the women other than what is stipulated in the Constitution?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, issues of special representation were enacted in the 1995 Constitution. A period of 10 years was given for its review and it was reviewed in 2005. Thereafter, every five years, it is subject to review and it has been reviewed. This would hardly be the time to bring the debate for the review because it is not yet five years since we last reviewed. So, that debate can come in the future when the proper debate comes under the Constitution, to consider the review process. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There has always been a misconception that the district women representatives actually represent women in this House. It is not the position of the law. You may be advised to look at the provisions of Article 78 which says, “A one woman representative of every district.” All of us, regardless of gender, are representatives of women as and that is the law. So, nobody should, because she is a woman, say that she has a right or that she is the one who is mandated to represent women. That would certainly be unconstitutional and actually, you may not know your role, if you think you represent women. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I hope my sister and others have understood. As I was saying, there is need to use another efficient and cost effective formula that can ensure women representation and participation. I want you to listen to the statements I am making; just listen to them. 

Cooperatives, Health, Education and Privatization

We killed cooperatives and started SACCOs. To date, SACCOs that were massively started using public funds at the sub-county levels have miserably collapsed. We removed user fees in health centres and yet these assisted health workers and we promised to fund health. Today, you have no gloves in health units. We offloaded public corporations to the private sector so that they could be better managed.  Today, they receive the greatest selective tax waivers and capital injections as if they are still public enterprises, at the cost of whimpering citizens. We killed the railway system and buried it under RVR. 

Now we are talking about high speed underground trains for Uganda. UPE was a good policy but was reduced into a campaign tool. That is why Netherlands withdrew from the sector because there were no tangible results as per original intended purpose. In other words, what are we saying as a country regarding our policy intentions and implementation? We must rethink and retable these matters for national discussion.

National Value System

Why is there a great wave of moral decadence in Uganda? Someone steals public funds and people are just unbothered while others cheer on. The leaders are participating in the loots. The youth have no sense of direction from their leaders. What is morally acceptable and morally wrong has remained elusive to young people because there is no sense of direction. In traditional society, the sense of shame was deeply enrooted. Where has this vanished in Uganda? Who is leading the task of conserving our traditional values that kept society together for all time, which ensured that society prospers equitably? The bigger ills of society today emanate from eradication of these core values.

Constitutionalism

The 1995 Constitution provides for National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy: It provides for democracy and observation of human rights.It provides for balanced and equitable development. It provides for accountability and dignity of persons.

Our view is that these principles have been grossly defied and defiled by people who are in power. (Laughter) Constitutionalism has been thrown out through the window. Respect of the rights of citizens to vote according to their will and to move freely has been encumbered. We need a national conversation and review of these undertakings. 

Mr Speaker and colleagues, we want to therefore encourage you to start an open debate over these matters. If we do not, we will phase-off from this Parliament and positions of leadership without causing the desired change in the lives of Ugandans.  We warn you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, while you are still taking some water, let me introduce some people.In the public gallery this afternoon, we have teachers and pupils of Mirembe Junior School. They are represented by hon. Ssimbwa and hon. NabilahSempala. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Conclusion: Mr Speaker, in her book, Laying Ghosts to Rest, MapheleRamphele said, “Successful people are those who make and admit mistakes rather than those who fail to confront failure”. We need to acknowledge where we have fallen short as a nation and get enough determination to take corrective action as Ugandans. It is against this background that we call upon Government to change its workmethods. 

Mr Speaker, it is not enough for Government to keep saying they are doing their best. That is not what they were put in office for. Government must simply deliver services. It must change its expenditure priorities from stock-piling tear gas to scaling up resources in the agricultural sector. (Applause) Government must do more research and training.It must focus on basic agro-based industries and scale up marketing of the farmers’ produce. We did it in Bugisu Cooperative Union and they came and took it. While farmers will smile with more money in their pockets, Government will also smile with an expanded tax base. I want you to listen to this - while farmers will smile with more money in their pockets, Government will also smile with an expanded tax base. Remember, this is not the same thing as heaping additional taxes on the same people who are already suffering a heavy tax load.

Mr Speaker, Government should respect and pay teachers, and they must pay health workers. People need access to clean water, protection from drought and other disasters. Think and act outside the box. Develop the true will and urge to serve Ugandans. Abandon greed for once, and remember the poor and downtrodden. We have been honest with you in the past and shared with you our thoughts. This country can be fixed; it is not too late. The templates, and our views on how to fix it, have been given to you. If you refuse to listen to us, you will stand and answer for all these matters and you will not blame us.  

We challenge members and Government to start a new debate on where this country is going. National policy, national values and constitutionalism are under severe threat. We must rethink our priorities and recommit to the rule of law and good governance. The insatiable appetite by the Police to clobber, intimidate, humiliate and muzzle the Opposition is bad. We want to remind all those behind these heinous acts against the Opposition that everything that goes up and up, always comes down. It has an end and it shall come to pass.

On our part as Parliament, we must use the oversight function mandated of this House to cause change in people’s lives. That power is clearly stipulated in the 1995 Constitution. If we fold our hands, we will become the biggest traitor to Ugandans, in our view. May God bless you all. For God and my country. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition, for making your response to the address by H.E. the President on the state of the nation. 

Honourable members, this is going to be the last day we are going to exceed 6 o’clock. There is an urgent Billwhere we are left with about four or five clauses to complete and then five clauses that were stood over. The reason for this is that Uganda was given a deadline of the 30th of last month to finish this Bill, and that is the Anti-money Laundering Bill. We have had a break where we have had some consultations. So, I am sure if we gave it another 30 minutes, we might be able to complete this Bill. So I implore you to give the time so that we can deal with this Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to lay my response on the Table so that it can expeditiously reach the President for his comments. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the response of the Leader of the Opposition. Honourable members, as you are aware – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I also want to take this opportunity to ask hon. Janet KataahaMuseveni to –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

MR OKOT-OGONG: Mr Speaker, it is in our Rules of Procedure that we must treat our honourable Members of Parliament with due respect. Hon. Janet Kataaha is a Member of Parliament representing Ruhaama Constituency in her own right. She is not here representing anybody other than the members of her constituency.

Is it, therefore, in order for the Leader of the Opposition to turn a Member of Parliament representing Ruhaama to a messenger to the President? Is the Leader of the Opposition in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, courtesy and decency are the cornerstone of parliamentary debate; it goes with decorum.However, as I always say, people are not the same. That notwithstanding, we need to accord the necessary respect to each of the members of this House. 

The honourable Leader of the Opposition knows the channels which he can use to reach the President formally. It is not correct, therefore, to make direct reference to a Member who is sitting in her own right as a Member of Parliament to be a courier.It is not proper.Honourable members, let us maintain the dignity of the House. Mutual respect is important; let us respect each other even when we debate. 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to raise a point of procedure. I have seen the MP for Ruhaama sometimes sitting with His Excellency while addressing Parliament. I am seeking procedural guidance from you, Rt Hon. Speaker, on when to treat her as MP for Ruhaama and then as First Lady because she has a dual role, which she has exercised in this Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am very conversant with what President Museveni looks like and I am certain he is not in this House; so, the comparison does not arise. The issue is, you have a Member of Parliament sitting here in her own right as a Member of Parliament and in no other capacity and it should be addressed like that. Let us go to the next item.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING BILL, 2009

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order, Members! Can we have some order!

Honourable members, we made significant progress with this Bill.According to the report that we adopted from the Committee of the whole House, it is only five clauses that have been stood over -clauses 2, 4, 10, 111, 116.In our deliberations, we stopped on clause 131 where we had enormous discussions. We were supposed to have taken a decision but we could not take one because it was late and Members had spent- Order! That includes the honourable member for- Yes, let us have some order, please.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to recommit clause 98. I beg for recommittal. I am only bringing this up as information because you were mentioning the clauses that we are going to handle.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I cannot recommit a clause that has not been recommitted. I am only talking about clauses that have been stood over. Regarding clauses that you intend to recommit, you should move the appropriate motion to recommit. I cannot announce it as a recommitted clause. We will take a vote on the recommittal.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman.

Clause 131
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: On clause 131, we had adopted some amendments to improve on the language and structure of this clause. Can we have the update? I think we had basically finished but we were a bit exhausted that evening so we could not finish. Can I put the question to clause 131 as amended? There were some issues that were raised.

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. At the time we finished, we had not quite agreed on what the amendments were. Can we have them read out, including what the changes were, so that we can say whether those are the changes that we had agreed on before we take a vote on them? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you will recall that the amendments that were proposed on clause 131 are on page 21 of the report of the committee, and they were in relation to harmonisation of those penalties for violations, if I remember correctly. We did the harmonisation and that is what was proposed by the committee. 

The honourable Member for Kiboga had raised the issue.We had tried to improve on the continuing offence in (2)(c) of clause 131 and the honourable member raised the distinction between these particular sets of offences in clauses 112 to 130 in comparison to offences as put in the first part under section 4. He said the two are separate. 

In clauses 112 to 130, you can have a continuing situation, in which case these penalties could be properly proposed. However, in clause 4, you do not have that kind of situation.So, there might be no need for creating a situation of continuing violations as had been initially proposed. We had agreed that there is a distinction.

There was a proposal to duplicate sub clause (2) (c) to bring a similar provision immediately after sub clause (1) (b), to insert (c), which also imposes a continuing situation. I think that is clear now. We donot have to do that because the circumstances are different. So, can I put the question on the clause?
 
MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. At the point of adjournment, the learned Attorney-General had partially conceded that under clause 131 (1), there is need to provide for sub clause (c) to cater for repeated or continued offences just as it is in sub clause (2).
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, that is exactly what I have just explained. That is the amendment that we got after the explanation from the member from Kiboga that the two situations are distinguishable. The offences under clause 4 cannot be continuing as compared to offences between clauses 112 and 130. The condition is that they cannot be duplicated. I now put the question to clause 131 as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 131, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 132, agreed to.

Clause 133, agreed to.

Clause 134

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would like to move some amendments to the schedule. One: “The minister may, with approval of Parliament, by statutory instrument, amend Schedule 1.”
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You mean for the prior approval of Parliament?
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Not Schedule 1, I am sorry. Schedule 1 is okay; it is by the Minister, the currency points. However, where it says, “the Minister with approval of Parliament, by notice in the Gazette, amend the list of accountable persons”, how about if the minister decides to either delete or add more names? We should be able to have controls over the minister so that he does not just delete people whom he does not agree with.   

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do you want Parliament to start approving notices?
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, I am talking about the list –
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, because this is a notice and not an instrument.
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, they will have to put the amendment in the notice. Mr Chairman, what I want the minister to do first is to ensure that the list is approved -
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What I am asking is: are we going to start approving notices also, because these are not statutory instruments?
 
MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, what the Leader of the Opposition is saying is that when you look at the second schedule, there is that list of accountable persons – casino owners, real estate agents, advocates etc; to allow the minister powers to add people to that list is virtually giving that minister powers to make law.So, since these are sensitive issues - we have even established a financial intelligence authority –I think there is need to veto these powers of the minister.
 
Earlier today we saw that the Minister of Works and Transport issued a statutory instrument and it brought a massive uproar from Members of Parliament and yet those powers are with the Minister. So, I think that it would be prudent that on this matter –
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member for Aruu, you could guide us because notices are in (2) and instruments are in (3). I was talking about notices under sub clause (2). Look at it again; there is a difference. I was asking whether we are going to start approving notices too because notices are in (2). Schedule 2 is in (3).
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, it is Schedule II that talks about the list, because they refer to accountable persons in Schedule 2. Our worry is that the minister can by notice remove or add to that list.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The question I am asking is: are we going to go to that extent of even approving notices, or this should be just an instrument?
 
MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I understand the concerns of the Leader of the Opposition. However, for it is to make sense, we have to radically amend clause 134 (2), probably to read as follows: “The Minister may, with the approval of Parliament, amend the list of accountable persons in Schedule 2 by…” and then it flows. That will ordinarily mean that we have to drop the phrase, “by notice in the Gazette.” However, it makes sense that Parliament retains the power to approve any amendments to Schedule 2.It is a very critical schedule.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, please take the cue – will this still be a notice or a statutory instrument?
 
MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: It will be a statutory instrument, Mr Chairman.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is what I was looking for because as Chair, I cannot amend it. So, can somebody propose an amendment? 
 
MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we have people like gamblers who dobetting; these can be included on the list of accountable persons just in case somebody realises they are handling lots of money related to suspicious transactions.The minister may also say that mobile money dealers get included on that list in the Gazette. So, I donot know whether we want that to come to Parliament.
 
MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to seek guidance from you –
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: From who?
 
MS AKOL: From the Chair.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, I do not give guidance on such matters.
 
MS AKOL: Okay, but on the issue of gazetting a notice, I would like to say that when an instrument or a notice is gazetted – I think for three weeks - the purpose is to inform the general public. If anybody has any objection, that is the period within which such an objection can be raised. 

In the circumstances, I support the status quo –(Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)Honourable Leader of the Opposition, I know what I am talking about. Actually, it is you who doesnot know.
 
MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, I am a little bit uncomfortable if the minister every time deems it necessary to amend this list, she has to come to Parliament.The economy may be moving very fast then and coming to Parliament, as you know very well, may take a lot of time to take action. Don’t you think, Mr Chairman and colleagues, that it would be wiser for us as legislators to give a free hand to the minister? Maybe then you could say that Parliament will be informed-(Interjections) - Yes, so that if Parliament thinks otherwise, then they can make a recommendation. If we have to come here every time there is a need for a change, I can see ourselves stifling ourselves, Mr Chairman. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I do not know why I do not seem to agree with the minister. The question is: do we want to legislate ourselves from the control of this list? If the answer is “no”, then we go with the Leader of the Opposition. What would hurt this country or Government or the minister to avail that list? Is the minister saying that Parliament is sluggish and does not work? 

I think this is the only way that the honourable Members of Parliament want to retain some bit of oversight. They get to know what is on the list, and this is a simple thing -(Interjections)–Yes, before it is even gazetted.Before somebody in Aruu or in Butambala gets to know, this House has already known, approved and gazetted for that matter. So, I buy what hon. Nandala-Mafabi said and as modified by hon. Fox Odoi, my neighbour, so that the question be put to that amendment. 

I only wantto add the issue of notice to that amendment, which he left at, “The minister may, with the approval of Parliament…” I propose to add, “and by a notice in the Gazette”. After the approval of Parliament, a notice is given out. I wouldnot see the honourable minister frowning over this. This is simple; it is a piece of cake.           

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. This law we are considering is an extremely important piece of legislation.When you look at the second schedule, the list of accountable persons, this is the heart of this legislation. You can kill this law by playing around with that list. Therefore, I find strong justification that the responsibility of varying this list should be shared between the minister and Parliament.

I just want to urge the minister to concede because we are just saying let Parliament approve and then you vary the list. I do not think this should be very difficult for you, Mr Minister, unless you have other strong reasons. I agree with the proposal that Parliament should approve before the minister can vary this list.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The reason why we are providing this comprehensive list in the schedule as of now is because we wantParliament to have a hand in it. That is the only reason. Should you now say the minister can go ahead and change that list without recourse to Parliament, then there would be no reason why we provided for it in the schedule in the first place. It would have been provided for under the rules or alternatively, we could have said that the minister will draw up the list. The framers of this Bill thought this matter was so important that Parliament should be able to approve the original list; similarly, Parliament should have a hand if the minister so wishes to change the list. 

Hon. Kasaija’s worry is – We have passed things here in record hours and you know it, if it is quite urgent. We have done the unthinkable sometimes, including amending the Constitution in one day. So, it is not that Parliament delays on issues and so forth. I really urge you to concede and we proceed and we conclude this Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What I was asking is: can you, therefore, amend the schedule by notice?

MR KATUNTU: We do not even have to provide for the gazetting or not. We just say, “The minister may amend”, and for the minister will come here with the amendment to the schedule. Maybe we can bring it as a statutory instrumentbecause we cannot come here and start debating the Gazette. So, you can come here with a statutory instrument and we can say, “The minister may, by statutory instrument, with the approval of Parliament, amend the list of accountable persons in the second schedule by…” 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Chair. I think the list of accountable persons talked about here are people like advocates defined in the Advocates Act and they are licensed.When you look at the last page, page 93, they say this refers to sole partners, employed professionals within professional firms. It is not meant to refer to the internal and professionals that are employees of other types of businesses or professionals working for Government agencies. 

If these people are already licensed, is it necessary for Parliament to get involved in this? According to the list of accountable persons they are talking about in Schedule 2, they are under advocates defined in the Advocates Act, notaries licensed and certified under the Notaries Public Act, accountants as defined in the Accountants Act and other independent legal professionals and accountants. Even if he goes to amend this, it is a particular type of people referred to and they are known in public. 

I think that it would be duplication for Parliament to be involved when these are people already licensed. I support the status quo as it is in Schedule 2. That is what it means.  

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I thought we should look at another scenario where we could preserve this list in Schedule 2 by simply preserving the powers of the minister to amend the schedule only if the amendment is increasing on the list.Where he is reducing the list, he is required to come to Parliament. I thought that scenario should be considered because that is where the risk lies- in reducing the list. 

When it comes to increasing the list, I think we can give the minister the leeway to do so.We have known - and I think we should not pretend- how long it takes to effect an amendment through Parliament and how many Bills have been lying in Parliament for even more than a year before an amendment can be effected- (Interjections)- I will take the information.

MR ODONGA OTTO: There is more risk in increasing the list than even decreasing the list. Actually, there is risk either way because you are going to wake up one morning, you give the minister these powers and he will list a personal company- the names of your company, Lugoloobi and Company Advocates. They will list it. They can use it as a weapon for witch-hunting. So, there is more risk in expanding the list than even in reducing it. That is the information I want to give you.     

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you for the information. There lies my submission, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much, Honourable members. Honourable minister, is there any real harm in this position? 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose, while conceding, as follows:“The minister may, with the approval ofParliament and by statutory instrument, amend the list of the second schedule.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:I put the question to amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.) 

Clause 134, as amended, agreed to.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we intend to insert a new clause after clause 134 to read as follows:
“Anti-money laundering focal persons 
1) 	A financial institution conducting business in Uganda shall designate a person to act as the anti-money laundering focal person.
2)	The anti-money laundering focal person designated under subsection (1) shall be responsible for such functions as may be prescribed in regulations made by the Minister.”

Justification: There is need to have a person directly responsible in the financial institutions to have no room for excuse. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is the amendment. It is proposed that it comes immediately after clause 134. That new clause is proposed in paragraph 37.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman.My problem is whether we should have this one provided for under an Act of Parliament because the obligation is already created by the law.So, I think Parliament does not need to create specific offices. I think that those are internal management matters of the financial institutions.


MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: The post of a focal person is not being regarded as an employment post. In Parliament, for example, there can be a focal person not necessarily doing only that work; he can be doing other duties but as a focal person when these organisations such as FIU want to contact the institution, they have somebody specific to consult and not everybody.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The question is: is it necessary to go that far?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Banks, for example, have already instituted such persons.

DR BITEKYEREZO:Mr Chairman, I want to differ ideologically from the chairman as far as the focal person is concerned.You know Ugandans are becoming very interesting; supposing that focal person becomes a money launderer himself, it becomes a problem for us.

MR KABAJO: Thank you very much, RtHon. Chair. Although the committee chair has gone straight to the new clause which he wants to insert, on that one I would want to go to the advice you gave us about legislating in vain.I do not think it is necessary to insert this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment as proposed in paragraph 37 - an insertion of the new clause 135 as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 135 

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, that is why I was still insisting that before you go to paragraph 37 -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we are now on clause 135.

MR KABAJO: Yes, under clause 135, the committee has proposed that we delete clauses 135(1) and (2). I was wondering why the chairman skipped that and went straight to -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Because he was inserting a clause before that one. We are now coming to clause 135 of the Bill

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, in clause 135 -exemptions for accountable persons -we intend to deletesub clauses (1) and (2). Justification: there is no justifiable cause as to why anyone person, whether natural or unnatural, should be exempted from complying with provisions in this law.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Chairman and members, I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 135 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 136

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, it is very terrible to say that workers are immune, that they do some acts and they say, “we are immune”. I see the words “in good faith.” How do you determine good faith?

Mr Chairman, I want to propose an addition here. I do not think the workers should be immune. They should know that they should do work according to the law as we have stated.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we are not reinventing the wheel in this situation. These are standard immunity provisions for workers.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, honourable Chair.As you have properly guided, nothing is new. It is not the time for us to start questioning what good faith would be. We know this word,“good faith”.The immunity of this authority or employees or representatives is a necessary evil we cannot avoid. I would go for the status quo and ask the honourable Leader of the Opposition to abandon that position so that we can move on.

MR KATUNTU: The Leader of the Opposition has conceded, but there is something small I want to bring up. You see, what happens is that ordinarily, civil servants are given that immunity if they are acting in good faith.However, should they act in bad faith then immunity does not arise. It is when they are acting in good faith and maybe make a legitimate mistakethat immunity arises. I had thought my boss had conceded but I think he is still thinking about it.

There is also a small typographical error on the second line, the third last word, “exercising a power”. I think our people doing the drafting should act a little bit better.I would therefore move that the word “a” between “exercising” and “power” be deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the deletion or striking out of the word “a”. I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 136, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 137

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Chairman, under clause 137, this could be a consequential amendment in relation to amending the schedules. The minister may find a way, since the schedules require coming to Parliament, of doing all these things through regulations. So I do not know if it would not be prudent also to say that such regulations are laid before Parliament, or in consultation with Parliament. This is because he can abandon amendment of the schedules and he will only use regulations to still do certain things which we fear he can do against us. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, you have to go through Parliament in every situation; you wake up, you come to Parliament. (Laughter)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: I think that just as we treated clause 134, I would have no strong objection treating this - 

MR MULONGO: Mr Minister, your conceding notwithstanding, the laws that are stipulated in this Act to be are not detailed enough in certain circumstances to guide the implementers. So, it is most often necessary to have additional guidelines in form of regulations and these are supposed to be consistent with the law. Therefore, it is only prudent that the law allows the minister to develop such regulations. These are actually supposed to be for the smooth implementation of this very law.So, it is important that we leave them to -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, the situation we are imposing now is that for all the regulations, the minister wakes up but must first come to Parliament. Is that what we want? Let me have West Budama North.

MR ODIO-OYWELOWO: Honourable Chair, reading clause 137 closely, one would only conclude that the regulations envisaged are for the furtherance of the provisions of this Act, to enable effective implementation of the Act. They will not in any way impair the implementation of the Act but they will make the implementation of the Act more effective. 

For us as Parliament to tie the hands of the minister to endless consultation with Parliament does not help the process. I would really think that my honourable colleague, OdongaOtto, would withdraw his concerns and we pass this as is provided for.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: As I withdraw, I would request that the minister lays before Parliament such regulations so that we know of them –(Interjections)- Within two weeks after issuance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Have they moved the amendment? That would be a - 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, I think that is not a problem because we do not want to do things behind Parliament –(Interjections)– No, we do not want to do things behind Parliament. So, I concede that we shall lay the regulations before Parliament.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, can you move the amendment properly? 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: I beg to move that the amendment will read thus: “The Minister may, upon the advice of the board, make regulations as may be required for carrying into effect any provisions of this Act and any of such regulations shall be laid before Parliament within two weeks from the issuance of those regulations.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Don’t you think that you need to break it? 

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you so much, Mr Chairman. I agree with the spirit of the amendment proposed by hon. OdongaOtto, but I do not think that it is necessary to specify the two weeks.This is because the essence of your proposal is that they will not come into effect before they are laid before Parliament. So, I do not think that we should specify the two weeks that you are proposing.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, do we delete the two weeks? There will be no need for a timeframe?

MR ODONGA-OTTO: If there is no need for a timeframe, then there is actually no need for my amendment because he can bring them after four years when they have been working for four years.

MR OKUPA: Probably, we would put it like the chair of legal came close to mentioning - before they come into operation, they will be laid before Parliament. We put it that way.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But that takes us back to what the honourable member for West Budama North had stated. If they have to be laid for prior approval of Parliament, in other words for an affirmative vote of Parliament, then you have gone back to what we have changed. If you are laying for information, then it does not require approval.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, if I understood hon. OdongaOtto well, I think his inclination was for the formality of laying. I also understood the chair of legal very well. There is no need to attach a timeframe because the formality of laying will not need debate or approvalas long as it is brought to be laid for the record of Parliament. I think that would be – [Mr Odonga Otto:“Even after five years?”] Well, if laying after five years makes sense to the one laying, why not? (Laughter)

MR KATUNTU: The hon. Oboth Oboth has some sense of humour. 
If a statutory instrument is required to be laid on the Table, it will not take effect until it is laid.The purpose of laying it is to give information to a particular institution or person and then it takes effect. 

I do agree that we do not need to put a timeframe there; we should just say,“the minister shall lay…”He will not issue a statutory instrument, operationalise it after five years, like hon. Oboth says,and then he comes and says, “I am now laying”. No, it cannot work that way. He is supposed to lay it and then it comes into effect. We are not talking about approvals; it is just putting it on the Table such that Parliament is aware that actually there is this instrument in place.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that would create a new situation because as I keep saying, there are three instances where you lay instruments before Parliament. One is the one that requires an affirmative vote. That means it does not operate until Parliament says so – approvals.

The second one is the one that is required tooperate until it is subject to a negative vote of Parliament. In other words, it starts operating until Parliament says no to it, but all actions taken under the authority of that instrument will be lawful until Parliament nullifies it.  

The third one is where you lay the instrument for information and it becomes operational on publication in the Gazette and not on laying before the House. So, I do not know which one we are talking about here.

HON. MEMBER: All.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It cannot be all. (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, honourable Chair. I think the latter one sounds more appropriate. It is for information and we are not going to debate.  I believe that the other Attorney-General rose in that spirit, that it is not going to be debated. On what he said, about coming into effect, I think it only comes into effect when it is gazetted, but it is purely for information. I would request that we move on.  

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I thank you very much. Since we are agreeable that this is for information purposes only, what hurdle does the minister have to confront if it is just for purposes of information? Picking a document which is alreadyworking and bringing it for our information within two weeks,what pain does it cause the minister? I think that it should be mutually beneficial even to the minister that Parliament gets informed.

Maybe an hour or so ago, we had hon. Byandala working on regulations or statutory instruments, something the House had actually partly recommended, and then the House was saying they were not aware. So, it is even to the minister’s benefit. After all, it is already operational;so, within two weeks, as a sense of accountability and a desire to inform an institution like Parliament, would it be painful to carry that document and just lay it on the Table? 

I still think setting two weeks creates a sense of obligation on the minister to inform the House. It is meaningless to inform the House after many years, after there are issues out in the public domain. So, I support the position advanced by hon. OdongaOtto; after all, there is no extra cost to it. 

MR MWIRU: Mr Chairman, when you look at that section, my understanding is that we are ceding our powers as Parliament to the minister; in case he made any regulations, they cannot come into effect until they have been gazetted. 

I take the view, Mr Chairman, that we leave it the way it is because it does not actually mean that by laying it on the Table, it is now operational; there is another step of gazetting.Leaving it automatically presumes that the minister must proceed to gazette. So, I think that we should leave the section as is. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 137 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 137, agreed to

Clause 138

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want the chairman of the committee to clarify. Why are we talking of 15 members of a committee when we have a board? What are these differences that you are bringing in?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that in 138?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, it is. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, is it your business or the minister’s because you have not proposed an amendment on that clause?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: We are proposing to replace the “Uganda Anti-Money Laundering Committee” with the “Uganda Anti-Money Laundering Taskforce” wherever it appears in this Bill – (Interjections) - Let us first hear this, then we shall give you time to debate. The clause is amended to read: “There is established a taskforce to be known as the Uganda Anti-Money Laundering Taskforce.” 

Honourable members, as I have emphasised, we have recommendations from the International Standards of Combating Anti-Money Laundering and Financing of Terrorism and Proliferation. In the region where we are members, most of the members have called this a taskforce rather than a committee. So, as we said,this is to realign it to proper and regionally acceptable nomenclature. In the rest of the countries, they are calling it a taskforce. If we want to be different for the sake – (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. This is a simple clarification. You want to conform to the regional standards in phraseology, nomenclature; do we equate the Ugandanstandard of English to those of other regions especially those that I know within East Africa? I do not want to say that we are better than them, but do we have any binding provisions if we donot call it a taskforce? 

The spirit in which you are proposing this is good, but the word “taskforce” waters it down. I have a big problem with that. We have diluted a taskforce to mean something for a short time. It is a short time. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I may concede, but let me read this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, if you have conceded, then donot put any other thing on the record.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: It is not about the English.Just like we changed the unit and we insisted to leave it as an authority -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you withdrawing or should I put the question to your amendment? 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: We concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is to change the name from a committee to a taskforce. In the Bill it is a committee. 

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, I do not think we can have this committee or this taskforce. First, you can never set up a permanent taskforce in law. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, that was withdrawn.

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Also, if you look at the functions of the committee and those of the board, they are almost similar; they overlap. So, why should we have two boards? Why are we stating this committee outside the Authority? I think the work of the Anti-Money Laundering Taskforce should be done by the Authority and we are making this law for the Authority. So, this would definitely mean deleting clauses 138 and 139. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Actually, it is even outside the Bill.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, when you look at the functions of the board on page 28, 24(b) says, “advise the minister on the exercise of the powers entrusted to the minister under this Act.”When you look at the functions of the committee, 139(1) (b) says, “to advise the minister in the performance of his or her functions under this Act”. Really, you do not need this committee. Basically, whatever is being provided for under clause 139 can ably be put under 24(b). This is just duplication and creating useless institutions.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we had not gotten to debating that level. We are just changing the name first and we agree on –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, you lost the name.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Honourable members, we created the Financial Intelligence Authority and its core function is to analyse information and investigate. After investigations, they forward that information to the relevant authorities like the –(Interjection)- Let me first explain this –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you. Under the Financial Intelligence Authority – that is in section 24, which we passed - one of the functions of the Financial Intelligence Authorityboard is to determine structures, staffing levels and terms and conditions of the Authority. They already have power to determine what structures they need.Even if they want to create a committee or a taskforce, theAuthority has those powers. 

Kampala City Council Authority, for example, has established those people with a yellow uniform; we did not talk about it here. Why should we create parallel structures that will cause them to start pulling ropes?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we must understand anti-money laundering in its entirety. Now, this committee is an inter-ministerial and inter-agency organisation. In fact, there is a committee composed of representatives from Bank of Uganda, representatives from the Capital Markets Authority – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Where is the composition of that committee?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Maybe what we can do is to read the composition and then we see whether we need a different committee from the Financial Intelligence Authority.

MR PETER LOKII: Thank you, Mr Chairman. If you go to page 29, the composition of the board has the same representation that the committee chairperson seems to refer to. I need clarification on how to draw, in terms of functions, the difference between the functions of the taskforce or committee and that of the board. 

The nature of the representation is such that it is composed of members from Bank of Uganda, Ministry of Finance, Director-General of the Authority, Ministry of Internal Affairs and all these others. We seem to be duplicating. I think the board will adequately handle the matters that are referred to it and it will create the necessary committees in order to facilitate its functions. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, even in drafting terms, – now I am talking about just drafting - you come to regulations and normally, after putting regulations the law ends.However, here immediately after regulations, you are creating an institution. What it means from a drafting perspective is that it was an afterthought; it was not in the text of the Bill before and then somebody said, “Why don’t we throw this also here?” and they threw it in. 

MR TONNY AYOO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Under clause 138, to create this committee we will be making the work of the Authority very difficult. I think the best we can do is to delete it.These people are going to be very vulnerable to money laundering itself. They will now act like a clearing committee, which will be dangerous. I would ask the committee chairperson to allow us delete it. Thank you.

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The nature of the business we are trying to deal with requires swift action. If we are going to be very efficient, the organisation must be as lean as possible and pyramidal. If we create very many power centres, we shall complicate the functioning of the very Authority that we want to put in place.

MR KWEMARA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to think outside the box and differ from the rest. First of all, we are conforming to international standards. I want us to look at the practice elsewhere. Kenya has got the financial reporting centre and on top of that it has got an anti-money laundering advisory committee. Tanzania has got a financial intelligence unit and also an anti-money laundering committee. South Africa has got a financial intelligence centre and an anti-money laundering committee. 

What is the implication here? Most likely when the committee shifted from the financial intelligence centre to the financial intelligence authority, that is where they could have made a mistake and that is where duplication could have come from. I would argue that we should separate the roles instead of saying that the committee does not need this structure. Thank you.

MS JALIA BINTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. When you look at clause 24(b) and you compare it with clause 139(b), you will see that it has been cut and pasted because they are the same. 

However, I also want to allay the fears of my colleague who has just left the Floor.We can use clause 27 where we have meetings and procedures of the board; 27(b) (iii)states that, “the board may appoint committees from its members to assist in the performance of its function.” So, it is already catered for. 

Mr Chairman, I therefore want to concur with my colleagues that we should delete clause 139 and we remain with the board. The board has got the mandate to appointworking committees. Thank you.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, first of all, I want the House to understand that we need two bodies, separate and distinct in function. That is why we have even proposed to change the functions of the committee, which we would have called “taskforce”,in our amendment here. There is a body that was created - the Authority - to handle anti-money laundering cases or suspicious transactions, and that is its core function. Then there is a body that has to do with policy, away from that Authority. The Authority has confined functions. That is why we have re-drafted the functions to have a body that can implement the minister’s policy, educate the public and even co-ordinate institutions. The IGG is even part of this. 

Let me give you the composition of the committee and then maybe you will know why we need it. (Interjections)-Wait and I tell you the composition. We have URA because it is a very sensitive organisation that monitors money launderers.We have Bank of Uganda but they are not part of the board; you remember we cut the composition of the board to very few members. We have the Ministry of Finance, the Capital Markets Authority, the Bankers’ Association, the Forex Bureaux Association – all these are geared to fighting money laundering. We also have the IGG and the Uganda Police.

All those bodies must be co-ordinated to fight money laundering but they cannot be part of the other body we created. Those members we put in place are few and their specific work is to do with following suspicious transactions, away from education and the rest. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, first, you are right because in the law we have said that someone will declare to customs when they are crossing the borders. You saw that. This means that they already have a function and they will be sending information to the financial intelligence unit. Bank of Uganda deals with transfer of money in the system; they will pass information to the intelligence unit.

Mr Chairman, there is no reason for us to create another body because these bodies complement one another from the way they do their work. It is up to them; they can sit and say – (Interjection) - No, there is no need for a committee. I will give an example.Currently, there is a committee, which consists of the DPP, the IGG, the Director CID and they are functioning but without it being in the law. I think PAC and the Auditor-General must also be on that committee.So, these are the committees. 

If you create this, you are going to create two power centres and they will fight. In fact, one person said to me that people will launder and then the other will ask, “Have you been cleared by Mzee?”That means that there will be one who will be a boss and another one subordinate. These are terrible things and we better do away with this. If those people have them, they have made mistakes. When we implement ours and it operates, they will see that we are doing the best thing. We made a law for KCCA here with so many power centres and you have seen the problem. I am sure even DrKiyonga knows that what I am saying is right.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, I partly heard what hon. Nandala-Mafabi was saying, but I just want to inform this House that this committee has distinct, clearly defined functions. If we do away with it, from my briefing, we shall have virtually killed the Bill.This committee is a multi-sectoral committee composed of different organisations, which will disseminate information and even carry out the actual job. So, I am humbly praying that we retain this clause because if we do not- I am told that we are not reinventing the wheel; our three sister countries have this committee. So, I am really praying that we keep the clause so that we do not disable our Bill.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I thank the honourable minister. I was just trying to scan through the internet here. I have looked at Guyana, Saudi Arabia and Kenya and in these different countries you will find that where they do not have a board, they have the committee and then the functions. What we are trying to do here is pick- where one has a committee, you bring it and the other one has a body, you also bring it. That is what I have seen. 

In the proposed Bill, you have not specified who the members of this committee are going to be. If you look at the Saudi Arabia Act, it has listed the membership of that committee running from the Ministry of Interior comprising of the Financial Investigations Unit, the General Directorate of Narcotics Control, the General Directorate of Criminal Investigations and Public Security, Legal Affairs, the General Directorate of Investigation - Administrative Investigations;the General Intelligence Presidency; Ministry of Foreign Affairs; Ministry of Justice; Ministry of Commerce and Industry; Ministry of Social Affairs; Saudi Customs; the Bureau of Investigation and Public Prosecution; Capital Markets Authority; and Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency.

If you want, why don’t you also go ahead and list instead of just leaving it to us the way you are doing, especially if you decide to bring the board, the committee, the advisory board. So please, be clear to us. What do you want? Do you want to amalgamate all this and if so, please go ahead and specify those departments that will fall under this.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I am agreeable to hon. Okupa’s proposal that if we want to list the members of this committee, let us do so here because those bodies are the ones that can help Government. We may wish to know the genesis of this law. Why are we being forced to sign by the 30thJuly? It is because we must conform to what the rest of the countries are doing. So, let us do it because this law will be partially passed if we do not conform to what the rest are doing.

We can compose that committee, and we have the list of the members here. So we can say that we have these members listed to compose this committee instead of just saying we do not need it. We cannot put anything in the regulations that was not provided for in the law. That is my appeal to members.

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am getting even more confused as the chairperson keeps submitting. If I heard him right, the committee chairperson said that these two bodies have very distinct functions but in the narration of the roles, they decide to repeat the roles as though it is the same body. (Interruptions) I wish you would listen as I submit because you will benefit-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, you are not on record. 

MR OPOLOT: Mr Chairman, you are saying you will establish the Uganda Anti-Money Laundering Committee but you do not mention its reporting mechanism. Also, when you talk of its composition, the qualifications are repeated just as for the board. That means that you are looking at the same functions.

Also, again you mention here that it is an inter-ministerial committee but you do not mention that in the Bill; you say they are representing the different disciplines, not different departments. Would you like to clarify on whether the disciplines are the same as the departments in the different ministries? I need that to be clarified before we can justify this.

I appreciate the burden the committee chairperson is going through because you are trying to copy something, which you may not understand so well. I really do not want to question the amount of debate those other countries may have put into their laws. However, I really think that for us to avoid confusing the two bodies and for us to ensure that we are effective in combating money laundering, we should minimise the number of institutions or bodies handling this; otherwise, the more we create, the more friction we will cause and we shall have lost the battle. 

Unless you can re-draft the roles of this committee, we are actually repeating the roles of the board. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. First of all, I am a member of the committee but I would like to give information, which will help my chairman and all of us to move forward. From what hon. Okupa submitted, I agree with him because where you find that a country has a committee, it does not have a board.

I was part of the team, which went to Malawi for benchmarking.The Executive Director of the Finance Intelligence Unit of Malawi gave our Bill a lot of time. When she reached clause 138, her comment was, “what about the board; is there any difference?” She was making an observation that actually when you create a committee and a board, their functions can overlap, and she actually asked who would be answerable to whom. Would the board be answerable to the committee or to the minister?

Chairman of the committee, from this, I advise that you concede so that we can proceed, but that is if you share the same view with me that the establishment of the committee will not add any value. I thank you.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman and colleagues, I would like to beg that we stand over this clause – (Interjections) – Yes, I know the urgency of passing this Bill, but I also do not want us to make mistakes. In the circumstances, can I be allowed to have this clause stood over for further study?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, can we go back to clause 4? Are we able to proceed?

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (MrMatiaKasaija):Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House resumes and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is that the House resumes to enable the Committee of the whole House report thereto. I now put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered theBill entitled “The Anti-Money Laundering Bill, 2009” from clauses 131 to 137 and stood over 38. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Stood over which clause?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I said the Committee of the whole House has considered clauses 131 to 137 with amendments but stood over clause 138. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, there is still business on the Order Paper. Are we ready to proceed? (Laughter)This Bill certainly should have been finalised today but we have not been able to do that. However, we cannot still blame ourselves. Thank you for sitting up to this time. This shows the spirit of commitment that you have demonstrated in the last few weeks.We have to deliver for the country. Thank you so much.

The debate on the State of the Nation Address is deferred to Tuesday next week. I now would like to urge the different organisations in Parliament to ensure that they compile their lists in which they will allot time for their members who will speak and how long each will speak. These lists should reach the Office of the Speaker before commencement of debate on Tuesday next week. I will just go by the lists.The time should be allotted by you. If you have a member who you want to speak for 30 minutes, indicate that.

Debate on this Bill will resume tomorrow, but also we have to deal with the population Bill tomorrow. It is a very small Bill; actually, if we had started with it, we would be done.House is adjourned to tomorrow at exactly 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7.24p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 10 July 2013 at 2.00p.m.) 

