Tuesday, 30 July 2013

Parliament met at 11.17 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this special sitting in honour of a fallen senior person in this country, the former Vice-President, Gen. Mustafa Adrisi. Death occurred to him, and to our knowledge we are here to do what this Parliament can do to give him the honour that he deserves as a leader of this country.

Honourable members, this debate will be adjourned at half past midday to enable preparation for the prayers in the mosque to take place and for onward movement to the burial ground. The burial will take place tomorrow. You know that according to the faith, certain things should have been done quicker but as a country, we need to give the space that is required for the country to remember those who have served it in capacities such as that of a Vice-President. 

We have a motion that will be moved. Honourable members, we need to agree that the debate will go up to half past midday. That means that we agree on either five minutes or less and if it is five minutes, at half past midday I will stop. So, whoever will have contributed during that time will have made their contribution. Thank you.

(Entrance of the late Gen. Mustafa Adrisi)

The National Anthem 

The East African Community Anthem 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me recognise in the VIP gallery, the hon. Anthony Butele, the hon. Paul Etyang and hon. Kubeketerya, former Members of Parliament; and on the technical bench behind me I have the widow and the family of the deceased. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE GEN. MUSTAFA ABATAKI ADRISI

11.21
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, I rise to move, under Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament, a motion for the resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Gen. Mustafa Adrisi Abataki:

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with grief the sad news of the demise of Gen. Adrisi Mustafa, former Vice-President under the Government of Idi Amin which occurred on Sunday, 28 July 2013 at Mulago Hospital;

AND WHEREAS the late Gen. Adrisi Mustafa was born in 1922 to Adrisi Odongo Kenyi and Mama Ide in Drachare village or parish in present day Yumbe District;

AWARE that the late Gen. Adrisi Mustafa attended Londoga Primary School where he received lower primary education, and later in 1951 he joined the Kings African Rifles in Nanyuki, Kenya, which training saw him rise through the ranks of warrant officer II and warrant officer I, captain and Officer in Charge Headquarter Company in the Malire Mechanised Specialist Reconnaissance Regiment based in Lubiri, and a promotion to lieutenant colonel and commanding officer Border Guard Unit;

NOTING that in 1974, due to the trust soldiers had in him, he was promoted to the rank of Major General after the soldiers objected to the appointment of Brig. Hussein Marella, a Sudanese national, to the position of acting Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces, a situation that led to the attempted coup that was led by the late Brig. Charles Arube against Idi Amin;

FURTHER NOTING that the appointment of the late Gen. Adrisi Mustafa came at a time when acts of lawlessness and extrajudicial activities were rampant and the late came into action by taking deterrent action against all culprits;

RECOGNISING that the late Gen. Mustafa held firm against some autocratic decisions and his firmness saved many lives of Ugandans;

APPRECIATING that the late Gen. Mustafa was an honest officer, transparent in the performance of duty, loyal and thoroughly committed to work in the service of this country;

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves as follows:
1. 	That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of Gen. Adrisi Mustafa.

2. 	That it takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered and his contribution to the development of this country.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members that is the motion. Is the motion seconded? Yes, it is seconded.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  Mr Speaker, Gen. Mustafa Adrisi Abataki was born in 1922 to Adrisi Odongo Kenyi and Mama Ide in Drachare Parish in the present day Yumbe District.

The family later moved to the present day Koboko in Keri village where the late Mustafa was raised. He went to Londoga Primary School where he received lower primary education. He joined the Kings African Rifles in 1951, and he trained later on at the then Kings African Rifles training base in Nanyuki, Kenya.

The late Mustafa was then promoted through the ranks to warrant officer II and warrant officer I. Because of his long service in the lower ranks and his dedicated service, he was commissioned to the rank of captain, after independence, in the Uganda Army. He was later appointed as Officer in Charge Headquarter Company in Malire Mechanised Specialist Reconnaissance Regiment, which was based in the present day Lubiri. He was thereafter promoted to a lieutenant colonel and then appointed commanding officer Border Guard Unit.

In 1974, due to the objections of soldiers to the appointment of Brig. Hussein Marella, a Sudanese national, to the position of acting Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces, there was discomfort in the armed forces which led to the failed coup attempt led by the late Charles Arube against Idi Amin. Because of his popularity within the forces, Idi Amin promoted the late Mustafa Adrisi to the rank of major general and to the post of Chief of Staff of Uganda Armed Forces. 

His appointment in this powerful position came at a time when acts of lawlessness and extrajudicial activities by Government were rampant. Although some of these criminal activities were not at the time publicised, it is a known fact that they were rampant. The late Mustafa during that time swung into action by taking deterrent actions against culprits. One time when it was reported to him that the brother of President Idi Amin, called Maj. Moshe Adinebi, had arrested a civilian motor mechanic who Moshe accused of mishandling his car engine mounting and put the mechanic into the boot of his car and loitered with the boy throughout the night as punishment, Gen. Mustafa Adrisi ordered the arrest of Maj. Adinebi, the President’s brother. He put Maj. Adinebi in the boot of his vice-presidential car and drove him to Jinja Barracks and back and later asked him how sweet it was to be put in the boot of a car.

During his service in the Kings African Rifles, Gen. Mustafa’s company commander was called General Sir Chandos Blair. He was impressed by Mustafa’s performances as Regimental Police (RP) whose chief duties were to enforce discipline among soldiers. Gen. Mustafa was very strict on smartness of soldiers. He made sure that every soldier’s uniform and shoes were well maintained and shined. He always checked every soldier’s haircuts and beards. 

As you may recollect, this same Blair featured later on in our history. There was a problem between Uganda and Britain after a British professor who was a lecturer at Makerere University, by the names of Denis Cecil Hills, had written a book entitled “The White Pumpkin” against Idi Amin. You remember that the professor was arrested, tried by military tribunal, found guilty and sentenced to death by firing squad. The British Government dispatched a senior officer, Gen. Sir Chandos Blair, who was the elder brother of the former British Prime Minister, Mr Tony Blair, to negotiate for the professor’s release. It was Gen. Mustafa Adrisi who received Gen. Blair at Entebbe International Airport. As I said earlier, Gen. Blair was a company commander of Mustafa during the Kings African Rifles and he promoted him to Senior NCO. 

Gen. Blair was impressed to find his man, Mustafa, now Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces. When Blair inspected the Guard of Honour that was arranged for him, he was impressed to find a high standard of smartness of the soldiers, to which he said was equivalent to the standard of the British Army. Gen. Blair inspected each soldier on that parade from headdress to belts, buttons and well shined shoes. He commended Gen. Mustafa for maintaining such high standard of soldiers. That was Gen. Mustafa Adrisi.

He was an honest man who emphasised the importance of commitment to duty, patriotism and obedience of soldiers. He frequently cautioned, rebuked and reprimanded officers and men of the Ugandan Army openly and without fear or favour. Since this Government came to power in 1986, we have had a very close relationship with him. He has been very supportive of Government and remained loyal. He participated and has been a very consistent and valuable advisor to His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President. So, we pay tribute to him for the service he rendered to this nation.

Mr Speaker, with the stability we have attained in Uganda, it is proper and appropriate to recognise those who served this nation. I have heard the question asked, “Why Mustafa and why not others?” Well, this is the beginning. We are determined to recognise the services of those that served this nation. 

When I was in the Ministry of Defence, we took a radical position. You may recall that during this time of turbulence, we used to refer to soldiers who served from 1962 to 1971 as “Obote soldiers” and from 1971 to 1979 as “Amin soldiers.” We realised that these were patriotic Ugandans who served during the reign of the governments of Obote and Idi Amin. They were not Idi Amin soldiers or Obote soldiers but they were Ugandan soldiers. (Applause) Therefore, we took the position that we would recognise their service, discharge them honourably and that is why we are determined to pay their entitlements without exception.

We shall accord the same recognition to all those who served this country in various capacities - former vice-presidents, speakers, prime ministers and leaders. We shall accord them the same recognition as we are according this departed brother, the late Gen. Mustafa Adrisi. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you. Let me recognise hon. Baker Dudu, former Member of the East African Legislative Assembly. May I also recognise the honourable Justice Stephen Kavuma, the acting Chief Justice. They are up here to pay their respects.

The first seconder of the motion is the Member from Moyo District.

11.37
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I think that I will also be brief because of the time element.

In supporting the motion, I would like to cover the side of the General’s life that has not been covered. As the Prime Minister has said, the General joined the army in 1951 at the age of 29 and worked for 28 years in the British post-independence government. He then went into exile in 1979 and stayed in Yei and returned on his own in 1987.  

Mustafa Adrisi was a loyal officer to the authority under which he worked. One very important thing was that he was not ambitious. If one is ambitious and stays around “hot chairs”, people may suspect that they have a problem. I think Mustafa had no ambition and, therefore, there was no cause for Amin to suspect him since he did not show any interest at all. 

He was also hard working and a very strict time keeper. In his official work, he was so assertive and he would leave you without doubt that the command he gave was that. So, people who worked with him were sure that what he said is what he meant.

Gen. Mustafa was a godfather of the people of West Nile, a bridge between West Nile and the rest of Uganda. He always guided. When we came back from exile, he said, “no more war in West Nile - hakuna vita”. He said it assertively and indeed there was no war. Because there is no war in West Nile, the area of conflict and the costs of conflict have reduced. This has helped the people of Uganda as a whole not to spend much, and it has given time for people to actively participate and concentrate. West Nile was not an issue but it is now considered peaceful because of Gen. Mustafa.

In exile, he lived in Yei and he was our point of reference. When we formed the Uganda National Rescue Front (UNRF), we had to consult him first. It was with his blessings that we formed this organisation. At the second meeting that we held at his house, we learnt that Marella wanted to attend this meeting but we all said, “No; he could at least help us by giving us some potatoes or something else now that we are at home, but not to come to this meeting”. Since then, he became the chief advisor to the UNRF. 

One important thing I would like to mention is that the UNRF started working together with the NRA even before the NRM came to power and before all of us came back home. We had been working together outside, and Museveni was aware and also Mustafa was aware and he supported it. To prove this, when the 27 people went to the bush, some 11 people from the west, led by the late Kazini, were cut off. They had nowhere to go except to Sudan, and Sudan had already been taken up by us, the UNRF. So, we welcomed them and Mustafa gave instructions, “Hakuna mutu takamata awatu; naka kwa headquarter” - nobody should touch them - “tuko pamoja”. These 11 people and Kazini stayed in our territory in Southern Sudan for three years. This is the contribution from Gen. Mustafa. 

We are grateful to President Museveni for warmly welcoming Gen. Mustafa on his return home with open hands. That encouraged Mustafa to settle and all his supporters to settle, and that is one of the secrets why the West Nile has been peaceful because their leaders are peaceful. 

When I was arrested, after I cleared myself in the High Court I went to Mustafa and he said, “Wewe ka chini. Rudi kwa kazi. Vitu hizi zimefanyika” - These things happen, so, go back to work. In the West Nile, we respect elders and this is the secret we have. Here, I do not know. (Laughter) So, when Mustafa asked me to go back, there was no alternative; I had to come back and it was meaningful because it brought more peace. Up to now, people are prosperous not only in the West Nile but all over the country. That is why Mustafa was a bridge between West Nile and the rest of Uganda. That is the explanation. 

President Museveni did a lot for Gen. Mustafa and it is important to know because already people are talking about a lot of things incorrectly. Mustafa had a house in Arua, which was repaired by State House at a cost of Shs 484 million. Yes, if you are not sure, you can go and see it. There are two houses with two boys’ quarters, 19 bedrooms, 21 washrooms, two sitting rooms, a kitchen and it is wall-fenced. State House has been giving the General an additional Shs 4 million every month on top of what he is entitled to from the Ministry of Public Service because he had complained that it was not enough. So, the President had directed the State House to give him Shs 4 million every month for his welfare and upkeep. 

He came to Kampala in 2009 for treatment and State House rented for him a house for one year, hoping that he would get better and go back but the disease persisted until last Sunday. All his treatment costs were being met by the government and the State House has also been paying school fees for his children. From our meeting, it was even agreed that the arrears of rent that had not been paid will be paid. (Applause) This information must be known and credit given where it is due. Even if you are in the Opposition, it does not matter really; anything good is good for everybody. 

Gen. Mustafa went further and advised Ali Bamuze, the leader of UNRF, to come home because West Nile must be peaceful and that peace must be given to the people of Uganda. Finally, Bamuze came back on the advice of Gen. Mustafa. 

One more story I want to tell you is that Gen. Mustafa was arrested in 1970 even before the Obote Government was overthrown. He was arrested with others because he went to receive Amin from the airport when Amin was returning from Cairo. Amin went to Cairo on an official trip as army commander and was supposed to go to Saudi Arabia. From Saudi Arabia, he was supposed to come back to Khartoum and from Khartoum he would come back home. 

When he was in Cairo, a certain European lady went to his hotel – Gen. Mondo was with him – and she informed Amin. These were intelligence people maybe from Israel or Britain or America. The important thing is that the lady went to inform Amin that if he went to Khartoum, he would be arrested. She advised him to change his programme and go back home. So, Amin informed people back home, and one of them was Mustafa Adrisi, to come and receive him at the airport, but Obote was not aware that Amin had cut short his trip. So, he came back and was driving from Entebbe with Mustafa and they met with Henry Kyemba around Kisubi. Henry Kyemba was then the PPS of Obote. So, when he saw Amin as he was going to Entebbe, he rang Obote saying, “Eh, Amin is back; are you aware?” (Laughter) Of course, I did not know the response because I was not there, - (Laughter) - but this is what happened. 

That incident brought a lot of commotion until a commission of inquiry was appointed. However, before that, Mustafa Adrisi was arrested together with many others who went to Entebbe. That shows you that that was the time things were brewing underground, which finally led to the 1971 coup.

Mr Speaker, I would like to stop here by thanking colleagues for their attention. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you too. We have a second seconder of the motion, the Leader of the Opposition.

11.53
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the entire Opposition, the people of Kasese and the people of the Rwenzururu Kingdom, I rise to deliver our sincere condolences to the family and friends of the late Mustafa Adrisi, and to second the motion moved by the Prime Minister for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to His Excellency the late Mustafa Adrisi.

Whoever renders service to many puts himself or herself in line for greatness, great wealth, great returns, great satisfaction, great reputation and great joy. We have assembled here today to pay tribute to His Excellency the late Gen. Mustafa Adrisi for a service he heartily rendered to his country, our motherland. Many reflections have been made and will be made of his life that resonate bravery, commitment, patriotism and accomplishments.

Honourable members, His Excellency the late Gen. Adrisi served as Vice-President of this great land and he had a blazing military career, which calls for great admiration. Like we have heard the Prime Minister mentioning, he would brush his shoes until he would see his image reflected on them. This was a sign of smartness, and he wanted the men and women of the armed forces to look smart. That is the character we are bidding farewell to today. He has lived a life of humility, which has attracted great affection until the day he passed away. 

Mr Speaker, the statesman we are saying goodbye to has been an instrument of peace. When he saw that there was unrest in the Rwenzori region when he was the Chief of Staff, he advised the Field Marshall to give the people of Kasese and Bundibugyo a district status, and that was during the reign of Idi Amin. We want to greatly thank him for that.

Further to his desire for peace, the Daily Monitor yesterday, while reflecting on his life, and has also been said by the previous speakers, said that the late Adrisi ordered the release of Makerere University students who had demonstrated and had been taken to the military barracks in Makindye. You know that it would not be easy today for, say a minister, to order for the release of someone without consulting “above”. (Laughter) 

This calls for us to think twice as we carry out operations and orders. What will be said of us at the end of the road? Will people put us into a bigger system? Even today I am surprised, Mr Speaker, when we as young actors in the Opposition are always reminded that we do not know what happened during Amin’s time. I did not know that even in Amin’s time we had great people like Mustafa Adrisi. (Applause) Let us think about the regimes in which we are serving and then we begin questioning ourselves before we take orders from “above” – will I be lumped in a group or will I get the chance of being singled out as an individual? 

Mr Speaker, with the increasing suppression of rights and freedoms of the Opposition political parties and leaders by government agencies, the heroic acts of protecting the Constitution of Uganda by His Excellency the late Gen. Mustafa Adrisi will dearly be missed. To the family and friends, may his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, too. Honourable members, we will be rising at half past midday, and that is about 35 minutes from now. So we are going to have to agree on a framework of two minutes each to allow as many Members as possible to contribute. 

The motion is that Parliament resolves as follows:
“1.That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of Gen. Mustafa Adrisi Abataki.

2. That it takes cognizance of the distinguished services rendered and contribution made by the late to the development of this country.” 

It is now time for debate. Each contribution will take two minutes. The first to start will be the Member for Maracha County.

11.59
MR ALEX ONZIMA (Independent, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the Prime Minister who moved the motion for bringing it out clearly that the senior citizen now lying in front of us, the late Gen. Adrisi, stood against the autocratic actions of the late Idi Amin. I say this because when the late Amin was overthrown, we, the people of West Nile, got a blanket judgement, that we are the worst murderers in Uganda! Today, the truth is beginning to come out; you can never bury the truth. In spite of all that happened during that regime, there were sons and daughters of West Nile who were peacemakers. So the late Adrisi now joins the list that includes the late Brig. Gad Wilson Toko who hailed from Maracha, the late Brig. Barnabas Tolit who hailed from Terego, and many others who were in the Army in the service of the country for a good purpose. 

I am also told that at one time an attempt was made on the life of the late Adrisi by the then regime. Actually, he got crippled in that attempt; the walking stick that you see on top of the casket here is actually a result of that attempt, which was made on the life of the late Gen. Adrisi. The late Gen. Adrisi actually never –(Member timed out)

12.02
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand on behalf of the people of Terego and West Nile in general to convey our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family and the people of Aringa and Koboko counties.

I want to closely associate myself with those words, which have been expressed on this Floor by Gen. Moses Ali. Whereas today we talk of patriotism, the General lying before us was the first patriot in this country. I vividly remember the days when I was a student and especially that time when I was in Koboko, and more so the time when the Uganda Army rose against what they used to call “Mia moja kumi na moja”. Those are the three one-sided tattoos on the cheeks of the Sudanese army officers. 

This gentleman lying before us stood up to say, “Enough is enough; Ugandans must take destiny of their own situation” and this is exactly what happened. When Gen. Marella was forced to flee, as it were, with a large motorcade of vehicles snaking from Kampala and crossing to South Sudan, I was at that time a student and I watched everything. 

I remember the late Gen. Mustafa Adrisi very vividly in 1979 when we, the first-year students of Makerere University, were brought for parade in Nakivubo Stadium in preparation for the 25th celebrations of January, the time and date when Gen. Idi Amin took over power. My OB, hon. Alex Onzima, is there to bear witness. At that time, seeing the smartness of the Army, some of us even thought twice as to whether we should not drop out of the university and join the Army - (Member timed out.)

12.04
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, I rise on behalf of all sports loving citizens of Uganda to pay tribute to the late Vice-President of Uganda, Gen. Mustafa Adrisi. This House recalls that during his time as Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda, our national team, the Uganda Cranes, participated, after qualifying, in the 1978 Africa Cup of Nations where Uganda came second when they were defeated in the finals by the host, Ghana. Uganda has never qualified since then, but I want to promise that the dream they had in 1978 will be realised during our lifetime; we shall qualify. 

Mr Speaker, in my capacity as the team manager of the Parliamentary Football Club of Uganda, the reigning champions of the East African Community at parliamentary level, I want to pay tribute to him. I also want to pay tribute to him as the former chairman of the Uganda Cranes Steering Committee of the 2012 Africa Cup of Nations. I want to promise again that we shall qualify and play at the continental showpiece of Africa Cup of Nations where he and the then President spearheaded and offered a presidential jet to pick our national team from Accra in Ghana. May his soul rest in peace.

12.07
MR FRED OMACH (NRM, Jonam County, Nebbi): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, much as Gen. Mustafa did not go far with formal education, he was a very great educationist and he made sure all his children were highly educated. He supported education at various levels.

Gen. Mustafa brokered the peace that has permeated this country, particularly in West Nile, when he invited Gen. Bamuze to come back home and reconcile with the government. This has made it possible for peace to prevail in that part of the country.

In 1976, when the students of Makerere University caused a strike on a Tuesday, commonly known as “Black Tuesday”, I was one of those who took part and if it was not for Gen. Mustafa, we would have been killed. He had a love for students, a love for life, and he supported the release of a number of Ugandans who were innocent and whom he considered could be pardoned.

Gen. Mustafa was a very clean person who also asked soldiers to be very clean. He was my neighbour when I was General Manager, Uganda Commercial Bank in Arua. He lived a very clean life, with a very clean home. May he be rewarded and may his soul rest in eternal peace.

12.09
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On my behalf and on behalf of the people of Obongi whom I represent here, I support the motion moved by the Prime Minister. I honour and respect the late, His Excellency Gen. Mustafa Adrisi, for the good work he did as mentioned by the people who spoke before me.

He was responsible for the success of the counter insurgency measures of the government in West Nile, and this has been mentioned. He was a bridge between West Nile and the rest of Uganda - this has been mentioned - but the bridge has been broken. Will West Nile be together with Uganda? Who is going to be the next bridge? Will he manage like Mustafa?

I would like to thank the government for acknowledging here in the speech of the Prime Minister that they will recognise all the people who served in this country - in the army and in the civil service - and that they are going to reward them. I would like to urge the government not to wait for times of death before you recognise and reward somebody when the person is actually gone. Let it be continuous throughout the life of that person. You know that there are many citizens out there who are suffering painfully following up their pension, which is not a favour but a right. (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me recognise in the gallery this morning pupils and teachers of Nsango Standard Academy represented by hon. Makhoha Margaret and hon. Stephen Mayende. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them.

12.11
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to our beloved son, Gen. Mustafa Adrisi. Once more, the people of Koboko and Uganda in general have lost another gallant son. We have been burying many of late.

As the Prime Minister has mentioned, Gen. Mustafa Adrisi was born in Yumbe although the fact is that his origin is in Koboko. His father was called Mr Kenyi and his mother Ide and he was called Abataki. These are typical names of the Kakwa people. So, he actually returned home. That is why today we are going to take his remains to be buried in Koboko.

Mr Speaker, the late General was a hardworking army officer. He was also a faithful and disciplined officer. That is why he ran through all these ranks to the rank of General. He did great work in the armies for both the late Milton Obote and the late Gen. Idi Amin’s governments. I am happy that among the many Amin soldiers, who were labelled bad, he has been a good example. This shows that there were many good soldiers among the Idi Amin soldiers. I thank him for the good job and the example he showed in defending the fact that not all Idi Amin’s soldiers were bad.

I also would like to thank him because when he returned from exile, he never agitated for war. He preached peace. Whoever went to him to seek advice, he always preached peace, unity and development. (Member timed out.)

12.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker and honourable members, we now know that there were people who stood up against the excesses of the late Idi Amin. Many of them were people from West Nile. Hon. Alex Onzima mentioned them and the late here was one of those, even risking his life. There was also the late Brig. Arube who tried to overthrow the Government of the late Gen. Idi Amin. When the move failed, he shot himself. There was also Maj. Gen. Lumago who did not agree with the excesses of the late Idi Amin.

What I am trying to say is that there were people who stood up against the late Idi Amin. This means we must now stop this blanket condemnation of ethnic groups because leaders came from those particular areas. We must not condemn the Acholi because of Joseph Kony. We must not condemn the Langi because of the excesses of the late Dr Milton Obote. This must now stop. These days you hear of the Banyankole and westerners; this too must stop. (Laughter)

I want to thank the widow and the family in general for looking after the late. The biggest tribute I want to pay to the late is that when he was chief of staff, he worked to the extent that every soldier built themselves homes in their respective villages. He would ask “Wewe, kusha jenga nyumba?” Unfortunately, these houses in West Nile were razed in the 1980s. When you go to places like Yumbe, Maracha, Arua and Koboko, you only find foundations, but slowly we are now rebuilding them. 

Mzee, thanks for your work. Thank you for lifting our spirit and raising our character high so that we are not the same as the others that caused so much havoc in this country. I thank you.

12.16
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker and my colleagues. I want to thank the government for deciding to bring our beloved to this House for this kind of respect.

The late was a hero to us. Although he is gone, he still remains a hero to us. This is because of his acts in the governance of the past governments where he participated up to the current government. The late remains a hero to us because of the things he preached, the reconciliation he preached, which has propelled this country. Why do I say that? Peace and reconciliation are still the pillars for the transformation of this country. So, as Ugandans, we have learnt a lot from the late.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, I want to thank the family for having raised such a person for this country. On the other hand, it is a challenge to them because we need to see the late Gen. Mustafa Adrisi still alive in that family, although we shall bury his body. My appeal to the family is to have followers of the late Gen. Mustafa Adrisi groomed so that his name can continue standing for our region and the country at large. This is a big challenge for the people of West Nile. We shall miss him. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

12.19
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The gentleman lying here is my father-in-law. When I contested, the late held my hand and said, “You are going to be a leader and you will continue to be a leader.” Those are the words that came from this man lying before us today.

The late was not only a military man; he was also a social developer. When we lost the late Maj. Olindo in 1978, very many soldiers went to Yumbe in Lodonga Sub-County to bury him. However, when they reached, there was no house to lay his body and yet four army helicopters had flown soldiers to bury him. From that time, the late General here before us today ordered that every soldier had to build a house for themselves. That was part of social development. If it was not because of the war, these issues of asking where power would be connected to if it is taken to West Nile today would not be there, because we already had our houses where the power would be connected to.

The late was a nationalist and patriotic; maybe it was because of the fever of colonialism, but this man – (Member timed out.)

12.21
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First, I stand to second the motion and thank Government for honouring our dear elder. 

A lot of good things have been said about the late. This shows he was a product of strong institutions. I am sure the Army is one of those strong institutions that build human resources for this country. Without the Army, the country cannot be stable. So, I thank Government for looking after him since he returned from exile.

Just as Gen. Moses Ali said, this government never appeared from the blue. It had support from all over, including from the likes of the late here, who was living in exile then. I personally share some of the experiences because my late grandfather worked with the late closely. The late Gen. Kazini actually stayed in our home during their rebel activities. 

We have a lot to learn from the likes of the late; we should not just wish them away. The Army as an institution has got something to learn from the likes of Gen. Adrisi. The current institution of the Army is involved in corruption. We pass budgets here and they say, “these are classified expenditures”, but when you compare the Army of the times of Gen. Adrisi and the current Army, there is a lot that was left behind. The Army then lived in barracks –(Member timed out)

12.23
MS REBECCA AMUGE (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me as the Minister for Northern Uganda rehabilitation and the Member of Parliament for Alebtong District in Lango sub-region to send my sincere condolences to the family. 

How would I want to remember Gen. Adrisi? In the 1970s, a lady from our place was married in their family but in 1979, the lady had to go to exile. She had a little girl she had brought from the village but they separated and ran different ways. When this lady came back after the war, she did not have the little girl so it caused a big conflict between the clans. However, when Gen. Adrisi returned from exile, he brought this girl. They had named her and she had already integrated in their family. She had her faith, they took her back home but she failed to integrate in her own family. The girl came back and she is now married and she lives in Germany. I think he would have said that probably she was a different girl from Lango but he did not do that. This is a very big legacy that I would like to use to remember Gen. Adrisi.

As a Minister of Northern Uganda, I work in this region. I know the people who are causing conflict and I know the ones who are bringing people together. The late Gen. Adrisi is one of those in West Nile who was trying to bring the people of not only West Nile, but the whole of Uganda, together. He tried and every meeting we sat in, people would mention the issue of unity. The history of Uganda is very fragile and I would like to thank the President of this country for coming up with this action which brings us - (Member timed out.)

12.25
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Busoga Parliamentary Group and on behalf of the people of Kigulu South Constituency, I wish to convey our heartfelt condolences to the family and Uganda at large on the demise and loss of our General. 

Permit me to pick two issues from the motion that was presented by the Prime Minister. He did give an assertive statement that they are determined as Government to pay all former soldiers. I want to say bravo. However, as we see off our General, we should be reminded that so many of the former soldiers did open their bank accounts and today they have kept checking their accounts but money has never been remitted. Let us ensure this is effected so that our Generals and our former soldiers rest in peace.

Also, when it comes to recognising and appreciating former leaders, this is a great decision and I appeal to all the current leaders to follow suit. The first time I visited New York, I visited Uganda House and I was dismayed to find some people from Uganda daring to scratch off writings that were on that building, - Field Marshall Idi Amin, Conqueror etcetera. Somebody was scratching them off. We should respect legacies and respect what others have put in place. That is in line with what the government is pushing for to appreciate and recognise former leaders. 

Mr Speaker -(Member timed out.)

12.27
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We mourn a great leader and a statesman. Actually, the demise of the former Vice-President only tells us that there have been good leaders in all governments. The excesses of different governments should not be taken as blanket blame. I bring condolences from Bunyoro and more so from Buliisa. For the generation of His Excellency Adrisi and much later, their only access to Kampala was through Packwach, Butiaba, Masindi Port and Namasagali because that was the only route they used to have at that time. 

One question I want to ask is: have we documented our history as a country? Who is a hero and who is not in this country? Many times we have heard of liberators; can we get the courage to own our ugly past and write the true history of this country so that those good men, those statesmen who have sacrificed for this country, can be put on record for our grandchildren to know that we have a history? Ugly as it was with some militarisation, that is how it was but with those excesses there existed some good people. 

The lesson I would want us to learn from this is that we should make sure that as the Ninth Parliament and the government of the day, we do not revert back to the civil wars which took so long. This old man has died a peacemaker. The only way we can mourn him is to make sure that we all become peacemakers and stop any trend that takes us in the direction of conflict or civil war, so that we co-exist as a country and we force this thing called multipartyism to work at any expense. We should dialogue and stop this violence and confrontation so that peace-making should be now –(Member timed out.)

12.30
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to convey my condolences on the loss of the former Vice-President. 

In remembering him, I would like to point out to this country that they ran one of the least corrupt regimes. Even with all the things that are said about the late Amin’s regime, they were not corrupt. They built the foreign service of this country. I would like to advise the present government not to attempt to rewrite the history of Uganda. Actually, maybe we dare face our history and even reconsider getting a way of recognising the former President even with all those things that have been said about him. If you go to Ghana, you land at Kotoka International Airport which is named after a former Field Marshal who staged a coup. 

Secondly, those of you who are in charge, God will call you to account individually. These things of, “we are beating them as a group” or “orders from above”; I want to warn the men and women in uniform - the Police and the Army - that you will be held to account as individuals. What will your record be? How will you be portrayed when you lay there - as the one who beat the Opposition most or as the one who saved the Opposition?

Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. (Laughter)

12.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INDUSTRY (Dr James Mutende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. Mine is to appreciate and demonstrate to us here the humility of the fallen General. I will give my own family experience. 

In 1975 during the Idi Amin regime, the town engineer of Jinja, the late Kasigwa, who was father to one of our colleagues, was murdered mysteriously. My father then was town clerk of Jinja and he was due to be transferred to Kampala on promotion. I am sorry Gen. Ali has left, but Gen. Ali was then serving as minister for local government and he tipped the mayor, the late Nsajja, telling him that if Mutende moves to Kampala, he is in for trouble. Indeed, my father left and went to exile and that day our home in Mbale was ransacked. However, after about two weeks when we had settled, Gen. Mustafa came and visited us and we were very humbled. He apologised for the mess that had been made in our home by the errant soldiers. I just want to confirm to colleagues that not everybody in that regime was evil and we should not blanket blame the regime or the soldiers of the day. 

I still want to thank Gen. Moses Ali who saved my father, enabling him to go to exile and he is still alive today. I thank Gen. Mustafa Adrisi for his humility because he came up to our home to come and sympathise with the family. I want to thank, again, and praise the late Mzee Mustafa Adrisi. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, in the public gallery this morning we have pupils and teachers of St Hellen’s Primary School represented by hon. Bitekyerezo Medard and hon. Emma Boona of Mbarara District. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House.

Honourable members, the motion is that this Parliament resolves that it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of Gen. Adrisi Mustafa Abataki; that it takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered and contribution made by the late General to the development of this country. I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, for those travelling, there is transport that will be leaving at 2.30 p.m. at the parking of the North Wing. Please be there on time. 

	The National Anthem	

The East African Community Anthem

 (Exit of the late Gen. Adrisi Mustafa.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much. I have to apologise to you. There is very little a Speaker can do in 30 minutes. We had one and a half hours, the movers and seconders took almost one hour of that and I had to budget within 30 minutes to allow you speak. I apologise to those who should have spoken but were not able to. 

Honourable members, these occurrences give us the opportunity to review our history and use that as a basis for launching how we move forward for the future. We should, therefore, take these moments as moments of deep reflection about the history of this country and the things that we put in place at this material time, and as leaders of this country what we must do to make the difference that is required to move this country forward. The past informs us but it should not prejudice our decision on how we move to the future. God bless you all and thank you.

We will not be able to sit this afternoon. I am advised that this is because today is a special sitting and we are supposed to be going to the mosque for prayers. However, we will be sitting tomorrow, and I beg for your indulgence that we sit tomorrow as there is urgent business that is pending, which rolls out into the budget processes. We need to clear a few things out of the way to facilitate the budget process. A lot of things could get held up if we do not finalise with this. So, the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 12.38 p.m. and adjourned to Wednesday, 31 July 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)
