Wednesday, 30 July 2014

Parliament met at 2.58 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. As I indicated yesterday, Parliament will close plenary after tomorrow’s sitting; so, today we are going to start the State of the Nation Address debate. If by the time we begin the whips will not have identified those who are going to contribute, Members will be subjected to the five minutes rule and those who will be able to speak will speak. Those who will not will not be able to speak. So I am just alerting you about that. Thank you very much.

The Prime Minister is not here; he indicated that he would not be here today. So, there is no question time. No, we will not amend rules from this Floor.

STATEMENT ON UGANDA RED CROSS COMMEMORATION OF FIFTY (50) YEARS OF SERVICE IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member has got my permission to appear in that format.

3.02
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for granting me this rare opportunity to come dressed in the colours of Uganda Red Cross Society. 

It is exactly 50 years today in this Parliament of the Republic of Uganda when the Uganda Red Cross Society was duly recognised through an Act of Parliament in 1964. The following year in 1965, the Uganda Red Cross Society was admitted as a member of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement. Through an Act of Parliament, the Uganda Red Cross Society was recognised as a voluntary aid society, auxiliary to public authorities and exercising obligations by virtue of the Geneva Convention for the amelioration of the condition of the wounded and sick, of armed forces in the fields, for the liberation of the condition of sick and shipwrecked members of armed forces at sea.

The Act further spelt out the main objects of the society as the furnishing of aid to the sick and wounded in time of war and to non-belligerent prisoners of war and civilian sufferers from the effects of war, the improvement of health, the prevention of disease and the mitigation of suffering throughout the world.

Since then, the Uganda Red Cross has executed its mandate based on the seven principles of the movement and reaching out to the victims of both natural and manmade disasters without discrimination.

Madam Speaker, the auxiliary role played by the Uganda Red Cross Society in alleviating human suffering cannot be over emphasised. Over the period, the society has grown from a handful of members and volunteers to a wide network of volunteers and members of over 340,000 members spread in 51 branches across the country.

As such, the society has been auxiliary to the Government of Uganda in especially carrying out both emergency and development work. Notable of the emergency response work were in the Luweero Triangle 1980-85, the Teso floods of 2007, the Ebola outbreaks in Gulu, Kibaale, Bundibugyo, Luweero; the Kasese floods, the Bududa landslides, the cholera outbreaks and victims of riots in and around Kampala, as many Members may know in this House.

Madam Speaker, the society has also focused on disaster risk reduction and realising the need to better prepare communities to reduce the occurrence of disasters, be able to cope and recover quickly. We have also been involved in health interventions mainly in the area of sexual reproductive health, HIV/AIDS care and support, interventions in first aid and road safety throughout community based first aid training, first aid services and road safety interventions especially targeting schools and boda boda riders.

Hon. Members, the above achievements and many more that I have not mentioned have been based on a strong capacity of branches and governance structures at branch and national level. The society has a governance structure for both the adults and the youth with the central governing board as the highest structure that monitors the day-to-day activities of the society.

Madam Speaker, the celebration of the 50 years came at the right time when the Uganda Red Cross is scaling up its mandate from the one provided 50 years ago and our theme for our celebrations is “50 years of service, volunteering for humanity.”

In order to fully execute its mandate, the Uganda Red Cross Society would like Parliament to consider the following key issues that form the basis of this humanitarian dialogue today:

    1. Amendment of the Red Cross Act.

Madam Speaker, the Red Cross Act of 1964 is overdue for amendment since the community needs have increased beyond the present mandate. Currently before Cabinet, the Bill needs to be passed into law immediately in order to address the current realities and needs of the people of Uganda.

2. 	Despite providing more than 90 percent of its services direct to the vulnerable communities, the society still faces direct taxation and VAT charges. This makes the delivery of humanitarian services more time consuming and expensive.

Madam Speaker, we implore Parliament to support us in attaining tax exempt status as our sister societies are enjoying in the region.

3. 	Budget support

All over the world, the Red Cross national societies are supported, to a large extent, by their governments and this is in line with the society’s auxiliary status to Government and local authorities. However, here at the Uganda Red Cross, we do not receive any subvention from Government and yet the work we do would otherwise be done by Government.

Madam Speaker, we implore you and this Parliament to consider supporting the Uganda Red Cross Society in meeting this important mission of supporting the most vulnerable.

Lastly, on the Good Samaritan law, in execution of her services, humanitarian actors are challenged with the response of bystanders in helping victims of accidents and other human suffering. The Uganda Red Cross Society is proposing the enactment of a new law that makes it legally possible for someone to render aid in an emergency to an injured person on a voluntary basis. 

This law will offer legal protection to the people who provide reasonable assistance to those injured, ill, in danger or otherwise incapacitated. The legal protection that will be offered by this law is intended to reduce bystanders’ hesitation to assist for fear of being sued or prosecuted for the unintentional injury or wrongful death.

 Madam Speaker, this law also proposes that categories such as Police, drivers, the Army and teachers among others should have first aid kits and skills in order to provide services to those that are in need.
As I conclude, I would like to thank the hon. Members and members of staff who have participated in donation of blood and a number of units, I am happy to report, have been collected. May I also say that those that would want to donate; we are still open up to 5.00 O’clock.

Madam Speaker, once again, I would like to thank you most earnestly for affording me this opportunity. I would like to thank all the partners of the Uganda Red Cross Society, the members of the press that have covered us and our work –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, if you could wait, there are these children that I want to introduce. Hold on children. They are from Meisa Bright Primary School in Mubende represented by hon. Ssemuli and hon. Namugwanya. You are welcome children. (Applause) You can conclude.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was concluding by urging my colleagues to be members of the Uganda Red Cross Society, support us and urging them to go and donate blood in the CHOGM Gardens. I was also thanking the press, partners and most especially you, Madam Speaker, for according me this opportunity to address this august House. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Tashobya. We shall only allow some three contributions. 

I want to inform you that in the Distinguished Public Gallery this afternoon, we have the Interim Central Governing Board of the Uganda Red Cross Society, dressed in red. We also congratulate our own, hon. Tashobya, who is their chairperson. They are here to celebrate 50 years of its existence and we want to thank the Members of Parliament for participating as well as the staff. 

Personally, I want to testify that when seven of my sub-counties suffered from a hailstorm, the Uganda Red Cross was there to provide the necessary support. So, I really want to thank them for that opportunity. (Applause) 

3.12
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Madam Speaker, thank you. In supplementing on your contribution, I also want to take this opportunity to thank the Uganda Red Cross. Just last year, a flood swept villages in my constituency and people died. I want to thank the Uganda Red Cross because they came in very handy and helped the people who were helpless and we do appreciate what they did and I want to thank them very much. 

I pledge my prayers to the Uganda Red Cross –(Interjections)– when the prayers are okay, other things follow. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Anywar, hon. Nzoghu, hon. Mutyabule, two minutes. Oh, that man had floods – hon. Mbahimba and then the member from the islands.

3.13
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representatives, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Thanking the Uganda Red Cross cannot be more emphasised. It is common knowledge that where there is a crisis, we all look out for the Red Cross. We want to commend them for the work well done and in particular, I remember that time when I saw one of the Red Cross volunteers running away with a baby from tear gas in Kasangati, I was touched. Leave alone Northern Uganda where we have been having problems for the last two decades, the Red Cross has had visible results.
Therefore, my proposal is that as much as the Red Cross is expected to do a huge job, their funding has now been curtailed and we cannot afford to see that the Red Cross is being taxed for humanitarian supplies we all rely on, including the government. Where there is crisis, they expect the Red Cross to come in handy.

My proposal today is that as Parliament, we make it clear and pronounce ourselves that the humanitarian products of the Red Cross should really be exempted from tax to enable them do a good job because if there is any problem elsewhere, it should be tightened rather than the people who are suffering with landslides, Nodding Disease and the rest of it to suffer by increasing tax on their activities. That is my prayer, Madam Speaker –(Interjection)– the chair of the Red Cross is also trying to chip in.

So, I emphasise that before we go from here, honourable colleagues, we make it clear that the tax should really be removed from the activities and products of the Red Cross to enable them –(Member timed out.)

3.15
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank you for giving me this opportunity and also to express my sincere gratitude to the Red Cross for the wonderful work that they have done not only in Kasese but in the entire country.

There are three reasons why I cherish the Uganda Red Cross: The first is that the Red Cross staff is transparent and I speak with authority that they are actually transparent because they operate on a budget that is even lean but with a lean budget, they are able to deliver results and results which anybody, including the blind people, can actually be told that they have produced results.

We have so many organisations in this country that even when you call on them for their services, they delay to go but the Red Cross will even invite itself where they have not been invited specifically to address not only humanitarian issues but also development issues. I want to say that in a municipality like Kasese, it is the Uganda Red Cross which actually changed the environment of Kasese Municipality. They planted a lot of trees that you see in Kasese Municipality and it is actually an effort of the Red Cross. (Applause)

On all the disasters that we have faced in Kasese, be it the time in May 2013 and May 2014, the Uganda Red Cross Society was there to help the people of Kasese to recover from the floods. I want to thank them specifically on those grounds and commend them and that that spirit should continue.

Finally, it is important that the good people in the Uganda Red Cross Society are also identified and honoured because there are people who have been honoured in this country when they did nothing. But here is the Uganda Red Cross Society which has done a lot of work and they are not being recognised. So, I want to implore Government that we must recognise the Uganda Red Cross as one of the charitable organisations in this country that have done beyond their expectations and that of Ugandans. Madam Speaker, when we talk of –(Member timed out.)

3.19
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support what my colleagues have been saying about the Uganda Red Cross Society. I want to appreciate their effort to supplement Government’s effort to handle disasters. When I reported a hailstorm here in Parliament, the Uganda Red Cross heard and they came very fast to Namutumba in 2011. They were able to give my people a lot of things including cooking utensils, blankets and so on. My people were greatly helped. And recently when we suffered a hailstorm in the sub county of Bulange, they still came in very fast to assess the situation and they have promised to help. So, thank you very much, Uganda Red Cross Society, for supplementing Government’s efforts; you are very good partners and we shall always support you. 

3.20
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In 2013 and 2014, like all of us are aware, Kasese was hit by floods from River Nyamwamba and other rivers that burst their banks. I learnt a lesson. All I knew was to appeal to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and they took time to appear but in no time, the Red Cross was there. So I want to commend and thank the Uganda Red Cross for being so fast in responding to disasters. 

Secondly, I did not know that Red Cross Uganda was established by an Act of Parliament. I thought it was an international NGO operating all over the world and therefore was just humanitarian to the vulnerable. I learnt of it when we were hit by those floods. What they did in the first two weeks was more than my government did for the people of Kasese. They were able to resettle us, they gave us food, they guided us and we suffered with them. So, I salute Red Cross Uganda and I thank them so much. 

Lastly, in Kasese, the Red Cross Uganda has land that the people of Kasese encroached on. I want to state clearly that we are going to work with you to secure your land, as the leadership of Kasese. Please work with us and always come to Kasese because the floods of Kasese will continue coming because this is a global phenomenon that is new in this world and will continue in Kasese. Thank you.

3.23
MS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to add my voice in thanking the Uganda Red Cross for the tremendous work they are doing to help Ugandans. We all have fresh memories of what happened in Bududa when this district was affected by mudslides. But the fast institution to come to the ground was the Uganda Red Cross. Red Cross stayed there until the last day. When you go to Bududa –(Interjections)– yes, they are always the first to come and they are always the last to leave. 

Madam Speaker, when we visit our people in Kiryandongo, some of them are still living in those tarpaulins given to them by the Red Cross. My own government has not yet resettled these people; some of them still live in the tents provided by the Red Cross. 

More importantly, the Red Cross has helped in mobilisation for blood. Right now, they are appealing to Members of Parliament and Ugandans to go and donate blood. As women, we always need blood in case there is an emergency as we deliver our children. When our children suffer from malaria and become anaemic, they need blood. The Uganda Red Cross is doing a good job to mobilise for blood. But even men also need blood. So, I want to commend the good job that Red Cross is doing and I – (Member timed out.)

3.25
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Philip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We all know that the Uganda Red Cross has done great work for our country and it does a noble job. It is one organisation which no one criticises because it does good things. Where there is disaster, the Red Cross comes in like a hand of God to solve the problems of those in distress. 

Over time, the Red Cross has diversified its work into activities like planting trees. In my constituency, they have given us safe water. When I was growing up, they were known for mobilising for blood for hospitals; they have built health centres and they still offer relief. It is a good organisation. 

It is an organisation built on charity and donations and these donations are not from us. Someone somewhere gives these donations. There are people outside this country who give these donations. What have we done to support the Red Cross because it is built on charity? Whose charity is this? 
I think the Red Cross should mobilise us Ugandans also to make covenants. If you start with MPs, you will have 300 Members of Parliament giving you may be Shs 10,000 per month; that would be a starting point but let us do something for the Red Cross. We only see this help coming to us when we need it but we do not know where it comes from. 

Government itself, even after passing an Act of Parliament to set up the Red Cross does not help the Red Cross. Last time when we were discussing Kasese when there was a report from the Shadow Minister for Disaster, the Minister for Disaster said that Government of Uganda worked through Red Cross. But from what the chairman has said, it seems this is not true. 

So we wish to have the government funding Red Cross. I am sure this august House would approve whatever little money they can give for Red Cross and we ask the minister concerned to operationalize the support to Red Cross; but more so by us individuals. We have a little money that we can spare and if the Red Cross got a million Ugandans and each gives Shs 10,000 using mobile money, they would have billions of shillings and they would give us more water; they would give us more relief and they would plant for us more trees. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.28
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryadongo): Madam Speaker, let me also join my colleagues who have spoken in support of the statement that has just been delivered by hon. Stephen Tashobya in commemoration of the Golden Jubilee of the Uganda Red Cross Society.

There has been and there still is an attempt to teach patriotism but I think patriotism comes from the spirit of voluntarism, and this is what you see in the actions of organisations and people like the Uganda Red Cross. These are people who put themselves in harm’s way for the sake of humanity through volunteering. It is because of this that some of us stand to applaud the Uganda Red Cross Society for the good work that they have always done in many aspects of life.

Madam Speaker, blood has always been a problem for those who need it. Madam Speaker, you will recall that some time ago, you and I buried a wife to a former colleague, hon. Bernard Mulengani’s wife, in a situation that could have been saved; a mismatch of blood groups. So, these are people who are helping to harness these resources but also underscoring one principle - the spirit of voluntarism. I would like to salute them for that and for putting themselves in harm’s way for the sake of humanity.

It is times such as these that I call upon people who engage in struggles – unfortunately some of these struggles are even on our streets with teargas – that again puts these people in danger, can’t this stop, for heaven’s sake because that is one way we can honour these people, saving them from being exposed to danger?

As I conclude, may I urge Government to fast-track the amendment Bill that is in the offing, which hon. Stephen Tashobya has just talked about so that we can bring that legislation to match the modern times. And may I also say that the Uganda Red Cross Society is here to stay. We have been quarrelling with what we call “briefcase” organisations –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, that is a life member; maybe I should yield the Floor for her.

THE SPEAKER: Life member? Are you not smuggling her in?

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you, hon. Sam Otada for giving way. Madam Speaker, I am a life member of the Red Cross Society and I am a Rotarian. So I am also in service above self. So, I don’t only know about the Uganda Red Cross but I belong to it. I would like to inform this House that the Uganda Red Cross is unique in its way of work. It is one of the organisations that have already established a permanent home where you can always find its operations and services that have been mentioned and I want to call upon all members of Parliament to join the Uganda Red Cross and mobilise for membership of the Uganda Red Cross in their respective communities because that is where voluntarism and patriotism can really be exhibited. I have been a volunteer at the Uganda Cross and I will continue to do so because that is the way to go. Thank you.

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, with the life member giving me that good information, I now rest my case. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much. Hon. Member, when I was in secondary school, I was a member but I think I am now expired. (Laughter)

3.34
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of Government, I would like to thank the Uganda Red Cross Society for making 50 years of existence and for making 50 years of giving service to the people of Uganda. I also would like to thank the chairperson for presenting a good report to this House.

Just to refresh our memories, especially the young members, the Red Cross was started by a lady called Florence Nightingale –(Interjections)– it is good to recall because some of you may not know these things. During the colonial war –(Interruption.)

MS LEMATIA: Thank you, Second Deputy Prime Minister, for mentioning Florence Nightingale. She is the mother of modern nursing and I belong to that. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I think there is a lot of smuggling today.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: The purpose of talking about that lady was intended to refresh our memory especially those who might have forgotten and those who didn’t know at all. So, let us know together that in the 18th Century during the colonial war, handling casualties of the war was so expensive and there was nobody to look after such injured people. That is when this nurse started this movement to take care of those who suffered injuries during the war for them not to suffer again, thus the beginning of the Red Cross Movement. 

And I am glad that it spread all over the world until it got to Uganda. We are very happy that we are also benefitting –(Interjections)– you first stand up before you give me information. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, information from hon. Nzoghu.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the Rt. Hon. Gen. Moses Ali for giving way. The information I would like to give to the House is that during the 1980s and 1990s, the General will recall the West Nile Bank Front in which he was a member –(Laughter)– and when you were operating in the West Nile, the Uganda Red Cross had to swing into action to help the causalities that you people were causing in West Nile. That is the information I want to give and that is the commitment on which the Uganda Red Cross actually operates. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order in the House.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I want to thank my brother but he gave wrong information. I have never been a member of the West Nile Bank Front; I have been the chairman of the Uganda National Rescue Front and we never caused causalities in West Nile. So, I think he was referring to a different organisation all together. But we also thank him for those services in West Nile. 

I want to correct one thing; many of us should understand that a stable country like Uganda now, will have many NGOs around. Most people forget why all these NGOs are in the country. Much as it is not clear that Government is going to give something to the Red Cross but Government has spent a lot to make the country conducive for the NGOs to work including the Uganda Red Cross and to say that NGOs have done more than Government is not correct because if there is chaos here, I do not think that you will see any NGO here. So, we have contributed a lot to the peace which many people do not see but feel, including the NGOs. So, it is wrong to say that NGOs have done more than Government. I want to appeal to colleagues that we appreciate what NGOs do wherever they are but that should not make you think that they have done more than Government. No NGO in the world will ever do more than any sitting government anywhere. Even here –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Today we are celebrating the service of the Red Cross 50 years down the road. We have all noted and accepted that they have done quite a great job in supplementing the work of Government. We want to encourage them to continue doing the humanitarian job which the government should be grateful about. Besides the shortcomings, we should encourage them. Is the hon. Prime Minister in order to water down the spirit of celebrating the service of the Uganda Red Cross Society for 50 years and encouraging them to do the supplementary work for Government by emphasising the shortfalls of the statement? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, he was responding to the debate on the Floor. Please conclude, Prime Minister. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I agree and every member should understand how members contribute. That is how my sister has understood me and I will forgive her of course. A lot of work has been done by the Red Cross over and many of us are beneficiaries and we pray that they continue to do a good job. 

On the issue of tax exemption, this will be referred to the right authority for further consultation with the Uganda Red Cross; otherwise we cannot say it here now.

On awards and medals being given to the wrong people, if there is an appeal, we should refer it to the awards committee so that the Uganda Red Cross people will be considered for awards whether correctly or not, whether some people have been given wrongly or not. But that will be considered. We are not going to withdraw awards that have already been given just because they were given wrongly. 

Madam Speaker, I want to end here by once again thanking the International Red Cross, the International Night Crescent and the Uganda Chapter which we are celebrating. I want, on behalf of Government, to thank everybody for their contribution and for accepting and I want to congratulate myself also for having the time to contribute.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members. We congratulate the Uganda Red Cross on the Golden Jubilee and the service to the people for 50 years and to assure them that when the Bill comes, we shall handle it with the attention it deserves.

I want to amend the Order Paper. Yesterday we instructed the Minister for Security to come and answer certain legal issues regarding the railway; so, I will allow him to speak but before that I will move forward item four so that commissioner Akol can lay the statements of accounts before we proceed.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a Point of Procedure still in relation to the items on the Order Paper. I note that item 6, 7 and 8 are to be handled by the chairperson of the standing Committee on National Economy but how I pray that we would rearrange them and rather than start with items 7, 8 and 9 by the Chairman, Committee on National Economy, we would start with item 8 which talks about the state of indebtedness of the country so that when we go to the other good aspects of borrowing, we should be aware of how indebted we are as of now. It would logically flow after getting to know our indebtedness we can then talk about the other recourse to borrowing. I pray that item 8 comes above 7.

THE SPEAKER: You are offending the rule against anticipation; you do not know what is in the report. Maybe they have rejected the proposal.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.57
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on Table financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2013 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following town councils and municipal councils:
    1. Mubende Town Council
    2. Kyotera Town Council
    3. Kaabong Town Council
    4. Buikwe Town Council
    5. Nkonkonjeru Town Council
    6. Nansana Town Council
    7. Rutunduzi Town Council
    8. Kakiri Town Council
    9. Namayumba Town Council
    10. Masuulita Town Council
    11. Mukono Municipal Council
    12. Lwakhakha Town Council 
    13. Kaberamaido Town Council 
    14. Kabiito Town Council 
    15. Masindi Municipal Council 
    16. Kasese Municipal Council 
    17. Karago Town Council 
    18. Bududa Town Council
    19. Luuka Town Council 
    20. Nakaloke Town Council 
    21. Kumi Town Council 
    22. Pallisa Town Council 
    23. Njeru Town Council 
    24. Kabwohe- Itendero Town Council 
    25. Rubirizi Town Council 
    26. Kabuyanda Town Council 
    27. Busembatya Town Council 
    28. Budadiri Town Council 
    29. Moyo Town Council 
    30. Nebbi Town Council 
    31. Soroti Municipal Council 
    32. Iganga Municipal Council 
    33. Butaleja Town Council 
    34. Ngoma Town Council 
    35. Jinja Municipal Council 
    36. Kira Town Council 
    37. Bundibugyo Town Council 
    38. Rwimi Town Council 
    39. Hoima Municipal Council 
    40. Katwe- Kabatoro Town Council
    41. Kalongo Town Council 
    42. Padibe Town Council 
    43. Namasale Town Council 
    44. Otuke Town Council 
    45. Amolatar Town Council 
    46. Alebtong Town Council 
    47. Dokolo Town Council 
    48. Agago Town Council 
    49. Apac Town Council 
    50. Amuru Town Council 
    51. Patongo Town Council 
    52. Anaka Town Council 
    53. Lamwo Town Council
    54. Mbarara Municipal Council 
    55. Oyam Town Council 
    56. Pader Town Council 
    57. Ayer Town Council 
    58. Lira Municipal Council 
    59. Kitgum Town Council
    60. Aduku Town Council 
    61. Lyantonde Town Council 
    62. Kamwenge Town Council 
    63. Kagadi Town Council 
    64. Katooke Town Council 
    65. Ishogororo Town Council 
    66. Ngora Town Council 
    67. Buliisa Town Council 
    68. Hima Town Council 
    69. Nyahuka Town Council 
    70. Nakaseke – Butalangu Town Council

I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, those are sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for expeditious perusal and report back. Minister for Security. 

3.54
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to express our gratitude for the debate yesterday and for the encouragement, which hon. Members expressed during that debate. Allow me to respond to key issues which were raised here and we were asked to respond to them today. Thank you for the opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that additional statement is on your iPads. Proceed, minister.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, this is the additional statement on the petition on illegal eviction notices by the Kampala Capital City Authority. On the so-called illegal eviction notices by the KCCA, the key question was the one about the 30-meter radius of the railway reserves. The question - (Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, we have work to do.

MR MURULI: The question that was raised by the honourable members was whether the radius of the railway reserves is supposed to be 30 meters or 15 meters from the railway line. The Uganda Railways Corporation (URC), as a statutory corporation, owns property along the railway line and the railway reserves are part of the said property. The URC has free hold interest in the said property and they generally extend 30.48 meters on either side of the railway line save for certain sections of the railway corridor.

The demarcation is as follows: In the Eastern corridor that is Kampala-Jinja and the Southern corridor - Kampala-Port Bell line, the railway reserves are 200 feet that is 60.94 meters wide, which translates into 100 feet or 30.47 meters on either side of the center of the track.

For the Western corridor or the Kampala-Kasese line from the boundary of Kampala railway station reserve that is the Nsambya level crossing to Mile 59/3 which is in Ndeeba, the railway line corridor is 100 feet, which translates into 30.47 meters wide, which is 50 feet or 15.235 meters either side of the center of the railway track.

Beyond Mile 59/3 Ndeeba that is the Kasese line, the corridor is 200 feet, which is 60.94 metres wide that is 100 feet or 30.47 metres on either side of the centre of the railway track.

Madam Speaker, the second question of importance was the question of the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). As highlighted in yesterday’s statement to Parliament, prior to the concessioning of the railway operations in November 2006, the Minister of Transport and the Privatisation Unit under the Ministry of Finance commissioned an abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan, a study in 2005. Due to the sparse encroachment mainly confined to the markets at Ndeeba, Katwe and Kireka, the RAP boundaries were limited to those areas. The affected persons - 225 in number - were subsequently compensated by the Privatisation Unit. A copy of the final report is with me here and I beg to lay it on Table. It is marked ‘A’. This is the copy and I hereby lay a copy of the RAP on Table. 

After the restructuring of the concession in 2010, a full RAP study was commissioned by the Ministry of Works and Transport, the Uganda Railways Corporation, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Rift Valley Railways, the private operators of the railway network in the country. 

The RAP study boundaries covered the 10.4 metres operational corridor, the 60 metres railway reserve and the level crossings and included a verification exercise of the Project Affected Persons (PAPs), a survey of the railway reserves and valuation of resettlement amounts due to those people affected by the project. 

Several community engagements were held to ensure that the society appreciated the need for the re-development of the railway line and the need to promote safety along the railway lines. The Resettlement Action Plan cut-off date was 22 January 2011. A copy of the Resettlement Action Plan is here and I would like to lay it on Table. It is marked “B1”. An additional copy, the final one marked “B2”, is also here. I do hereby lay it on Table.

The other question was to do with the wall along the Kampala-Ntinda Road. Madam Speaker, the construction of the wall along Ntinda Road was being done by Shumuk Springs Ltd. The KCCA had earmarked it for enforcement action. The wall was illegal and KCCA had earmarked it for demolition and I am glad to report that this morning, KCCA took action and actually demolished that wall. (Applause) I would like to lay on Table copies of pictures showing that wall and the KCCA demolition team in action. The wall is no more. I do hereby lay it on Table.
 
Let us also state that the proprietor of the property directly opposite Spear Motors was not the person involved in the construction of the aforementioned wall. The proprietor of the property opposite Spear Motors filed a petition against KCCA and NEMA before the Constitutional Court over the demolition that took place in 2012 and we are awaiting a ruling on that matter. Otherwise, KCCA and NEMA had ordered him to restore the property to its original state. Madam Speaker, KCCA has ‘teeth’ and it is indeed biting.

The final question was on the issue on the Jua Kali funding. Madam Speaker, we are sorry to report that KCCA did not receive any funding for the Jua Kali activities and therefore we do not have anything more to report on that matter. 

Let me extend deep thanks and appreciation to you and the members of this august House and indeed the Members of Parliament from Kawempe, Rubaga and Makindye who raised this matter and brought it to the attention of this august House. 

We have taken note of the views of the honourable members of Parliament very seriously and deeply and we shall address them in our day to day operations as we transform Kampala Capital City into a better city. I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members. We shall submit the minister’s response together with the annexures that have been tabled to the committee that is investigating the issues and we shall get a final report from the committee. I thank you very much. Next item.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Procedure, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Item five.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Procedure, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Item five.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Procedure, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You know that I can suspend you from this House!

LAYING OF REPORTS OF PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATIONS ABROAD IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 32

    (I) REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH ON THE BENCHMARKING VISIT TO KENYA

4.04
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Kenneth Omona):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I come to lay here a Report of the delegation of the Committee on Health on its findings from a benchmarking visit to Kenya on the Tobacco Control Bill, 2014 which was conducted between 23rd and 27th June. 

It was attended by seven members of the Committee on Health: hon. Margaret Iriama who was the leader of delegation, hon. Naome Kabasharira, hon. Betty Aol, hon. Beatrice Barumba, hon. Femiar Wadada, Dr Michael Lulume Bayigga Ssalongo and hon. Ronah Ninsiima. I hereby lay this report, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, a date will be appointed for its debate. I thank you.

    (II) REPORT OF THE DELEGATION TO THE  FIRST HIGH LEVEL MEETING OF THE GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR EFFECTIVE DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION MEXICO CITY, MEXICO, 15TH – 16TH APRIL 2014

4.05
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Madam Speaker, in accordance with our rules, I beg to lay a Report of the Delegation to the first High Level Meeting of the Global Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation in Mexico City, Mexico, 15th – 16th April, 2014. 

The team included hon. Maria Kiwanuka, the Minister for Finance; hon. Amos Lugoloobi, Chairperson of the Budget Committee; and hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, the Shadow Minister for Finance and Planning. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members. A date will be appointed for its debate.

    (III) REPORT OF THE DELEGATION TO THE 2014 DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION FORUM, NEW YORK, 7TH – 12TH JULY, 2014

4.06
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a Report of the delegation to the 2014 Development Cooperation Forum of the United Nations, New York, held from 7th to 12th July 2014. 

The delegation included hon. Geoffrey Ekanya and the Executive Director of the NGO Forum. I beg to lay the report. 

I also lay the attachments which include the letter to you, Madam Speaker, from the President of the IPU. Also in the attachments is a paper that I presented to the conference.

Madam Speaker, with your permission, yesterday I got a letter from the President of the Economic Council of the United Nations congratulating you for appointing me and for my participation at the conference. I beg to lay a copy of the letter here. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, also in the attachment - because of our participation, Uganda competed to hold the next UN meeting here and it was unanimously adopted, because of my participation –(Laughter)– against Turkey. It was resolved that Turkey hosts it – in the next two years, there will be three meetings: in Korea, Belgium, and Turkey - but because of my participation, Uganda was chosen. I beg to lay a letter to the permanent representative to New York and the guidelines for hosting the conference including the financial implications. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, a date will be appointed for debating the report. We acknowledge the attachment. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON HEALTH ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE NATIONAL MEDICAL STORES

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, if you could just state the subject and go to the recommendations; and use 10 minutes only.

4.09
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Kenneth Omona): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to present the report of the Committee on Health on the performance of the National Medical Stores. Madam Speaker, allow me lay on Table a signed copy of this report together with the minutes of the meeting that was conducted in processing and coming up with this report. I beg to lay. 

On 15 April 2014, the House directed the Committee on Health to inquire into the operations of the National Medical Stores with a view of ensuring the procurement and distribution of medicines, medical supplies and other commodities. 

The House had been informed by a report of the committee on findings in Northern Uganda which indicated that stakeholders had complained about medicine supply. Some of the complaints were:
    1. Drugs stock out at regional referral hospitals
    2. Under supply by the National Medical Stores on some medicines 
    3. Supply of drugs with short shelf life
    4. Supply of medicines by the National Medical Stores that was not required or requisitioned
    5. Failure by the National Medical Stores to supply reagents and other vital supplies such as HIV test kits. 
    6. 
Madam Speaker, suffice to mention that the debate on the said date also raised concerns that the National Medical Stores is inefficient and was exhibiting monopolistic tendencies; has not used it position as a bulk purchaser to bring down the cost of drugs. Also that it had not engaged with lower health facilities to understand their challenges and had not brought its services closer to the people through the establishment of regional stores. 

Madam Speaker, the above concerns motivated the House to direct the Committee on Health to interact with the National Medical Stores and hear its side of the story. Subsequently the Committee on Health on 28th to 29th April 2014 held a meeting with the board and top management of the National Medical Stores at the Imperial Resort Beach Hotel Entebbe. 

During the above meeting, the concerns of the members of Parliament and the findings from the field in Northern Uganda on medicine supply were brought to the attention of the National Medical Stores. This report therefore presents the findings and observations that the committee made when it interacted with the National Medical Stores and the recommendations that the committee offers to improve medicine supply in public health facilities. 

It is important for honourable members to know the mandate of the National Medical Stores. The National Medical Stores is a creature of the law - the National Medical Stores Act CAP 207. It is responsible for procurement, storage and distribution of essential medicines and medical supplies primarily to government health facilities. This means that no government health facility is mandated to procure essential medicine directly. Thus the National Medical Stores procures and distributes medicines to the national referral hospitals, specialised institutes like the Cancer and the Heart institutes in Uganda, the blood transfusion services, regional referral hospitals, all general hospitals, all health centres IIIs and IVs; the Police, the Army and prison facilities. 

Madam Speaker, in the interest of time, honourable members will read more. In the report we have talked about the medicines and the budget management; we have included the National Medical Stores medicine procurement and supply system and honourable members can read that. 

Let me mention the challenges in drug supply; why patients do not access drugs from public health facilities. We found that -
    1. there is resistance in the reforms in the procurement and distribution of drugs;
    2. there is poor quantification of drugs by these health facilities in the orders that they send to the National Medical Stores;
    3. there is non-adherence to procurement plans and ordering by these health facilities; 
    4. there is non-adherence to prescribed drug lists and/or irrational prescribing by health workers. 

The committee was informed that the major cause of artificial shortage of drugs in health facilities was due to non-adherence by health workers to the Uganda clinical guidelines; the latest being clinical guidelines 2010 which clearly states how health workers should prescribe drugs. The clinical workers prescribe drugs outside the prescribed list to deliberately divert patients from using the available government drugs. In this way, the clinical workers push patients to private pharmacies around health facilities. 

The second aspect relates to the polypharmacy which means prescribing big number of medicine for the same ailment. The committee noted that this was private practice phenomenon imported into public hospitals. In private practice, health workers prescribe too much medicine in order to justify huge bills. Patients are persuaded to believe that the more drugs given the more serious the condition of the disease and hence a huge bill. 

When the same health workers come to the public facilities, they continue to over prescribe just like in public facilities. This leads to quick drug stock out. There is also a bigger problem with this practice. Consumption of too much drugs may lead to other complications such as liver and kidney failure. 

Madam Speaker, other challenges that we met were theft of medicine and medicines supply in health facilities. We also encountered the inadequate public awareness about embossed drugs. There is also the challenge of third party procurement or donated drugs and inadequate laboratory supplies that were submitted by the NMS. Also, neglect of preventive health care is one huge challenge that should be addressed to reduce on consumption of drugs. 

Recommendations

In order to improve the procurement, storage and distribution of medicine and other supplies, the committee provides the following recommendations: 
    1. That the capacity of health facilities to prepare procurement plans should be improved. 
    2. The none adherence by clinicians to prescribed drug lists according to the Uganda clinical guidelines should be addressed because the professional bodies should penalise clinicians who prescribe drugs without adhering to the guidelines, including those who over prescribe medicines which are not necessary. 
    3. On the donated drugs, the Ministry of Health should review the donations of drugs to Uganda to ensure that only quality donations are accepted and properly projected and mainstreamed in our medicine supply chain.
    4. There should be public sensitisation on the medicines supplied by Government vis-à-vis embossment so that they can help in community policing and monitoring to reduce stock theft of government drugs. 
    5. On laboratory supplies which the committee found inadequate in the facilities, in financial year 2013/2014, the Ministry of Health and the National Medical Stores should prioritise the procurement and supply of medical equipment and laboratory supplies to all health facilities. In addition, recruitment of laboratory technologists and assistants should be prioritised.
    6. On family commodities and protective gear, the committee recommends that the National Medical Stores should proactively push down family planning commodities and other protective gears to health facilities even when these health facilities have not requisitioned them because in some places, they are needed by the consumers yet there are inadequacies in supplies.
    7. The committee also proposes and recommends the promotion of preventive health care. This will reduce onto the volume of medicines consumed.

Madam Speaker, exciting to note is the fact that there has been a discovery for the cure of jiggers, which has been a big debate for a long period. We learnt with a lot of excitement that the National Medical Stores had actually discovered a cure for jiggers and had stocked medicines for the jiggers. The committee was shown pictorial evidence where the drug was being tested in some communities with tremendous and successful results.

Madam Speaker, if I may say, the same medicine that is used to curing scabies is the very medicine that can be used to cure jiggers. The committee wishes to advise colleagues whose communities are infested with jiggers to ensure the communities make orders to have these supplies from the National Medial Stores.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the instruction of the House to the committee was to critically examine the operations of the National Medical Stores and establish whether the institution was operating effectively as per its mandate. Generally, the committee came to the conclusion that the National Medical Stores was operating squarely within the law. It is a well-managed entity with strong core values of professionalism and integrity. However, its good work is being hampered by other players in the health sector. The committee elaborated some of the crucial recommendations that once implemented may lead to improved health care service delivery.

In the implementation of these recommendations, this august House collectively, and the MPs individually have a role to play. Let us play our role and hold other players accountable for their part. 

Madam Speaker, I move that the report be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson of the health committee. Before we do anything, I want to appoint the hon. Joy Ongom to join your committee so that the committee gets 18 Members because you have been 17.

In the public gallery we have the hon. Dick Nyayi, former MP for Ayivu. (Applause) You are welcome. We need just four contributions of two minutes each. Yes, hon. Dr Epetait.

4.22
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for the good report and their due diligence.
In the Eighth Parliament, I was a member of the Health committee and also Shadow Minister for Health. We grappled over the same issues. The fact of the matter is that many health facilities across the country and many districts were not happy with the policy shift that we made. We took a decision to reverse the amounts of money remitted to the National Medical Stores because initially they used to give 35 percent for drugs to Medical Stores and 65 percent to the districts for purchase of drugs that may not be available at the National Medical Stores.

What we discovered that time was that all districts were actually squandering the 65 percent allocated to them. When we took the decision to reverse those percentages and put more at the National Medical Stores is when the war started.

Many districts and health facilities are actually fighting that policy shift yet the National Medical Stores demonstrated very good capacity to perform in that regard. We must enforce compliance because we realised that even when there were drugs at the National Medical Stores, districts and health facilities opted to purchase from other sources mainly from the Joint Medical Stores and we said if you are to purchase from other sources other than the NMS, then there must be a certificate of non-availability issued by the National Medical Stores before you purchase from anywhere else. But they also flouted that instruction and in some instances they started forging certificates of non-availability of drugs and medicines from the National Medical Stores.

So, we need to take a tougher stand. The National Medical Stores has a demonstrated capacity to deliver. It has actually improved; initially, they would make deliveries and stop at the district headquarters but when we insisted that they must deliver up to the lower health centres, they have performed very well. The National Medical Stores is being fought by greedy people who think they should eat that money. 

Madam Speaker, may I comment on the donation from development partners. I think as a ministry, we must take a firm stand not to accept non-embossed drugs; that is one of the ways that the unscrupulous people are minting money from the unsuspecting patients. All drugs and supplies – if there is any donor ready to give us something they must coordinate with our National Medical Stores. We are not a dumping ground. What happens is those donors bring in their parallel supplies before cross checking whether we already have such medicines at the National Medical Stores or not. So, at the end of the day, we receive a big volume of a particular drug and a lot of expiries and remember it is very expensive to dispose of expired drugs. We cannot squander money in that way.

So, the procurement system must be coordinated. The central point must be the NMS and no donor should bring in drugs before crosschecking with the NMS and we don’t need non-embossed drugs in our country. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

4.27
MR MATHAIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for presenting such a good report. But I would like to address the House first on the first paragraph of the report that this report was occasioned by a similar report of the committee from Northern Uganda to the effect that they had received complaints from various stakeholders relating to the inadequacy of particular supplies and inconsistencies in drug availability. The committee proceeded, in their own statement, to interact with the NMS. The first report to Parliament was their own report to Parliament claiming that they had discovered from stakeholders that there was actually a problem.

The committee interacted with the NMS and is now reporting that there is actually no problem. I am actually disturbed, Madam Speaker. I am actually trying hard to comprehend the gist of this report compared to their earlier reports to Parliament that there was a problem they discovered in Northern Uganda and they are now saying that after their interaction in Entebbe, they discovered that perhaps their fact-finding was false. I can report authoritatively that Masaka Regional Referral Hospital still faces drug stock outs. I religiously visit this hospital quarterly to assess what goes on in this hospital. At least my colleague will bear me witness because she too does so; and there is still a problem.

The committee is now saying that the problem is with the stakeholders who had reported to them earlier on, which problem they reported to the House. The question is, is the first report of the committee that occasioned this report valid or was the first report a rumour that the committee never investigated but rushed the House into allowing them to go and spend more time. I need to be helped and then I will be able to thank the committee for a job well done. Otherwise even from paragraph one and their conclusions and recommendations, I am lost.

4.29
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. It was last week that I was touring the health centres in my district and I got a number of problems that much as the committee is reporting that the NMS is working within the law, there are some gaps that need to be addressed.

Lira has got two Health Centre IVs that is Amacha Health Centre IV and Ogwo. When I visited Amacha Health Centre, I got reports of drug stock out and this health centre notified me that they are serving more than four districts: Amacha is serving Kole District, part of Dokolo, Lira itself and Alebtong District.

You realise that the quantity of drugs that have been supplied in Amacha have never been increased. It was their request that if such a health centre can be uplifted from a health centre IV to district status and the quantity of drugs that are sent there should be increased because the way they see them, they seem as if they still deserve such a quantity. So such problems are there.

When I asked the patients whether they are buying drugs from outside, they said yes they are doing it. We told them that the Government drugs are labelled and they told me they are illiterate; and we are aware that the majority of our people are illiterate. They don’t know how to check whether a drug is for Government or not and above all, they are sick and vulnerable. When they are given drugs from those clinics, they just swallow them. I think there should be mass sensitisation about the government drugs that are sold in such clinics.

Madam Speaker, I don’t know may be the chairman will notify me, when I went to Amacha Health Centre IV, there was nothing completely - Amacha is a Health Centre IV and many people visit that health centre for tooth extraction but there is no single equipment to be used in that hospital and I do not know whether it is the fault of the National Medical Stores or not. The people are suffering; whenever they go, they are attended to but there are no materials or any single equipment to help the patients there and I need that to be addressed. Thank you so much.

4.33
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I also thank the chairman for the report you have presented. I have noticed that many people have given up on going to these health centre IIIs. The point being that they travel long distances to health centre threes and they do not find drugs there. When somebody goes there once or twice and they don’t get the drugs for treatment, they give up. Consequently, they turn to the MPs and say, “You know, I want to go for treatment; I want to go to the other place” and so on and whenever I ask what the problem is and why they don’t use the health centres that we have they say that there are no drugs there. 

Madam Speaker, I have established from our health personnel in the Kaliro District that it is true the quantities of especially antibiotics and antimalarial drugs are actually inadequate yet these are the most used drugs. People actually get despondent when they see that they cannot get the treatment that they need from those places. 

We have heard from the report that these health personnel deliberately refuse to give prescription of the drugs that are available such that they force these people to go and buy drugs from their health centres. This really calls for very stern action and I do not know how we shall address this because the local people do not know whether the drugs are available or not. It must be the highly professional supervisors who must be able to establish that this person was deliberately denied the drugs which were available and was given another prescription altogether. It calls for strong action such that it is deterred.

The report talks about the regional customer care offices –(Member timed out.)

4.35
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a bit reluctant to thank the committee for their report. I do not know whether I have been biased by my health workers from my district or the committee did not do the work that they are supposed to do. I was also in the Eighth Parliament and we really made the shift in the policies where we said that it should be solely the NMS to procure for us the medicines. When I was in my district, there were many essential drugs which were not in my hospital and even in the health centres. I did not even talk to the senior health worker. I talked to those other health workers that work at the ward.

They told me that even the essential drugs that they normally request for are not provided by the NMS. 

In this report, it looks like the committee did not even do what we wanted them to do; instead, they went on praising the NMS and blaming our health workers in the health units. In Yumbe District, we do not have these better clinics where these health workers would refer the people to so that they could buy the drugs that are very expensive. Therefore, we completely rely on the public health units. There is a problem with the NMS that needs to be addressed.

4.40
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the chairman for this report but I have some reservations. For example, after reading through the recommendations, I would have liked to see result-oriented recommendations, which would change our health centres dramatically. What do I mean? As many Members have said, when you go to a health centre, the patients you talk to will tell you, “I was given Panadol and I am supposed to go and buy the rest of the medicine.” She will have the prescription but out of the five medicines, maybe one or two has been offered and yet there is information that maybe two days ago, medicine was delivered from the National Medical Stores. So after this report, we have still not got the solution. For example, about two weeks ago, the National Medical Stores came to Mbarara and went to many drug shops which were found to be selling government drugs. This routine check is not something they do regularly. If this check-up was regular, maybe the leakage of medicines would be reduced.

Most importantly, generally for every health centre III and IV in my district, there is a private clinic and the drug store belongs to one of the staff that people know. So when I look at the recommendations, I do not feel that there are going to be changes in what has been happening.

What can we do to ensure that when drugs come, everybody knows that the drugs have come - (Member timed out.)

4.41
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the committee for the report. When sending the drugs to the health centres, there are essential drugs, which must be included like the one for malaria, worms and so on. However, I would like us to add the mama kits as one of the essential commodities to be sent. This is because in my health centres, the officers in charge do not request for these mama kits and as a result, they are scarce and are sold to the mothers.

I asked in one of the health centres, do you get these mama kits free? They said no, they are bought at Shs 2,000. This may seem to be little for you but for a person down there, it is too expensive. We would like to urge that the mama kits should be free and must be among the essentials.

The National Medical Stores does deliver the drugs but do they deliver the right amounts? In Koboko, we receive the drugs but after one week, they are finished. Is that all they deliver or they deliver less than what is required? If you take Koboko Health Centre IV, it is acting like a district hospital. People come from Congo and Sudan and the drugs are not enough. I would like them to increase the amount of drugs going to Koboko. Thank you very much.

4.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (INDUSTRY) (Dr James Mutende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine is very brief and I would like to draw Members’ attention to item 7 on the discovery of the cure of jiggers. I found this a bit amazing. Jiggers, like other infestations like lice and bedbugs, are really a function of poor hygiene. When we read in the report that, ”The committee learnt with happiness that the NMS has discovered a cure for jiggers and stocked medicine for the jiggers”, I think it sends a wrong message to the nation that communities where jiggers are –(Interruption)

MR OKUONZI: Thank you very much. I am also quite amazed by that statement. I did not expect a statement of that type, which is even in quotes, to come from a committee and from a medical doctor. The information I want to give is that when you discover a drug for a particular condition, it must have gone through three phases of drug testing and I do not think anybody in the NMS can do that kind of research. So, for you to have discovered treatment for a particular condition, it must have gone through three phases of testing, which they have not done.

DR MUTENDE: Thank you very much for the information. So Members, mine was just a matter of caution that this kind of statement could send a wrong signal to the country that you can go ahead and continue picking jiggers after all there is a cure for them. There is no cure for jiggers, it is prevention and it is about hygiene.

The committee had done a good job on point 6.7 where they talked about promotion of preventive health care. The last bullet is “maintain hygiene in the homestead...” I wish they had stopped there and not gone into this cure of jiggers. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the language may not be very entertaining to you but people have died of jiggers.

4.45
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When the first report was made to the House, I was one of those who insisted that additional work be done by the Health Committee.

Madam Speaker, initially I wanted to submit on methodology as part of procedure. I will add to that a substantive concern. From the report of the committee, it is very clear that the committee interacted only with the National Medical Stores and that is very disastrous in terms of getting all this information that was required from the end user department. 

If you interact with only the National Medical Stores, how do you know what is happening in Jinja Regional Referral Hospital, in the Cancer Institute and in Serere? This was a very big flaw and I think that is why it would appear to us from the report of the committee that the whole country - all hospitals and health centres - have conspired to paint the National Medical Stores very badly even when the NMS is doing a good job. That is the origin of problem; methodology.

Madam Speaker, there were very critical issues for instance to do with specialised drugs. The Uganda Cancer Institute and the Uganda Heart Institute had issues with the way the NMS was delivering these drugs, which are supposed to be used in combination yet the NMS was delivering them in bits and pieces thereby rendering their effectiveness almost non-existent.

Madam Speaker, I was a member of the Social Services Committee and a very key supporter of the policy shift; I wanted drugs to be bought centrally but as we talk, the final outcome, which is the deliverables of these drugs is what we are questioning. Up to 60 percent delivery is made on order. What about the other 40 percent of the money appropriated by this House? 

I want to suggest that for us to get to the bottom of this issue, the committee goes back and brings the user department. Why is it that Kabale Hospital is complaining? Moroto is complaining? Mubende is complaining? And they did not meet them. So, they need to bring to one room NMS and all those hospitals –(Member timed out.)

4.48
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I have just one issue for clarification; in 2.0, Doctor did elaborate to us the mandate of the National Medical Stores and he mentioned that the National Medical Stores is responsible for procurement, storage and distribution of essential medicines and medical supplies primarily to government health facilities.  

I wonder why the committee did not inform or put it in their report - the expired drugs in all these hospitals across the country. Are you talking about storage of drugs in Entebbe or even when these drugs have gone to the health facilities? When we were in Yumbe, we saw that they had run out of space for storing these drugs. In Arua, when all the Health Centres IV tried to bring these drugs to the districts, they said their stores were full and they asked them to take them back and they have nowhere to store these expired drugs.  
So, can the committee help us on this issue - because the country is full of expired drugs, which have got health implications? What should we do with those expired drugs in the country side? 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Chairperson and your committee, from the contributions, it seems that the Members are not satisfied with your report. (Applause) I was also wondering whether you had an opportunity to talk to the actual consumers - the final consumers and the people themselves not the institutions but the people who use the drugs.

5.51
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Kenneth Omona): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank colleagues for their keen interest in this report. 

First of all, let me begin from the contribution of hon. Alaso as to why the committee only interacted with National Medical Stores and not the consumers. You will recall very well that after our report of a tour of Northern Uganda when, indeed we said that in our interaction with the communities and those health facilities, the report we received from them, just like hon. Matthias Mpuuga noted, there is a contradiction between the report we are presenting now and the report from our committee tour. Indeed, I want to thank you for that very smart examination of our report. 

It is true, we did indicate in our previous report and if you read it, we actually said “the reports we received” and not “our findings” but the report we received from the community, they complained. Colleagues here raised issues that were pertinent and if we could refer to the Hansard, our terms of reference as the committee, were to interact with the National Medical Stores and report to the House. Indeed, we limited our interaction –

THE SPEAKER: Was that the instruction of the House?

DR OMONA: Madam Speaker, this was the instruction from the House; that the committee interacts with the National Medical Stores and reports back to the House. That is why we limited our interaction around there.  (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order.

DR OMONA: Madam Speaker, this is also what our committee thought about but this would have taken us a little more time than we did to prepare this report. This was just because the instruction from the House was that we interact with the National Medical Stores and that is why we only interacted with the National Medical Stores and made this report even though we would not have loved to limit our interaction with only the National Medical Stores.

Secondly, just a quick response to reactions from colleagues about the cure of jiggers; I am also very surprised that my senior colleague, Dr Okuonzi, is surprised that we are talking about the cure for jiggers. You see, jiggers are a pest and when we talk about cure, it means total killing of the pest and prevention, as Dr Mutende puts it, is wider. In fact, even cure can be used to prevent but what I meant here was pharmaceutical or chemical cure for jiggers.
  
Madam Speaker, I may not be in position to elaborate all the processes that the National Medical Stores undertook to finally say that this reagent kills or cures jiggers. I also remember very vividly that the Minister for Information addressed the nation mentioning this cure and so, it is not limited to the Committee on Health. 

We are reporting what we found there and it is true that we examined evidence that the Benzyl Benzoate emulsion kills jiggers and very many people in the community have benefited from this. (Members rose_) - I take the further clarification.

THE SPEAKER: No, please. Hon. Members, I have other business on the order paper. Please, conclude.  

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think it is also important for honourable colleagues to differentiate between the mandate of the National Medical Stores and the wider mandate of the sector, which is the Ministry of Health. The National Medical Stores may not have the entire mandate or community policing surveillance to find out who is stealing the drugs. I am sure the Minister of Health is here and he should be able to tell the House what the ministry does to prevent theft of drugs once they are delivered by the National Medical Stores.

It is true and honourable colleagues have talked about the stock out and expired drugs. If you critically read our report, these are mentioned there. The causes of expired drugs in health facilities - one of them that we indicated in the report is the poor requisition of drugs; the health workers’ inability to project their needs for the drugs within a certain period of time.  

The National Medical Stores uses the procurement plans of facilities. This is the mandate of the National Medical Stores. Now, the challenge here, and maybe the minister can speak on this, is that every health facility, regional and district hospitals have got a certain amount of money allocated to them per year for procurement of drugs and therefore, the National Medical Stores cannot supply beyond their budget ceiling. 

Now, this of course is the question that probably we need more money to buy more drugs for our people because the National Medical Stores also only supplies what the facilities can afford or what is provided for those facilities. They cannot provide an infinite quantity of drugs and supplies and this is where the question is – that we need more money to buy drugs. 

As I wind up, we simply limited our findings on the instruction of Parliament but I think it is important, just like you have said, that there must be continuous interaction among all the stakeholders; the National Medical Stores, health facilities and also other senior supervisors from the ministry so that there is improvement in capacity of the health workers at the lower health facilities in terms of monitoring of the medicines, being able to project the medicine and other supply needs for the facilities as they are supplied regularly.

For the information of honourable colleagues, the National Medical Stores has now developed a system of delivery of drugs that they are delivered regularly except this month and they indeed reported, that as required, they needed to carry out audit and this audit delayed the supply of drugs. 

However, there are regular schedules actually; even honourable colleagues can pick these schedules and look at them when drugs are expected from in every region from day to day. And indeed, these drugs are delivered and monitored. When you go to National Medical Stores, one innovation we saw there is that once a truck is set off from National Medical Stores, it is monitored on GPS on a big screen. Any truck that deviates from the road, within five minutes, the engine will switch off and the driver has to explain the delay before it can be turned on. 

So, I think the ministry and other stakeholders must participate to make sure that the respective procurements, supplies and use of medicines is right. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we note the report of the committee; we invite them to remain reminded of the concerns, and report to us, finally, when we come back in the budget debate. Please report to us about the concerns of the Members in the budget debate. Thank you.

REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW $7 MILLION FROM THE ARAB BANK FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND ANOTHER $15 MILLION FROM THE OPEC FUND FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLUS ANOTHER $15 MILLION FROM THE SAUDI FUND FOR DEVELOPMENT FOR THE REHABILITATION AND EXPANSION OF KAYUNGA AND YUMBE GENERAL HOSPITAL PROJECTS

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before the chairperson comes, there was some concern today about the weather conditions around Parliament. But I have been assured that by the close of business today, the clouds will be forming. (Laughter) 

Hon. Chair, if you could use ten minutes.

5.00
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Xavier Kyooma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is the report on the Committee on National Economy on the request by Government to borrow $7 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa and another $15 million from the Opec Fund for International Development plus another $15 from the Saudi Fund for Development for the rehabilitation and expansion of Kayunga and Yumbe general hospitals. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the original copies on Table. 

This request was presented to this House by the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 5 November 2013 and accordingly, referred to the Committee on National Economy for consideration in line with Rule 166(2)(b) of the Rules of Procedure. The committee considered and scrutinised the request and now, we beg to report. 

Methodology – 

THE SPEAKER: That one, Members can read. 

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Equally so, even the background Members can read since it is on the iPads. I can move to 5.0, which is the project objective. The main objective of this project is to contribute towards improved delivery of the Uganda national minimum health care package – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, according to our rules – and I am seeking your indulgence so that we vary it and we move in tandem, the rule demands that the report of the committee must be laid unless the Speaker orders that it is varied. So, I am seeking your indulgence so that the records can confirm. 

THE SPEAKER: You have just walked in.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I have been in the lobby and you know that the lobby is part of the precincts of Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: No, you are wasting our time. Please, proceed – (Interjections) – what rule has been offended? He has done that; They are here. What did you lay, hon. Chairperson? –(Interjections) - without the minutes? 

MR KYOOMA: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the committee minutes for the borrowing regarding Kayunga and Yumbe general hospitals. I beg to lay. 

Madam Speaker, 5.0, the project objective of this project is to contribute towards improved delivery of the Uganda national minimum health care package through improvement of health infrastructure at Kayunga and Yumbe general hospitals. The project in general aims at supporting government policy to expand health service coverage and upgrading as well as meeting basic needs to improve the health status of citizens. The project also aims, in particular, at reducing the impact of the problems of maternal and child health by reducing the mortality rate for children and mothers and to improve awareness and health conditions of the target population through the provision of health service to the residents of the surroundings. 

Project components

The project is composed of four components summarised in the table below: 
Component one is about civil works and the component description is given. Component two is procurement and installation of medical and non-medical equipment and furniture. The description is also given. Component three is consultancy services whose description is also given. Then component four is support to the division of infrastructure in the Ministry of Health whose component description is also given. 

The project costs and financing 

The estimated cost of the project is $41 million and it is proposed that the Saudi Fund for Development contribution will be $15 million, BADEA will be $7 million, OPEC Fund for International Development will contribute $15 and Government will also contribute $4 million. 

Madam Speaker, we go to table two, which shows the proposed financing plan in summary. As I have already read, the table highlights the information I have already submitted together with the percentages, the total cost being $41 million. 

Table three shows the project detailed financing plan; it shows the component that will be financed by BADEA in terms of civil works, equipment, consultancy services, PIU and the sub-total; likewise, for SFD, OFID and Government of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, table four shows what is specifically for Kayunga General Hospital and for Yumbe General Hospital. Kayunga General Hospital will take $13.67 million, which is 33 percent of the total cost while Yumbe General Hospital will take $19.688 million, which is 48 percent of the total cost. Consultancy services will take $2 million, which is five percent of the total cost. The project implementation unit will utilise $0.39, which is almost one percent and contingency will take $5.25 million, which is 13 percent.

Madam Speaker, I now beg to report on the loan financing terms and conditions.
    a) For the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa, the loan amount is $7 million. The tenure is 40 years including 10 years of grace period and the interest rate is one percent per annum. It will, however, reduce to 0.25 percent if the payments are effected within 30 days of the due date.
    b) The financing by the Saudi Fund for Development is to the tune of $15 million. The tenure being 30 years including 10 years of grace period and the interest rate is one percent per annum on dispersed and outstanding amounts.
    c) On the OPEC Fund for International Development, we will contribute a loan amount of $15 million. The tenure is 30 years including 10 years of grace period. The interest rate is also one percent per annum on dispersed and outstanding amounts. The above terms are considered highly concessional. 
    d) Other conditions, in addition to the entry into force of the loan agreements, the following conditions of effectiveness have to be fulfilled within six months of signing the loan agreements:
    i) Legal opinion from the legal authority of the borrower stating that terms and conditions of the agreement constitute enforceable and binding obligations upon the borrower.
    ii) Adherence to the procurement methods agreed upon  with the development partners, which are consistent with the PPDA regulations;
    iii) Provision to the development partners of progress reports, financial statements and audited accounts of operations; and 
    iv) Providing an environmental and social impact assessment to be carried out for the project.

Implementation arrangements italicise all the others
The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Health with the Permanent Secretary of the ministry being the project accounting officer. It will be managed by the Ministry of Health Division of Infrastructure, which will be supported by the recruitment of two engineers for work supervision – one for Yumbe and another for Kayunga. There will also be recruited one accountant for the project office in Kampala.

The estimated implementation period is four years starting from the date of the project effectiveness.

The Ministry of Health will report on a quarterly basis on the status of implementation progress of the project activities containing among others, the technical and financial status of the project’s implementation.

Observations and recommendation

Project impact on the health budget

The committee observed that the financial impact of the project on the government’s health spending will be affected mainly in terms of additional resources for maintenance of renovated facilities and repairs and replacement of medical equipment. The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should scale up its commitment to increased health budget financing if the project benefits are to be sustained beyond the project’s lifespan by ensuring that the recurrent costs due to the project are timely absorbed into the national budget.

Inadequate operational funds

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, I think you just read the subject and the recommendation. Members can read the other parts of the report.

MR KYOOMA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

Inadequate Operational Funds

The committee recommends that Government should consider increasing hospital budgets for operational funds for Kayunga and Yumbe general hospitals. 

Electricity for hospital operations

The committee recommends that Government should urgently connect Yumbe Hospital to the main national grid via Moyo or Nyangak power station via Koboko as this will ensure the full realisation of the project objectives.

The committee further recommends that Government should either increase the hospital budgets for utilities of all health facilities or should subsidise their utilities. Health facilities should also be facilitated to install alternative sources of power such as the use of solar.

Reproductive Health Equipment

The committee recommends that Government should clearly earmark a budget for reproductive health and give it the necessary attention it deserves in order to make big strides towards achieving the Millennium Development Goal No.5, that is to reduce by three quarters between 1990 and 2015, the maternal mortality ratio from 506 in 1995 to 131 by 2015, which is now at 438 as at 2011.

Other medical equipment

The committee recommends that Government should expedite efforts of deploying locally trained bio-medical engineers in major health units to carry out routine repairs of broken medical equipment. The committee further recommends that the government policy on routine maintenance and repair of medical equipment be implemented.

Building infrastructure

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that Government expedites the process of renovating all the remaining health facilities in the country in light of the collapsed infrastructure systems of most of these.

Water Infrastructure

The committee recommends that Government expedites the process of rehabilitation of water supply systems in all the health facilities in order to improve on the water and sanitation conditions in these health facilities. Government should further facilitate all health facilities to acquire water harvesting systems in order to mitigate unforeseen water shortages that might pose sanitation challenges in those health facilities.

Staff Housing

The committee recommends the urgent need for Government to provide accommodation facilities for medical workers at all health facilities. Inability for health facilities to provide accommodation for medical workers is of great concern as it has highly contributed to the inability of local governments to attract and retain medical workers even in the place of increased pay in form of additional allowances.

Lack of land titles for health facilities

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health together with the Ministry of Local Government expedite the process of ensuring that the land for Kayunga Hospital is immediately titled and well-fenced off to guard the risks of future claimants and encroachers before the implementation of this project cycle.

Medical staffing levels

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health and that of Public Service and Ministry of Local Government should expedite the process of recruitment to fill vacant posts in all health facilities in order to reduce the doctor-patient ratio.

Hospital management

The committee recommends that Ministry of Health should devise innovative mechanisms of addressing leadership and management challenges in health facilities across the country as hospital infrastructure improvement without good leadership management in the health facilities will be a disaster and should be seriously addressed.

Monitoring and Supervision

The committee recommends that Ministry of Health should enhance supervision and monitoring of health service delivery. There is a need to establish an effective multi-functional structure of central support dedicated to supervision of health facilities.

Fostering supervision will require the Ministry of Health to ensure that the health services are being provided according to the set standards. There is also need to increase funding for supervision at local governments especially for the hard-to-reach areas.

I need to note that during our field tour, while at Kayunga, we established that the one who was in charge of keeping keys for the room where drugs are kept had been away for more than a month and we wondered how patients were getting drugs. It was very serious and that is why we had to come with that recommendation. 

The committee further encourages members of Parliament to get more involved in direct monitoring and supervision of the health service delivery in their constituencies.

Conclusion

The committee has noted Government efforts to address health system bottlenecks and improve effectiveness of the health sector. Emphasis on addressing system-wide constraints will ensure that reproductive health activities become more sustainable.

The project aims at improving functionality of the existing health facilities, in particular, to deliver maternal and child health services, which represent a major source of disease burden in the population.

Investing in reproductive health care, especially family planning will not only relieve the strain on Government budget for social services but also improve the health of mothers and children and the overall welfare of households.

The committee, therefore, supports and recommends to this House to approve Government’s request to borrow $7 million from Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa, $15 million from the OPEC Fund for International Development and $15 million from the Saudi Fund for Development for financing the rehabilitation and expansion of Kayunga and Yumbe general hospitals. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Chair. I think these are straight forward. I know that hon. Oleru has been in tears for the last 10 years over some of these issues. If there is no objection, can I put the question? (Members rose_) - are you objecting? If you are supporting, just sit. I want to hear only objections.

5.21
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, we are not objecting but there are fundamental issues that need correction. One, we cannot in a modern world have a tied loan. This, we have to change. This issue of paying interest rates on disbursed and undisbursed - the Minister of Finance needs to change the agreement. We have loans in our books, which we have only received only 5 percent, 90 percent is undisbursed and we are paying interest; that needs to be changed.

The second one, if you look at operational costs, contingency and so forth, the loan of Shs 100 billion, Shs 30 billion is going to be for operation. This is too high and it needs to be changed and I do not know why the chairman does not recommend adjustment.

Another key important point is that the salary of an accountant will be Shs 10 million a month for three years and we are going to pass it here.
An engineer is going to earn over Shs 13 million per month for three years. These are issues that we need to change in the resolution. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you objecting to us supporting our people getting help in this country?

MR EKANYA: No, Madam Speaker, I support this loan - 

THE SPEAKER: I am talking about your objections to the salary. Is he a foreigner or a Ugandan? If it is a Ugandan, let a Ugandan eat? (Laughter)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I do not oppose but you know we need to create harmony. You will find that at Ministry of Finance, everybody will leave work and he will want to go and fight in these places.
Even you, Madam Speaker, you do not earn this salary. Let us have a levelled ground. To have Shs 30 billion for consultancy is too high, which means our people are only going to get Shs 70 billion.

These are serious issues.

5.24
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support this loan acquisition. We realise that many of our health centres are dilapidated and many of our communities have lost confidence in the health sector, the reason some of them go for traditional healers.

I have to support the committee on the recommendation on the Ministry of Health to regularly supervise health centres and health facilities.

I just said on the Floor of Parliament that last week, I was visiting the health centres in my constituency. I have two Health Centres III. One of them in Aromo Sub-County has a general ward where both the males and females are accommodated together; above all, those who have got TB are also in the same ward. It is a serious matter. If the ministry was supervising them, they would have stopped it.

I do not have capacity as a Member of Parliament to stop such admissions but it is the mandate of the Ministry of Health to stop such admissions in which only the women will be admitted. If it is TB cases, then it should be TB cases. It is a serious matter. 

When I went to Agali Health Centre III, it is only the women who are admitted in the health centre and the men are not being admitted, when actually, sometimes they come in a very critical situation. They are not admitted and they are not supported. 

So, Ministry of Health, please, wake up, help our people, supervise the health centres and we are also here to report some of these cases to you. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Members, can we concentrate on this request? We are going to have the State of the Nation Address; we will have the general debate on the budget where you can raise all the other issues. I want to hear objections about this. 

5.26
MS MONICA AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is just an addition. It is not to reject the proposal but to give guidance. Our role as Parliament is not to rubberstamp everything that the Executive comes with, when you bring a policy; it is our duty to ensure that we implement it in an appropriate way. Therefore, as an oversight body of the Executive, they need to listen.

What we are proposing is good but the committee should have guided the Minister of Finance that all health centres in this country need rehabilitation; they are all dilapidated. Today, Yumbe and Kayunga will celebrate. What about Bugiri and others? You should have guided the Executive to come with one loan, which is going to work on all these and we forget this once and for all. When people are repaying this, we know that the money has addressed all the health centres in the country. I wonder what you did with the minister when he appeared. You should have guided her as a committee responsible for this, that the Executive adopts a better long-term planning strategy in this direction. 

Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Just to follow up on what she is saying; we did that for Education and we got a general loan for traditional schools but this piecemeal approach creates problems.

5.28
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to follow up what hon. Amoding has just said. We have a situation in Kiboga Hospital, which is on the Kampala-Hoima highway. We know that the petroleum industry is now transporting a lot of equipment along that highway to the production areas but we have a hospital, to which if you took one of those oil expatriate workers, they would not allow that person to stay there even for 30 minutes because it is in such a poor shape. All the drainages are blocked, there is no water and there are very many problems. 

This hospital has been visited by the Prime Minister. So I request the Ministry of Health to urgently consider the rehabilitation and expansion of this hospital. 

I also support what hon. Amoding has said that we have a number of general hospitals and health centres IV in the country. Some districts do not have general hospitals but health centres IV as the main hospital. We should get a loan to have all of them rehabilitated. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support this loan application.

5.24
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the loan but I would like to share the experiences we had in Mbarara after getting a very big loan and building a very big hospital. Some of you who have visited Mbarara Referral Hospital have seen a very huge structure. It is very new and there is equipment but what happened is that when we were approving the loan here, maybe we did not go into details. 

We have a very small maternity ward and women sleep outside in the corridors and under trees, yet we have a very huge new structure. Very much money was spent on that building. Later, we were told that there was no provision for a maternity wing. We were told it was a private wing and we still suffer the way we used to suffer before this building was up.

So, I would like to caution about the new loan and new buildings that we need to be specific so that when these hospitals are built, there is a change for the population and so that people do not continue to suffer. Although there is a beautiful structure to see, we still have the same problems we used to have. It is now a referral centre for the western region and even people from Congo and Tanzania go there but we still are overcrowded. So, I would like this loan to help the people efficiently and not simply be an ivory tower for the people to see. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like to encourage you to follow up on these loans once they are made. You can actually make changes even after the loan has been approved including on the ground. I remember I recently had to battle on the design of the Iganga Hospital so that some changes could be made. Do not just leave it to the minister. Follow up and ask, “What are the designs? How big is it?” No, you can still make alterations.

5.32
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the chairperson of the committee. We would like to say that we support the loan request but let the ministries learn to bring requests at once because we have sub-counties in our areas without health centres. Will we come again when you bring another loan request? Hon. Members, let committees and ministries be subjected to the fact that when we do something, we should do it as a lumpsum so that we do not continuously come for loan requests.


I will also supplement by saying that regarding rehabilitation, we do not know whether the committee will come with another loan request for rehabilitation of the referral centres, which are not in that request.


Lastly, regarding staff quarters, we went to Hoima Hospital, which has staff quarters but most referrals have staff quarters that are in a sorry state. So, we urge the committee before you bring another loan request, make a survey for all hospitals so that we finish this request for the Ministry of Health once and for all. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I hope now Government can understand why when we were doing the PPP, we insisted that we should be part of the process from the beginning so that our concerns are taken into account. I hope at some stage, we can make a resolution that we must first see these requests before they are signed by the minister. Yes, we may have to do that like we did with the PPP and I think we were right.

5.34
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga West County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I support that we should get this loan for these hospitals but still, Government should go ahead to look at other health centres, which are badly off like Bugiri, Kiboga and elsewhere.

However, the engineering department lets Government down. When they procure this loan, huge as it is and we have nothing on the ground - you see a very big thing but the engineering part is a problem. They put some things - the thing is big but the space is not there. Engineering is very important and they should involve the local leaders.

When we procure these loans, they just take it as if it has come from heaven. They do not want to involve the local leaders and plan with them so that they can know what is coming to them. So, I urge the minister to be vigilant when we are implementing these projects. 

Therefore, I move a motion that you put the question and we pass this loan. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question - before the motion, hon. Members, in the Gallery are some young people from Kamuli. They are from Star Light Primary School in Nabwigulu together with their teachers. They are just near the centre of the town and are one of the best performing schools in both Namasagali and Nabwigulu. I represent them together with hon. Allen. We are delighted to see you. (Applause)

Motion -

5.36
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion to amend certain items but I wanted the chairperson to first give me his opinion because of certain key issues. One, is for us to pay interest rates on undisbursed funds. The second one is the issue of contingency. The Government of Uganda is contributing $4 million. The contingency in this case varies. 

My proposal is that this can be handled annually in the budget process. The people from Health and Finance, in case prices vary, can come to Parliament through the committees and then we give them money through the right procedures but if we pass it here, it means now, it becomes mandatory. Therefore, I would like to hear from the chairman.

Also regarding the consultancy of five percent, which means that of Shs 100 billion, it is Shs 5 billion. What consultancy is that? And then salaries – so, chairman, please –

THE SPEAKER: What do you say about varying those conditions?

MR KYOOMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I do not think that actually operations are equivalent to Shs 30 billion. This is because I want to believe that you have included consultancy in operations and the implementation and contingency should be outside operations, ideally. 

Consultancy is around Shs 5 billion. Project Implementation Unit, including salaries, is around Shs 700 million. So, added together, it is actually less than Shs 6 billion. So, it is not Shs 30 billion. It is around that figure unless you really revise the calculation. 

I hope we are together hon. Ekanya because it is here; consultancy is $2 million when you just multiply by the rate of Shs 2,600. You will be getting around Shs 5.2 billion. Then, Project Implementation Unit is $0.39 and multiply by Shs 2,600, it is around Shs 700 million and so added together, it is less than Shs 6 billion.   

Contingency - the idea of waiting and it is incorporated in the subsequent budget may not work out because that would still require them to come back here so as to be allowed because if the contract price is say 36 point something, minus the contingency, it should be that. For contract price to be altered, then they have to come back here. But I want to agree with you that perhaps the contingency amount looks to be big but my minister is here and he will come in.

THE SPEAKER: What about the issue of interest on the undisbursed sum?  

MR KYOOMA: Madam Speaker, you have already guided well because in our committee, my members will agree with me - we asked whether we could have an input in these negotiations. And as you said that perhaps, we have to look at these requests before they are signed, I think this would address such anomalies.

THE SPEAKER: No, but they have been negotiated.

MR KYOOMA: This is the right time when the minister can tell us whether these terms could be altered. Could I use this opportunity to handle the other issues as the majority were compliments. Hon. Amoding said we should have advised the minister. I want to assure you that the committee catered for your interests; when you look at page 11 under (vi), we observed that actually these old hospitals are in a very bad shape and in our recommendation, we said that the Government should expedite the process of renovating all the remaining old health facilities in the country in light of the collapsed infrastructure systems of most of these facilities. Once Parliament has adopted, then the minister should handle. 

I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can we hear from the Minister for Finance because one of these complaints has been perennial because each time the loans come, we complain about the terms and conditions but the following loans come in the same form. Minister for Finance  -

5.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very expensive to be poor because when you go to borrow, you have to abide with the terms and conditions. We have negotiated this and this is what we have agreed to and we may not be able to change it at this level. 

The undisbursed balances are funds which are already put aside for Uganda and cannot be lent out to any other country and so if we do not use it, the bank is not giving it to somebody else. So, it is charged 0.5 percent on the undisbursed balances and this has been the standard used by all these banks all over on the loans that they give out to various countries. So, at this level, Madam Speaker, it might not be possible to change this but we can note it for future borrowing.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are here this afternoon to debate and approve the loan request in order for Government to borrow a certain amount of $15 million.  

The guidance that I would like to seek from you is, what if today, we resolved that Government should not go ahead to borrow, what are the implications? Because from the minister’s submission, it appears that the deal is done and therefore, we are just rubberstamping. Is this the way we should transact business in Government? 

5.44
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have $2.4 billion that is borrowed and not disbursed and we are paying interest. Why do you go to borrow money when you do not know what to do with it? Why do we go to borrow money when we are not yet ready to use it?
  
Two, at one time, when I was a member of the Committee on National Economy, we agreed with the minister that we are not going to borrow money less than $10 million. Why should a country borrow $7 million? You fly out to capitals for negotiations to borrow $7 million. Like the Members are advising, why don’t we negotiate to rehabilitate a particular sector and negotiate for more money like the Speaker guided the House on how we did it for the schools? It shows some sort of poor planning and bad governance.

Lastly, I would like to know - the people in Bugiri are in the process of demonstrating and closing the hospital because it is a death trap. People go there to die; there is no medicine; no doctors; no water; no latrine and no toilets. They would like to know from the ministers of Finance and Health. 

What should we tell them? We have been stopping them from demonstrating? When you are going to rehabilitate Bugiri Hospital where the Prime Minister had an accident and the helicopter was going to land on a maternity ward – the retired Rt Hon. Apolo Nsibambi - but he could not even be taken to that hospital. He had to be flown here. So, could the two ministers, – when is Bugiri Hospital going to be rehabilitated? Otherwise, we are going to demonstrate and close it. I thank you very much.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I received a petition, on your behalf, from the Busoga community on Bugiri Hospital and the Basoga expect a decision of Government on that hospital. 

But I rose to seek clarification from the Minister of Finance. In some countries, there is no requirement for a loan request to pass through Parliament but for us, there is a requirement that before a loan is approved, Parliament must pronounce itself on it and the reason is that Parliament must scrutinise that loan and can actually make proposals. In the last Parliament, there was a loan request, which was brought before this Parliament under the Ministry of Public Service, which was up to about $70 million and we reduced it to $23 million and the Minister of Finance was a member of this House. 

So, I want you to clarify when you say there is nothing we can do about this loan as the whole deal is finished when this Parliament has previously changed some of the terms. Could you clarify whether you were a different minister from the minister today in terms of the information you are giving us?

5.48
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, over the years, one would get a temptation of believing that there is a lot of connivance between the Ministry of Finance officials and the World Bank. In the Seventh Parliament, the Youth Livelihood Project was brought. The Ministry of Finance gave us a condition that it is feta accompli and the implementation agency would be the Ministry of Finance and Parliament had nothing to do. We objected and we did not approve the loan, until the Ministry of Finance went back and changed the terms of the loan and changed the implementing agency. When that was done, it was brought back to Parliament and Parliament passed it. 

I would like to seek clarification from the minister; when he says this is feta accompli; hopefully, next time when we bring a loan, is it deliberate that your team tried to do a good job and due diligence that is expected of them? What do you mean by saying that next time, it may be different from what you have negotiated now?

5.49
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this Parliament should be more careful on financial matters. When I was contributing on Private Public Partnership Bill, I said that the objective of every loan must first come here so that we can scrutinise it. In Rwanda, the terms required by the same World Bank are different from ours; they are totally different, yet, it is the same financial institution. 

I would like to concur with hon. Dombo. In financing, you go to borrow money with an objective. Once you accept the conditions – when you are not strong, then you fall into foul play. Most times, technocrats let us down; they are very cunning and in the long run, Government loses money. The loans from China and Arab Emirates are not the same as those from the World Bank; we borrow from them because their conditions are more favourable to us. 

I would like to inform the minister that the constitutional mandate stipulates that for any World Bank loan – if Parliament does not pronounce itself on a loan, that money cannot be committed. That is why they are waiting to see whether we pronounce ourselves before that money can be committed. 

It is high time that Parliament did more scrutiny and renegotiated some of these loans; there are very many competitors in business. These are banks for business. We have an upper hand in the negotiations. It is not a matter of pressure because Yumbe Hospital is dilapidated; the after-effect will be even harder. The financing terms and agreements have been accepted by the Solicitor-General but we must change the way we negotiate for loans so that the conditions are not rough for Ugandans to pay back. 

THE SPEAKER: Let the minister update us on what to do. 


MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, when I said we cannot change, I was referring to the 0.5 percent on the undisbursed balances. I was not saying that Parliament has no right to look at the loans as presented and make recommendations. For this particular loan, what we have agreed to is that 0.5 percent would be charged on undisbursed balances. This money is already put aside; it cannot be lent to any other country until, in the case of Uganda, we say “We do not want this money” that is when it will be taken away from what is allocated to Uganda. So, in answering the question that was raised by the Leader of the Opposition in the House – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you need to satisfy us; why do we borrow and then leave it there? For one, two three, four years?

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, we have now changed the methodology to ensure that by the time ministries, departments are coming to borrow, all the requirements - that once Parliament passes a loan, immediately the loan will be ready for disbursement; including the designs and bills of quantities. And in the case of this particular loans for Kayunga and Yumbe; these are all ready. The moment Parliament passes this loan, the work will start immediately. So, we are trying as much as possible to discourage borrowing and then leaving the money without being utilised; that is why we changed the programme so that whatever is passed is immediately implemented. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion to amend the resolution as follows – first of all, I would like to apologise, for my calculation. I agree with the chairman that it is not 30 billion; it is Shs 19.7 billion. 

So, based on that, I want to move a motion to amend the resolution that “consultancy, which is 5 percent be reduced to 2.5 percent.” That will be $1 million. And contingency, the global practice is always 10 percent - (Interjections)- so, I move that for contingency, we provide 10 percent of the total loan instead of Shs 5.250 billion. Let us reduce it to Shs 4.1 billion, that is, 10 percent and that is the acceptable standard. I beg to move. 

5.55
MR KABAJO: Madam Speaker, I object to the motion of hon. Ekanya because he said that we reduce the consultancy from $2.5 million to $1 million. But you must have a basis on which you do something. If you do not have the details of the kind of consultancy they are going to do, then whatever recommendation you are making and your whole motion is arbitrary. If you are reducing from 2.5 - why don’t you reduce it to $700,000 or $1.5? It is arbitrary. I personally object to that motion, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: So, what is your proposal?

MR KABAJO: We leave it as it is because you have no basis on which to make the change; you do not know what is involved in the consultancies; what type of consultancies are involved and so on. You need that information to base that particular recommendation. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, as the minister consults on what is involved in the consultancies, address the contingency. 




MR WAIRA MAJEGERE: Madam Speaker, since it is now clear that there are many issues coming up on this report, why don’t we allow a chance for the committee to go back –(Interjections)– yes, we allow the committee to go back and make some changes and they come back. 

THE SPEAKER: We might get you a bit more money – for instance, we might reduce from the contingency and add it to the maternity ward.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The motion has been moved by hon. Ekanya to reduce the consultancy and the contingency fees. Some other honourable colleague has opposed it. But there is some clarification I need to get as far as the consultancy is concerned. One, have we already procured the consultant and contracted them? Have we already contacted the consultant? How did we move to contract the consultant before the loan was approved? Assuming the loan does not get approved, should we still go ahead to pay the consultant for doing no work?

So, the consultancy needs to be brought down because this is money that is usually most often open to abuse. Secondly, as a practice, we do not usually give contingencies beyond 10 percent. So, surely, what is the basis that this time, we have created a contingency that is above what the normal practice has been? What is the justification for that?

I support the motion as moved by the hon. Ekanya, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, hon. Members, this debate reminds me about something that happened in the Parliamentary Commission. You know, when you budget for a certain figure – no, the advert also comes in the same form and the application is exactly fitting. Maybe, hon. Commissioner Dombo can elaborate further –(Interjections)- you remember we had a problem with the consultant for the Auditor-General – (Interjections)- yes, they bidded for –(Interjections)– yes, because it was in the budget.

MR DOMBO: Madam Chair, I stand here on two issues. The first is to clarify as directed by you, on what happened when the Parliamentary Commission advertised for the recruitment of the Auditor to the Auditor-General. 

What the firms do is to come and get to know what has been provided in the budget and that is what they exactly put in their costs. To us, as a Commission at that time, we objected to this. So, we sent it back because we thought that cost of auditing was public knowledge and that all firms and their costs were available. So, we recommended that the exercise be done afresh so that taxpayers’ money is not wasted. As you know, if we have to ask others to account, as Parliamentary Commission, we also have to account. That is the decision that was taken.

But the most important thing here, Madam Speaker, is – (Dr Baryomunsi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Information from the retired Commissioner – (Laughter)

DR BARYOMUNSI: I just want to give additional information that actually, these contractors come and pick these policy statements and the plans for the various institutions. In this case, when we objected as a Commission, those firms have now accepted to do the same work at about 25 percent of what had been quoted. (Applause)

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, the other issue that I said I would raise is: there was a reason as it was deliberately put in the Constitution that “with Parliament’s approval.” If we just yield – because the minister has talked and the technocrats have said - we will be relegating our powers as an institution. 

When we were discussing the funding for Kabale–Kisoro Road, we met officials from the World Bank in one of the international meetings and they proudly said that what we negotiate for is what you get. That is what our team negotiated for and that is what we had. But they were also wondering whether Uganda has sensible people, if those are the terms that we were negotiating. I found this very painful.

So, the only thing we can do now is - in order to ensure that the Ministry of Finance officials get to know that Parliament is awake and is doing its work, let this report go back –(Applause)– and consult between the joint committees of National Economy, Finance and that of Health so that the terms of this loan are reviewed for us to do a fundamental job.

I find a problem to support hon. Ekanya’s motion because of the reasons advanced by the other colleagues on what work is required to be done. What is in the consultancy? 

Madam Speaker, we are mortgaging our country and I do not know what we shall tell our children. And what history will be told of us when we cannot do right when we have the opportunity to do so?

THE SPEAKER: No, it is not too late. 

MR YAGUMA: Madam Speaker, the country is already losing a lot of money in form of 0.5 percent calculated on the undisbursed loans. We requested for these loans, we approved them but as if we did not need them.

Now, the minister has assured us that with this loan, everything will be disbursed. In light of that, I pray that we remove the condition of 0.5 percent from this loan. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, hon. Members, for me, if the 10 percent is a standard contingency, why don’t we move the other two percent to add to maternal health? Why don’t we do that? Can we, please, do this as a test case so that these people can wake up?

MS AMUGE OTENGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. However, I have something to say. Uganda is no longer a small economy. If you look at what we are now proud of – the oil economy, the mineral resources in terms of the deposits that we have discovered of recent – we are now moving towards the PPP arrangement. However, I would like to say from the time I came to this Parliament, we have been debating and disagreeing on how our loans and how our positions are negotiated.

I would like to say that many countries are now moving away from having only the technical people do these negotiations. The negotiations should be a kind of a core activity that should be given to a competent team. That team must take responsibility for every wrong that they commit so that these other ministries that are supposed to be involved –(Interjections)– you cannot put me to order because I am now speaking as a Member of Parliament. Those other line ministries can back up technically, if there is something they have to add, and then the Office of the Attorney-General –(Interjections)– no – (Laughter)– Madam Speaker, if you listen to me, you will realise that I am helping both this House and the Government but that is if you accept to listen to me. I know what I am talking about because I have facts and figures and I know what I am bringing here.

So, what I would like to say is – 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. Please, let the minister speak. She is a member for Aleptong.

MS AMUGE OTENGO: What I am saying is going to help this country. What I was saying is that we need competent negotiators like other countries are doing. That is why we get what we deserve. In other countries, if you negotiate in a shoddy way, you can account for it with your life. Therefore, for now, we cannot send back this loan because this is exactly what we have been doing. Can we think outside the box and see what other countries are doing; we benchmark and see how to form a team of competent negotiators. That is when we will get the best. I know that sometimes we disagree on what we can no longer correct. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to propose that we take the risk of making alterations as proposed by the hon. Ekanya so that we can send a signal.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, I just want to say something on what consultancy services entail in regard to what we submitted. Consultancy services include preparation of detailed engineering design and tender documents, assigning the executing agencies in tenders launch, evaluation and supervision of the construction and that is what is taking the Shs 2 billion that is proposed in the loan.

MS ANITE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Since we talked about the loan, the people of Yumbe started celebrating because I saw hon. Huda celebrating. As neighbours of Yumbe who do not have a hospital, we are equally celebrating.

It is a bit hard to say that we should take this report back but I want to say that in the interest of this country and the taxpayers who pay their money, I would like to agree with the proposal brought forward by hon. Dombo that we bring all those three Committees of Health, Finance, National Economy and Ministry of Finance. I find it very hard to agree with the proposal brought forward by hon. Ekanya. Like other colleagues have said, we do not know the magnitude of the work that the consultant is going to do. I would really want to say –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: There are two things that we have to know in these loans; the stage we are on, any amendment on the consultancy fees is a contractual obligation, which Government has made because some work has been done on those hospitals. (Interjections) Yes, there is no consultant who can start work - I was a Minister of Health, this strengthening system by the World Bank, for the World Bank to come and lend you money, you must have done some work.

Where I would like to agree is on the contingency, it is just a variance where technocrats have been taking this money. We faced a problem in our committee that that variance which goes beyond a certain percentage such as 15 or 10 percent. On that, I can agree that the committee can go back with Finance, National Economy and Ministry of Finance such that they can agree on this. We are not objecting to passing the loan but at least, we need to scrutinise these loans so that we get the best deal out of them.

THE SPEAKER: Mr Minister, what is the basis for the 13 per cent contingency before I go back to hon. Anite? 

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker the contingency is Shs 5.250 billion which is 13 percent. I have no objection to the proposal by the shadow minister of finance as far as contingency is concerned. But as far as the consultancy fee is concerned, I have explained to you the details of these consultancy services, which come to $2 million but the contingency, yes,  I can concede.

MS ANITE: Madam Speaker, just to conclude, the more you ask the hon. Minister to come to the Floor to explain, the more he confuses us and for me, I would really still want to stand on my feet and defend the position that you send back the two committees together with finance but give them a time frame to do the work because without a timeframe, it will again take forever and yet the people’s expectations have already been raised.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. A contingency is a provision and the common practice in engineering is that you provide for 10 percent. I do not know where the 13 percent that the minister is making a provision for is coming from.

On the other hand, consultancy is also guided by international practice and this is an amount that is provided for; it does not mean that this amount will be expended in its entirety. I think that is what the House needs to understand. Bids are going to be sourced and when they are sourced, it is upon the administrators of this programme to determine which bid is the best for the consultancy.

At the back of my mind, I have corruption and collusion that may occur between the managers of this project and the potential consultants. I would like to propose that we pass this loan as it is but make adjustments in the ingredients of the loan especially –(Interjections)– let me explain; I am holding the Floor. There is evidence that the Ministry of Finance did not do a good job in this negotiation. Rather than reducing the bottom line figure of $7 million, we maintain it at $7 million, juggle around with what is going to go to the consultants and then the contingency. The rest of the money could be utilised in the body of the project as you suggested, Madam Speaker.

If you decided –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, the more I listened to the minister concede that actually he can consider on contingency the more confused I became. 

For us, in accounting, if the balance sheet refuses to balance by 1 shilling, it may mean a million dollars. This is because you may not know what is causing the disequilibrium. You must go back to the original entry in order to confirm what the problem is. Now that the minister is conceding that actually, he can vary the contingency here on the Floor, then the very reason why as Parliament, we must send it back because we do not have the opportunity now, the capacity - we give a timeframe of one week and then we come back and approve a loan when we can defend the decision we are taking, Madam Speaker. 

DR TUMWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to appeal to colleagues because in the few months I have been in the Ministry of Health, I have recognised that it is very difficult to get money to rehabilitate hospitals; the moment you try to go back to the donor and to negotiate –

THE SPEAKER: No, negotiation is within us. We will not go to the World Bank.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Anyway, the issue is that the moment we try to go back, it will take us many months back. We have already had complaints from Bugiri, Kiboga and complaints from nearly all the hospitals in the country. 

Therefore, my appeal is that let the Minister of Finance as he has already conceded and agreed to hon. Ekanya’s proposal supported by hon. Amuriat - because in any case, what we are seeking is a loan. If there is need for more funds later, we can get from the budget of Uganda if in the negotiation –(Interjections)– yes, when you come to contingency and find that what you got as a loan was not sufficient, then you can go back and try to get the money from the Government of Uganda funds rather than saying that we take back this loan to the committee and then the process delays when actually, we have also got a big delay on World Bank hospitals - at the time we passed the Anti-Homosexuality Act, the World Bank was supposed to consider funding for all these hospitals including Bugiri but by just postponing by just that day, up to now, we have not been able to get them to approve again. 

So, the moment we try to take back the issue of getting financing for these hospitals, we shall end up losing the money. Sometimes -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, no one is going back to the World Bank. The money remains the same. All we are saying is that instead of 13 percent, let us move the three percent to another sector in the same loan. That is what we are saying. On the contingency, we are saying let it go and do other services.

DR TUMWESIGYE: I agree with you but what I am not sure of is whether, the moment we try to make a number of changes, we do not need to go back to the donor that we negotiated with. The Minister of Finance can clarify on that issue. (Interjections)

The second point I wanted to make is just to respond to some of the issues that came from hon. Members of Parliament like from Kiboga. I must say that Kiboga Hospital is going to be included in the hospitals to be rehabilitated this financial year. We have allocated money to Kiboga Hospital within our own budget and that will be taken care of.

There was also a comment regarding Bugiri Hospital. As I have already said, we are waiting for the World Bank to approve the $90 million for Bugiri Hospital, along with 12 other hospitals and 27 health centres IV. We hope they will approve and the hospitals will be rehabilitated.

There was also another comment from Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital. Hon. Boona was trying to question the rationale for having such huge buildings and that maybe those buildings are not serving the purpose which she thought they should serve. I must say that Mbarara Hospital was phased. The first phase included construction of theatres and I believe the theatres are being used. There was also an intensive care unit and a private ward. 

The maternity ward that she is talking about is for the second phase, for which the Ministry of Health is negotiating with African Development Bank. I am sure Mbarara Hospital will soon be rehabilitated and be made another National Referral Hospital.

There was also another comment from hon. Atim regarding -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, let us concentrate on this loan. Hon. Atim’s issues were to do with the general policy in the ministry, which she can get answers to later. We want to hear whether we can make this alteration, save money for this country and improve the health services. 

Hon. minister, what will happen if we move the $3 million and put it on the maternity centre, doctors’ houses or any other service?

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, we have the detailed documentation, which we gave to the committee. Unfortunately, I did not come with a copy neither did the chairperson of the committee. It gives the details. So, if they are not material alterations, we do not have to go back but if they are material alterations, we must go back to the bank from where we want to borrow. 

So, I have no problem with this being referred to the committees as proposed by hon. Dombo. We will give all the documents coming from the bank, which indicate - and then also the chairperson - when we receive these documents, they come from the various ministries, departments and agencies after their technical persons have gone into the details and that is what is received by the Ministry of Finance. Afterwards, the Ministry of Finance technical people go together with the technical people from the various ministries and they come out with this position. But as I have already said, we will accept the position as presented by hon. Dombo.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, can we give them three days? This is important.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to correct an impression that has been created by my senior, hon. Dombo, about the contingency that in accounting, even when it is one - contingency in this case is not tagged to any item. Rather, it is meant to say that in case there are variations and that is why the minister said he would concede on contingency.

Madam Speaker, we have engineers in this House because I think in this case, the contention is on consultancy and contingency. I would beg that as a House, we have the capacity to finalise this matter here rather than referring it back. I do not know what will be added.

Madam Speaker, the consultancy - (Interjections) - may I be protected, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Order, let us hear the chairperson.

MR KYOOMA: Madam Speaker, the consultancy of $2 million, which is an equivalent of around Shs 5.2 billion is for the two hospitals that is Kayunga General Hospital and Yumbe General Hospital. If the engineers, like my senior colleague, hon. Ekanya, has said that the standard measure for contingency is 10 percent - and if the engineers in this House could advise us that 1 percent could be enough, meaning that that would be around Shs 2.6 billion split into two would mean around Shs 1.3 billion, and that that is enough for this, then this work could be finalised here and now. 

Really, we have done our work diligently and I do not think that we would add much by going back. I thank you very much.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to move a motion under Rule 50(k) that the matter we are debating be referred to the Committee on Finance for one week and we come back and take a decision on it. My justification is that today is Wednesday, there is Thursday, Friday - we can come back and report on Tuesday and complete the whole process. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I know that we are going to adjourn but we could convene the plenary specifically to conclude this because it is important. We have complained about the terms on which we borrow in each Parliament but nothing changes. I think let us start from this one. 

Hon. Tumwesigye, do not get angry. It is only one week and we are trying to give you more money to do your work. We are getting the money for you. Hon. Members, I put the question that the motion be approved as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before the Committee on Finance goes on to the Budget, before the Committee on Health goes and before the Committee on National Economy goes, we are giving you one week to take into account our discussions and come back with a possible re-distribution of this sum. One week and even if we are on recess, the House will be convened for this matter only. (Members rose_) The next item.

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE STATE OF INDEBTEDNESS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

6.28
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Xavier Kyooma): Madam Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on National Economy on the state of indebtedness as at June 2013. I beg to lay the report. Equally so, I beg to lay on Table the minutes of the Committee on National Economy. I beg to lay.

This report is for the financial year 2012/2013 and therefore, it should have been presented sometime back. I found it as work in progress and inherited it.

Introduction

Article 159(4) of the 1995 Constitution of Uganda and Section 13 of the Budget Act, 2001, require the Executive to submit the total indebtedness of Government, all grants extended to Government, guarantees on loans by Government to private and public enterprises and status of utilisation of each loan and grant. 

Pursuant to the above, the Standing Committee on National Economy exercised its oversight duty under Rule 166(1) of the Rules of Procedure by analysing development finance (debt and grants) that was provided in the report on Loans, Grants and Guarantees for the financial year 2012/2013. This also included consultative stakeholder meetings with selected key players on the above subject.

The committee considered views of various stakeholders and scrutinised various documents on the state of indebtedness and now, we beg to report.

Objectives of the report

The overall objective of this report is to document critical information on the state of indebtedness as at end of the financial year 2012/2013. In particular, this report is intended to inform Parliament on the state of public debt and its sustainability, sources of external finance and performance of loans.

The specific objectives were;
    i) To measure the level of public debt by end of the financial year 2012/2013 and its sustainability over the medium to long-term horizons;
    ii) To measure the overall performance of loans and grants to various sectors;
    iii) To come up with recommendations to improve public debt management and loan performance.

Methodology and scope, Madam Speaker, I can skip to the executive summary. 

This report provides an analysis on the state of indebtedness as at June 2013 unless otherwise stated. A total of $496.06 million was mobilised in new external financing commitments by various development partners during the financial year 2012/2013. New loans worth $399.3 million were approved by Parliament while new grants worth the equivalent of $96.76 million were concluded during the financial year 2012/2013. 

The share of new loan commitments as a percentage of the total new external development assistance increased from 53.5 percent in the financial year 2012/2013 to 80.4 percent in the financial year 2012/2013. In absolute terms, however, the loan contribution to total new financing reduced by $217 million.

As at June 2013, Uganda’s debt exposure stood at $6.176 billion compared to $5.88 billion at the same time, last June 2012 of which $3.8 billion is debt outstanding and disbursed while $2.4 billion is debt committed but undisbursed.

Results of the debt suitability analysis undertaken indicate that Uganda is not under any debt distress at current levels. However, Uganda’s debt is sensitive to high amount of non-concessional borrowing. 

A total of Shs 2,217.5 billion in both project and budget support was received by end of June 2013 as disbursements for both loans and grants. No budget support loan disbursements were made during the financial year 2012/2013. 

Government has made significant strides in achievement of the objectives for which loans and grants are contracted as demonstrated by the declining undisbursed debt. However, absorption capacity constraints across MDAs still remain a challenge to the full realisation of the intended objectives. 

In addition, the sub optimal project and cash planning, as highlighted by Uganda’s poor performance on the Index of Public Investment Efficiency, have often delayed project implementation. 

As at June 2013, a total stock of Shs 6.750 trillion was held as domestic debt of which Shs 2.548 trillion or 37.7 percent was in Treasury Bills while Shs 4.202 trillion or 62.3 percent was in Treasury Bonds.

Madam Speaker, during the financial year 2012/2013, Government did not issue any guarantees to statutory and private entities and still holds seven contingent liabilities worth $145 million.    

Public debt

The total stock of public debt, that is domestic plus external was Shs 16,672.34 billion or 30.5 percent of GDP during the financial year 2012/2013. Of this amount, Shs 9,922.09 billion, which is 18 percent of GDP, was external debt, while the remaining Shs 6,750.3 billion, which is 12.3 percent of GDP is domestic debt, as shown in the table below. I hope that colleagues will read the table.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, they can read that.

MR KYOOMA: May I go to observations and recommendations, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR KYOOMA: Public debt expansion is likely to significantly raise interest rates for government debt, thereby increasing interest costs for future generations. Moreover, this could increase interest rates for all private debt such as home mortgages, consumer loans and business loans.

The near-term consequences of the debt expansion present weaker economic recovery and the private sector will absorb the larger effects of increased public debt. Government should structure its debt strategy to allow private sector access cheap credit from the domestic financial market in the medium term. The higher interest costs are also usually associated with high real money market rates and high expected inflation rates. It is, therefore, important that government borrowing is done at the lowest possible long term borrowing cost. Government should support a well-functioning domestic financial market and facilitate the central government access to financial markets in the long term. 

Although about Shs 585 billion of the total stock of government debt, which is eight percent is held by off-shore investors, this could rise as yields edge up. The danger with this is that whereas off-shore investors are usually attracted by high yields on government debts, any negative change in perception regarding the riskiness of the government debt will result in quick outflow. Government should, therefore, establish a mechanism of absorbing such shock on exchange rate at minimal cost of economic growth. 

The total public debt as a percentage of GDP expanded from 28 percent in financial year 2011/2012 to 30.5 percent in financial year 2012/2013 on account of the expansion of the external debt from 16 percent of the GDP to 18 percent of GDP, implying a higher growth, that is of 24 percent of debt accumulation as compared to GPD growth. In other words, the debt is growing faster than GDP. 

Performance of development assistance 
A lot of foreign disbursement in terms of loans and grants amounted to Shs 2,217.51 billion during the financial year 2013/2014 compared to Shs 2,746.39 billion disbursed in financial year 2011/13, implying a reduction by 13 percent. This was as a result of the low disbursement rates of budget support grants and none disbursement of budget support loans since no such loan was contracted during the period under review. 

Madam Speaker, again the programmed amount during the financial year 2012/2013 of low disbursements was 37 percent short of the programmed levels largely due to disbursement for budget support. Government financing of the budget had anticipated a higher disbursement and larger proportion of grants – that is 67 percent, compared to loans at 43 percent. However, the outstanding indicate a higher share of loans than grants in financing the national budget during the period under review. Such development financing distorts the programmed debt levels and could have implications on projected levels of borrowing. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chair, I do not know whether you do not just give the highlights because Members have the document on their iPads, unless you think everything is important. 

MR KYOOMA: Madam Speaker, that takes me to page nine where we have budgeted and actual disbursement of channel of assistance. With the exception of the project support disbursement, budget support disbursement has fallen short of the approved budget levels for the financial year 2012/13 as indicated in the figure below. 

Observations

Total foreign disbursements fell by 19 percent in financial year 2012/2013 from Shs 2,746 billion in financial year 2011/2012, to Shs 2,217 billion in financial year 2012/2013 and were 37 percent short of the programmed levels largely due to significant reduction in the budget support grants. 

Let me now go to page 11 where we have domestic debt. Public domestic debt in this analysis will mean debt instruments issued by the central government. This assumes that local governments and public enterprises are limited in their ability to issue debt instruments and/or there may be a few investors willing to hold these instruments. 

There are three main reasons for Government domestic debt. They include: 
    1. Budget deficit financing
    2. Implementing monitory policy 
    3. Developing the financial sector 

By the time this report was made, domestic borrowing to financial shortfalls had not been observed but I hope it will come in the second one. 

The domestic debt is illustrated in the table on page 12. The figure on page 13 shows the domestic debt stock in billions.

Observations and recommendations

The cost of stabilising the economy on the budget is rising and high. Bank of Uganda should design monitory policy management tools that rely on regulating demand for private sector credit via interest rates. 

With the start of Government to issue domestic debt instruments for fiscal policy purposes, domestic debt data should indicate the user of the debt by instrument type on the report on loans, grants and guarantees submitted to Parliament. This has been lacking. 

The composition of orders by instrument type should also be indicated and provided to Parliament to determine the main holder of the domestic public debt. Such holders could include commercial banks, insurance companies, pension firms, the Central Bank and the public. 

Since one of the objectives of issuance of debts in the domestic market is to deepen the financial sector, then Government should report to Parliament the primary and secondary market pricing and volume of trading by type of instrument.

Arrears outstanding and arrears clearing 

Government should indicate all outstanding payment of arrears of interest and/or principal on instruments issued at the suppliers. 

Restructuring of debt portfolio

Government should provide a restructuring of portfolios of domestic debt to Parliament. 

Treasury bills rollovers

It is common practice for Government to rollover treasury bill issues and not make any repayment of principal. To regulate this, Parliament through an Act of Parliament could impose limits on how much Government can rollover; or Government should establish a policy regarding rollovers. This is very important. 

One of the most important issues in government debt is the reason for borrowing. Government should always indicate the proportion of the debt stock being used for budget financing and for monitory policy. So, full disclosure is very important in that case.

Parliament should institute a statutory limit on the level of domestic debt the government can issue. For example, it could be a specified percentage of government revenues. This will also make assessment of debt levels in relation to any legal limit as this will indicate how close to or how far away Government is from breach of its statutory limits. 

With the start of issuing of treasury bills for the fiscal policy, Government should establish procedures for coordinating the timing, amount and pricing of the debt instrument so as to ensure the same signals are being transmitted to the market and that the market is able to absorb the amount of the debt they issued. Government then should diversify and boost investment in other sectors like ICT, water and agriculture. 

Madam Speaker, I now wish to report on the external debt. Total external debt exposure amounted to $6.18 billion as at June 2013, representing 29 percent of GDP, of which $3.826 billion is outstanding and disbursed while $2.35 billion is committed but still undisbursed. This is a serious concern, Madam Speaker, as you had already highlighted. 

This information is in figure five and table 4; figure five is on page 16 and table 4 is on page 17, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, on page 18 we have a stock of arrears on principal and interest indicated for the different years. On page 19, we have an illustration of the share of the various multilateral creditors to multilateral external debt stock as at June 2013.

Observations and Recommendations

External debt exposure is rising – five percent gross in the financial year 2012/2013 and currently, at 29 percent of the GDP - and it is bound to rise further as increased pressure on Government to deliver public services mounts on the account of oil revenues. Government should therefore resist temptation to borrow in the medium-term against future oil revenues to finance an unsustainable increase in public consumption.

Instead, Government should design policies that increase productivity and preserve competitiveness. Government should focus on lowering production costs through investment in public infrastructure, skills training and land reforms to boost agriculture. Government needs to find alternative sources, especially for infrastructure, that require much faster project implementation.

Contingent Liabilities

Government issues guarantees to government institutions and private companies. The management of resources from the debt is entirely for the beneficiary institutions but Government maintains a monitoring role as these are contingent liabilities.

During the financial year 2012/2013, there were no new guarantees issued by Government to statutory bodies or individual companies. For the same reason, the value of stock guarantees for which Government holds contingent liabilities has remained at US$ 145million as shown in the table below.

Observations and Recommendations
Contingent liabilities have remained the same since 2011/2012 financial year, although the performance of which loan government guaranteed is not reported on. It is always important to report on this. The Auditor-General should undertake a financial audit of the above guarantees with a view of assessing the performance of such loans.

Debt Sustainability

Madam Speaker, debt sustainability analysis assesses the ability of the country to service its current and future debt as well as assessing the vulnerability of the current debt portfolio to external risks so as to establish the likelihood of a distress. The table on page 22 shows a summary of the public sector and external debt sustainability assessment criteria.

Observations and Recommendations 

Government must expedite the implementation of the oil legislations. As I said, honourable members, this was supposed to have been presented last year but it is just coming now. Government must start construction of the oil refinery in the financial year 2015/16. This will trigger the start of full-scale oil production and export by the year 2018 to boost revenues.

The committee commends Government efforts in restoring high economic growth rates and controlling inflation to a single digit. However, Government should expedite the construction of Karuma hydropower dam to boost productivity levels of the economy. To achieve this without distorting the country’s debt sustainability path, Government should seek external financing from sources that offer loans with a grant element of 20 percent or more. In this case, we would advocate for concessional loans.

Government should establish a cap on domestic debt growth to avoid crowding out the private sector from accessing affordable finance.

Government should re-balance the profile of the debt portfolio by issuing more long-term instruments and moderating bills issuance while at the same time significantly raising the productive capacity of the economy. To this end, Government should streamline and improve project identification, selection and institution by reviewing the Public Investment Plan in the financial 2013/2014. This has been overtaken by events.

In addition to improvement in the Credit Reference Bureau, financial literacy, consumer protection and financial innovations, Government should expand the financial system outside the banks to widen the client base and develop capital markets.

Summary on Debt Sustainability Analysis

In summary, Uganda is not under any debt distress. The public and external debt positions are not only sustainable in the medium-term but are also projected to remain sustainable over the projected period. This is mainly attributed to prudent macroeconomic management and cautious approach to borrowing with over reliance on concessional borrowing. Factoring in oil revenues in the assumptions and anticipated financing of the investments in projects that are expected to enhance productivity have enhanced the macroeconomic projections against which debt sustainability is measured.

The analysis, therefore, tends to reflect that there is room to consider alternative financing options in addition to current financing options without compromising Uganda’s long-term debt sustainability. Therefore, the selected projects for these financing options should be appraised with an economic and financial orientation not only to enhance productivity but also to provide a positive return on investment. It is therefore critical how they will be selected and executed.

Debt Service

The total Government of Uganda external debt service by the end of the financial year 2012/13 was Shs 579.08 billion; of this amount, Shs 149.9 billion or a share of 26 percent of the total external service was for interest payments and Shs 417.22 billion or 72 percent of the total external debt service was for principal payments as indicated in the table below. The table at page 29 shows the debt service ratios, debt interest to revenues, debt interest to expenditure and the total debt service to exports.

Observations and Recommendations 

Madam Speaker, the external debt service is expected to rise as previously contracted debts become due for payments.  At the current growth rate of the debt service, which was 12 percent in the financial year 2012/13, outstripping growth of annual domestic revenue currently at 0.5 percent of GDP, places a significant amount of pressure on the budget. Therefore, Government should increase its tax and non-tax efforts to raise Government revenues to finance its budget in a sustainable way.

Payment of various charges on external debt is on the rise, currently at Shs 11.95 billion, reflecting increasing administrative costs of external finance. Therefore, Government should source external finance for only critical investments whose economic rate of return is above 14 percent and also mobilise funds from sources whose administrative costs are considerably low, that is, less than 0.02 percent of the total loan.

Interest costs of debt on the national budget are also on the rise, taking over 12 percent of the domestic revenue, crowding out critical expenditure needs in the various sectors that depend on domestic financing. This has constrained service delivery in terms inadequate budgetary provisions for such expenditure. The major drivers of these interest costs, especially domestic interest costs, are shallow domestic financial markets, increasing fiscal deficits and high costs of monetary policy. Government should, therefore, deepen the domestic financial markets, lower budget deficit through increased tax revenues and manage monetary policy at lessor costs to be able to free resources to finance other sectors of the budget.

Development Assistance Utilisation

The table on page 31 shows loan utilisation by sector as at March. Agriculture, education, health, budget support and those other sectors are indicated. On page 32, the figure shows the performance of loans by those sectors and this is diagrammatically presented. 

In conclusion, public debt is on the rise and projected to rise further. However, what is of concern is its growth rate, which is outstripping domestic revenue growth rates. This implies that the country’s capacity to meet its debt service obligations weakens annually over the medium-term. Despite this weakens, grants that would enable the country to absorb this shock in the medium term are project to fall significantly in the medium term and completely wiped out in the long run.

Going forward, all debts to be contracted should be strictly for infrastructure that has an economic rate of return above 14 percent for the country to be able to service debt without distorting critical budgetary priorities. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chair of the national economy committee. Of course, we are one year late. The information is a bit out-dated, but let us have a few comments.

7.01
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Chairman, for this report but there is a bit of a contradiction. When you say that Uganda is not under debt distress and you state the debt service and how it is going to rise, there is a problem.

I am worried because the chairman and the committee avoided telling us how oil will help us to pay our debt. The reason we are getting oil is not to pay debts but to improve services. If we are looking at oil to pay debt then there is a problem.
Finally, this conclusion is very interesting; it says that going forward, all debts contracted should be for infrastructure. I am crying because of CAIIP roads! In Kalungu, these murram roads were constructed and they are not even three years old but already worn out. When you look at the money that was paid for these roads, it should have been used to buy better tractors and other road units to help the districts run.

I was not in the House by that time but I have to own the problem we went through. The roads under CAIIP, whether we are paying for them after 45 years, are already worn out after two years. Why did we spend all that money? When you talk about infrastructure, you must be careful. I want to be clear on this because some of our areas have no income -(Member timed out.)

7.03
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and his team for a good job so far. 

In management of the public debt, there are five critical issues: One, the debt to GDP ratio; two, the debt to domestic revenue ratio; three, the debt to BOP account; four, debt sustainability; and five, the absorptive capacity both for the economy globally and the sectoral capacity to absorb the debt. Clearly, the committee is making a point to the effect that the bulk of the public debt, both domestic and foreign, has largely been going into financing of huge public infrastructure. The chairman wondered at some stage whether this infrastructure reflects the objectives of the Public Investment Plan.

At the beginning of the report, the committee said that they interacted with three entities namely, finance, Bank of Uganda and a section of Parliament. I do not know whether the committee found it or would find it appropriate to interact with some of our key partners as far as these loans are concerned. Part of the complaint of Parliament is how these loans are negotiated, and we have critical partners, especially the multilateral lenders –(Member timed out_)

7.05
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have four issues. The first one is that I consider as gross indiscipline and irresponsible to borrow beyond ability to pay. By the time you have a debt burden growing at 30.5 percent faster than your GDP, that means you are mortgaging the country and you are mortgaging your children.

The second issue is about the domestic debt; who authorises domestic borrowing and who guarantees those who borrow domestically? We have provision in the Constitution that requires us to approve, so who authorises that?
My third point is about performance of these loans. In the Seventh Parliament, we borrowed money for landing sites, six or seven years later the landing sites had not been constructed. This country continued to pay commitment fees, interest, and worse still the borrowing entity did not even honour its counterpart funding, so that loan performed very badly.

I also want to point out that the World Bank says that over Shs 510 billion of our money is wasted in form of corruption and fraud. Could it be that we are borrowing part of this money for an endless pit that is corrupt and fraudulent and people just steal it as we mortgage the country? I want to advise Government to stop borrowing for workshops and capacity building. We need to put in very deterrent measures; if we authorise a loan for an entity and it is not being utilised, why should this Parliament authorise another loan for the same ministry?

7.07
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the chair for the elaborate report. 

Whereas I appreciate the Government’s borrowing to finance the budget, I would like to note that the rate of interest costs is so high. Like the chair observed, this is affecting service delivery. For how long shall we keep borrowing and incurring high interest rates? 

Another issue that has been observed is: what are we borrowing for? Like hon. Ekanya observed in the previous debate, you are borrowing to finance consultants; what is the output of the consultants to justify you to incur this high interest rate? It is high time that Government thought about critical areas that have got high IRRs - Internal Rate of Return, for the purposes of those who belong to other professions. We should not just borrow simply because we want money; we should borrow where we have expected return.

As I conclude, I want to propose that for the future, whenever we are to approve a loan, let us first consider where this money is going. I want to appeal to my colleagues, let us consider loans where we are sure that the IRR is over and above 14 percent. Thank you.

7.09
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. Following up from hon. Musasizi's point, the quality, capacity and intentions of those who negotiate on our behalf must become a very key aspect to consider in the whole business of loans. That is where the gist of the matter lies.

Madam Speaker, I happened to interact with some officials from IMF informally and they were very sympathetic with us. They feel bad about what they are doing to us but they say that is what we actually ask for. That is the dilemma. Other countries that have got good experts have had far better benefits from loans but the people we have, the unpatriotic Ugandans, who do not care about the future, are just fleecing us off. To me, this is the cardinal issue. 

Many times we have come and complained about loans and we have had a lot of sessions on the performance of loans. If any business has a loan that it is not utilising, it is supposed to be closed. Now, you cannot have this huge percentage of non-performing loans that we are paying and nobody is accountable for this. I think this is a fundamental problem.

I wonder what kind of sanctions we can take as a Parliament. How can we be able to get into Government and make these technical people –the political people –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Use a minute to conclude.

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, the challenge we have politically is that we are just working on a political agenda. We are under pressure as politicians to deliver and we are impatient so these technical people take advantage of us. That is where we are making fundamental mistakes. That is why I appealthat we should have a technical team from Parliament to deeply investigate these kinds of anomalies that are costing us a fortune as a country.

7.12
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. In 1990, I visited IMF and I talked to somebody who was in charge of the Uganda desk. I complained about the unfair loans they were giving us and he told me that Uganda signs for loans they have not even read through. Uganda delegations can go to Washington with ten people and these ten will attend the first one hour of the first meeting but by the time they are signing, only two people are remaining and they have not even read the contract they are signing. That was in 1990 and I was with hon. Manzi Tumubweine.

Rt Hon. Speaker, can the minister give us an analysis of this US$ 2.4 billion, which is undisbursed - when we contracted the loans, when they were supposed to expire and why they are not performing. We need to know that.  

I would also like to ask the chairman for clarification on whether the loans for Karuma and Isimba dams are part of the total loan portfolio you have given us. We are also going to build them on money from loans, so I would like to know. Uganda has signed a protocol with its other East African countries that we should not borrow more than 50 percent of our GDP. We are right now at about 30 per cent. If you have not included Karuma, Isimba and the standard gauge here, we might be going towards 70 percent, which is against the protocol, which Uganda has signed with East African Community.

Lastly, Ministry of Health is looking for money but from the figures and graphs you have given us, their performance so far is at 17 percent and water is at 7 percent. Since Ministry of Health is at 17 percent, this means they can only utilise 17 percent of the money they borrowed and yet they are looking for more money. As they come back with the assignment we gave them, they should also analyse for us these other monies, which they borrowed and have not utilised. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, there is no motion for adoption. This report has just provided information and we also note that it is one year old. However, I think that we need to move to a situation where we shall now require the- I am just thinking aloud, but I hope that Members can consider introducing a system where the principles of borrowing are first brought here before the Government borrows, because we have lamented and nobody is listening. So we shall get a small team to bring a motion here so that we do something more serious. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, I want to proceed to item No. 11 on the Order Paper. There are items that have been on the Order Paper for almost three weeks. I will invite the hon. Member for Nwoya to move that motion.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON THURSDAY, 5 JUNE 2014

7.16
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I rise to move a motion to thank His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda for the clear and precise exposition of government policy contained in the State of the Nation Address to Parliament of Uganda on Thursday, 5 June 2014. I move under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by several Members.

MS ADONG: “WHEREAS Article 101(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda requires the President to deliver to Parliament an address on the state of the nation;

AND WHEREAS His Excellency the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, in compliance with the constitutional provisions delivered the State of the Nation Address to this Parliament at the International Conference Centre in Serena, Kampala, on the 5th day of June 2014;

AWARE THAT the State of the Nation Address gave a broad projection on areas of strategic significance to Uganda, in particular concentrating on the basic priority sectors which are agriculture, industry, services and ICT;

COGNISANT of the fact that in his address, His Excellency the President informed the nation that the Uganda economy continues to be vibrant amidst the economic challenges and reforms on the local, regional and international scene;

FURTHER COGNISANT that for Uganda to be competitive and address the economic challenges identified in the State of the Nation Address, emphasis must be on commercialisation of agriculture, value addition, industrialisation, building the service sector and the state pillars to ensure that the state is capable of governing its people and protecting them; developing the human resource through education and improved health care for all, continuing to promote a private sectorled economy which is a more efficient vehicle for enterprise identification and growth; developing the infrastructure especially electricity, roads, railways and others; and integrating the African market to assist the private sector;

NOWTHEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:  
1. That Parliament of Uganda expresses its gratitude to His Excellency the President for his clear and precise exposition in the State of the Nation Address.

2. That Parliament commits itself to the promotion of the great ideas, values and qualities cherished by His Excellency the President in the State of the Nation Address.”I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The motion has been moved and it is seconded. You can justify.

MRS ADONG: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. This Parliament has to give thanks to the President as the father of the nation. The President is also the champion of transformation of agriculture.This time when he was addressing the nation from the conference centre, he was quite unique in his presentation to the extent that most Members who do not subscribe to the NRM party thought he was joking. This is because he changed his way of presentation. 

Madam Speaker, the President emphasised the achievements that have been made in infrastructure, which we all see in our regions. For electricity, we have got the expanded rural electrification project in almost all the regions except in a few areas where it is already underway. We believe this will increase the level of small and medium enterprises that depend on electricity and also other agro-processing machines that are within the region.

We also have some glaring infrastructure that we used to see only on television and in dreams but it is all in the country now, for example the market infrastructure. Go to Kawempe and to the major regions of this country, markets are being constructed and we believe this will improve the nature of our –Even though the railway, which he emphasised, still needs a lot of work, we believe in our President and if we all rally behind him, all this will be achieved.

The President also emphasised environmental conservation and in particular, protection of our rivers and lakes so that we continue being relevant as the Pearl of Africa.  Madam Speaker, we need to support the President as a nation and protect our environment. We do not have to wait until the President tells us to stop cutting trees or planting trees; this is already within the policies and laws. So, I urge fellow Ugandans to rally behind the President so that we can all keep our environment clean and remain relevant as the Pearl of Africa.

On peace and security, we need as a nation to thank the President. Even though we have a global challenge on peace and security, Uganda continues to shine under the leadership of President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni because of the good policies and strategies that we are using as a country.  I urge our friends in the Opposition to always see the peace in all regions of the country. The British failed to secure peace in Karamoja but now under the leadership of the President, you can drive in Karamoja even after midnight without seeing any guns around. So, we need to applaud him for that. 

The President also told us about the proposed Bills, which are in the offing. We urge the Cabinet and people that support the President to bring forward these Bills to Parliament so that we are able to work on them and give the country good laws that can govern relations between our people.  

Madam Speaker, the President also talked about a major challenge that our country is facing, which is shortage of reliable agents. I urge the civil servants and all the stakeholders that are involved in service delivery to try and change and be good agents so that we can realise the outcome of the services that the government brings.

Finally, the Leader of the Opposition also responded to the President’s speech and I would like to makea few comments. Much as he emphasised on criticising the President, the President took them by surprise by changing his way of presentation.

Suffice it to mention that the Leader of the Opposition in his address, at paragraph 112, castigated the achievements of Uganda as being “the so called best tourist destination” simply because the number of tourists that visited Uganda during that period was not mentioned. I urge him not to undermine Uganda as the Leader of the Opposition. You cannot really refer to your country as “so called” and yet the world rated Uganda asthe best destination and marked Uganda as the only country in the world in 100 years to be positioned for the solar eclipse. (Laughter) –Yes! Probably, that is why they referred to –(Interjections) -So if the Leader of Opposition is saying –(Interjections)– I beg for your protection, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. Order, please.

MS ADONG: What I am talking about is that the Leader of the Opposition said that Uganda cannot give real figures of tourists, but how can we refer to Uganda as the so called best tourist destination. I urge him to be nationalistic and take it in good faith that our problems should be our problems and not castigate the whole country. He needs to be patriotic.

We thank the President for women’s emancipation because he took it up with passion and yet the Leader of the Opposition talked about it, that the NRM still boasts about women empowerment. I would like him to apologise to the women of Uganda because in his address at paragraph 151, he says that “the so called women empowerment brought by NRM has only turned women into clapping and kneeling human beings for crumbs”. 

Madam Speaker, I wonder whether the women in this House, including the Speaker, are kneeling and begging for crumbs. I request him to apologise to this nation because of the women empowerment strategies that we have. I am here on affirmative action that has been brought by government. We have very many powerful women running many government offices, including the empowered women doing businesses in the villages and they are all nurturing Uganda. I do not think that they are really kneeling and clapping for crumbs. I think that is very unfortunate. He should actually withdraw this from his statement.   

I thank and urge all Ugandans to support the President and stay focused and work hard to develop our nation. I thank you so much.I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, mover of the motion. I now invite the seconder, hon. Ruhunda. You have five minutes.

7.09
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to add my voice to that of hon. Adong and thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. 

As usual, the President continued to be robust in his approach towards the economy. Under the NRM leadership, steered by the President, we have seen this economy grow and that is a fact we cannot deny. We have seen figures at seven percent and then in the previous financial year, we were at 5.6 percent irrespective of the economic crunch. I think that was very good performance from the microeconomic planning of our country. 

Madam Speaker, when it comes to the economy, the private sector, as the President stated, accounts for 77 percent of our economy. The Leader of the Opposition is one of the beneficiaries of the private sector because under the NRM leadership, we have seen media institutions grow, including the Monitor that has now changed hands and is doing very well. So, if the economy was not doing well, then liberalisation would not be very attractive. Now we are able to attract foreign direct investment in our economy, which shows a clear guarantee of the stability of our country and belief by the global actors in Uganda as a destination for investment. 

I, therefore, urge the Leader of the Opposition to join us and join hands with government to see that we promote our country. If there are varying views, those can be discussed and we can agree from a policy angle. However, if we are talking about the general economic performance indicators that show economic growth, we should be in tandem because this is scientific; we cannot run away from it. 

Madam Speaker, some of the Members criticised the fact that we are looking at global demand. The President, and rightfully so, noted that as a country we have reached a level where we are looking at the business we have to provide. That is why I was very happy when the President talked about the global market - what Uganda can provide to the global market.

The President talked about the global demand for coffee – 149.1 million bags, which is equivalent to US$13.6 billion of unprocessed coffee. That means that if Uganda is to strategize and realign our production after that demand, our farmers will benefit much more. So, we need to begin looking at the market and ensure that all our investments are driven towards the market. 

It does not make sense to plan for our country without looking at the global dynamics, especially for agricultural products. Uganda, being one of the key agricultural areas, and since I come from a tea producing area, and as a tea farmer, we do benefit from the direction of the President. Right now, the strategy to allocate seedlings as part of the agricultural inputs to the farmers is doing wonders in the Rwenzori; I can see my friend from Rwenzori is very happy because coffee production has been boosted. This is what the farmers have been lacking. We are happy with the reforms that are being made under NAADS because the element of wastage within NAADS in form of workshops and so forth is being set aside and tangible issues are being addressed. That is where the UPDF has been involved in distribution of the seedlings. 

Madam Speaker, it is extremely important that as we industrialise the country, we see steady growth – (Member timed out) 

THE SPEAKER: Use one minute to conclude.

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, if we are to boost the economy, we have to look at investments. For electricity, we have seen that for the country to turn into a middle class country, we need 50,000MW. As we speak now, we are generating 852MW. This means that the annual demand of power in Uganda is at 10 percent, so we have to continue planning. We see that Government is moving in the right direction with the construction of Karuma, Ayago and other power generation dams and this means that the country is moving in the right direction.

Lastly, I would like the Leader of the Opposition to appreciate security –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, finish on security and then we move on. 

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have been waiting for three weeks and this point of security is key. 

Personally, I was a little bit taken aback by the response of the Leader of the Opposition, especially his view on external interventions. The external intervention by UPDF is very strategic. With the volatile situation in the Great Lakes region, if Uganda as a land-connected country cannot take an upper hand in prevention measures to make sure that we do not have wars coming to our country, then we will go back to where we were. So, Uganda must take an upper hand in security matters. I am very proud of the UPDF under the leadership of President Museveni for strengthening the security of our country. Thank you, Madam Speaker

7.36
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amur): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate His Excellency the President for the State of the Nation Address. 

The President talked about poverty reduction. He mentioned clearly that poverty in Uganda reduced from 56 percent in 1992 to 19.7 percent in 2003. I do not know what parameter the President used. The indicators we have currently show that the gap between the rich and the poor is widening. If you go to the villages and look at the levels of poverty, you would not believe it. I wonder whether the President is comparing those in towns with the villagers. 

The President said clearly that 68 percent of Ugandans are peasant farmers and the peasant farmers are the most affected by poverty. So I feel this figure is not correct. If it was given to him by the technical people, then I think the technical people deceived him. They wanted to show the President that poverty is reducing yet the real people who are suffering in the villages are increasingly poor. 

Madam Speaker, the President emphasised agriculture. As I speak now, the agricultural sector is bearing heavy taxes, and 68 percent of our population are peasant farmers. As I speak now, farmers are collecting signatures to petition Parliament to reduce taxes on agricultural products. Look at the tax put on hoes, fertilizers– Our farmers are not happy. If the President is emphasising agriculture and we are also taxing farmers in the new budget, I do not this will be achieved.

Madam Speaker, the President talked about the road network. Yes, our roads have been improved but the equipment that was supplied to the districts has broken down. When we went through the districts as the Committee on Local Government, we found out that most of the graders and trucks that had been procured have broken down. I do not know from where that equipment was purchased because the quality of the equipment is really poor.

The President also talked about the industrial sector employing over 841,000 Ugandans. When you look at the affairs of former governments, Uganda had industries like the Lira Spinning Mills, the sisal factory, the ginnery – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: It is only three minutes, so you have to choose the most important issues to talk about.

7.39
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to dwell on agriculture but let me start with women’s emancipation. I would like to point out that this movement is not an effort of an individual because it is a global concern. We should look at the UN conventions like the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). 

We must also examine the struggles of those women who were members of the CA. It was because of their efforts that women are where we are. Those efforts were supplemented by the efforts of Forum for Women in Democracy (FOWODE), which is continuing with some of the unfinished work of the women representatives in the CA spearheaded by hon. Winnie Byanyima. So, we should not tag it to one person. I thought I should clarify that.

On agriculture, I am grateful that for once, His Excellency the President appreciated agriculture as a sector that is very important. Unfortunately, that was only by word of mouth. Let us look at the budget. What was said before was that when it comes to money, that was not the problem; it was the agencies that spearheaded agriculture that had issues, but that is wrong. 

We need to examine the population of Uganda that is engaged in agriculture. I want to inform the House that even buying hoes is a big problem for our farmers, so how could we believe that when we introduced NAADS, it would do a lot of good for the people? That is still wrong. Even letting UPDF manage NAADS is more disastrous -(Interjection)– I have only three minutes –

THE SPEAKER: If you donate your time, that is your problem.

MS AOL: Okay, I will not accept information. I wanted to say that in a place called Awere, where we now have soldiers managing NAADS activities, last week while I was there distributing seedlings, I asked whether they had received the seeds and seedlings from NAADS and they said they had not. So, I think it will be double jeopardy for our people – first, depriving those who were working as staff of NAADS of their jobs and also, I am not very sure if we care going to fulfil the needs – (Member timed out.)

7.43
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to join the movers of the motion to thank His Excellency the President for fulfilling his constitutional duty to address the country on the state of the nation.

Madam Speaker, the movers talked about infrastructure. I would like to say that it is evident that as one moves into the rural areas, they are able to notice an improved road network in addition to other infrastructure developments like schools and health centres, which have taken place. However, I notice that the problem will be on the cost of getting in place this infrastructure development and also the issue of durability of these projects. 

When you look at some of the roads, you realise a problem, and I want to think that the problem might be with poor contractors. Some of the roads get worn out even before they are handed over to the Government. Madam Speaker, we need to help the President in this regard. I call upon each department of Government to help the President by making sure that projects are done well. You know that we at times use the road fund and so it is important that we get good work done.

Secondly, I would like to talk about free things. We have instituted a culture in Ugandans of always expecting free things. People want to take their children to free schools in addition to accessing free health services. That culture has made our people a bit lazy. So, we need to rethink this strategy.

When you go to the rural areas, you find youth in the trading centres waiting for free things. Government just introduced the Youth Livelihood Programme but I doubt whether that money will be paid back by these youth. I am saying this because from their childhood they have known that everything is supposed to be free.

I want to thank the President for his clearheaded leadership. This man, Yoweri Museveni Kaguta, is a clearheaded man as far as leadership is concerned, and this is a challenge to our future leaders. They need to know that the person from whom they will be taking over was a fulltime President. He has dedicated his time to lead this country. I know there might be some weaknesses here and there, but this should be a signal to our future leaders that if one has to lead this country, they have to be serious and should take presidency as a fulltime job.(Member timed out)

7.46
MR IGNATIUS WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I also join colleagues to support the motion to thank the President for delivering the State of the Nation Address.

The President talked a lot about agriculture. However, I would like to point out that this sector is facing many challenges. Many people are selling fake agricultural inputs to farmers. Recently, NAADS gave support to MPs to mobilise the people but some of the seeds failed to germinate. So, if it can happen here what about those people in the rural areas? So, there is need for us to support the farmers. 

Government could put in place mechanisms to finance agriculture. I come from a region that grows a lot of maize and last year we lost a season yet people had got loans to finance that season. So, these loans have become a big problem and some people have been discouraged from planting during this season.

I want to call upon Government to establish an agricultural bank. We have been asking for this for a long time and it is important. When you go to any commercial bank for an agricultural loan, they will give you the money to buy seeds but the following month you are expected to start paying that loan. That is not the way an agricultural bank would operate; they would be able to give farmers a grace period. Beans and maize, for example, take three months and that means the farmers would have to start paying the loans after those three months. But if you take a loan and the following month you have to start paying, then it is a big challenge to farmers.

There is the issue of taxes on agricultural inputs. Much as we need revenue, as Parliament I think we need to reconsider this. It is now a big to challenge to farmers as most of them cannot afford. We need to reconsider.

Post-harvest facilities such as silos are a challenge that we have in our region. There is planet of maize now because the season has been good but many of the people are selling it at a giveaway price because they cannot keep it. We have no clear food export policy for the country. All our maize is going to Kenya. Now the Kenyans are going to store the maize and sell it back to Ugandans. So we need to have a clear food export policy for the country. You cannot allow everything to be taken.(Member timed out_)

7.49
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Adong for moving a motion to thank the President. He has fulfilled an important function as the head state and I would like to join the rest of the Members to support the motion as well and give some few remarks.

It is eminent that there is some development in the urban areas and there has been growth that we have experienced ourselves. When you move around, there is availability of both manufactured products and even raw ones that can be consumed locally. This is a very good indicator. At least we did not notice experience very serious inflation. These are all good things that show us that our country is moving forward.
The President talked about poverty being at 19 percent nationally. If we are categorise this percentage district by district or region by sub region, there are some districts that are at 35 to 40 percent. If we can balance and make sure that people who are responsible for the implementation of government projects really wake up and do what they are supposed to do, such differences where some parts of the country are lagging behind yet some other parts of the country are progressing would be non-existent.

I want to thank the President for taking a decision to allow our soldiers to go to South Sudan. People of Northern Uganda had broken hearts when the war broke out because that is the route of the LRA, which exists in Central African Republic. However, the people are happy now and they are expecting good things to come. I want to thank the President for that good thing he did.

There is an eminent high cost of living, which we cannot run away from. People are struggling to make ends meet. You ask how we can get out of these challenges. Go to the villages and remote districts and see how people are failing to take their children to higher levels of learning - (Member timed out.)

7.52
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, RtHon. Speaker. I want to join the Members to salute the President for the State of the Nation Address.

I will start on the issue of rehabilitation of the irrigation schemes. Most of the time we have depended on nature as a key provider of water and without rain, production cannot take place. I was happy last week when we went to Butaleja and I saw life at the Doho Irrigation Scheme. We also went to Kasese and I saw Mubuku booming. I feel that this is the way to go. I appeal to my brother Nzoghu that even if he does not want to see these things, at times we need to give credit where it is due.

I only want to remind the President and those who are on the front bench here that we also had Kige citrus fruits in Buyende/Kamuli. It used to be a centre of excellence in production of citrus fruits and on many occasions, commitments have been made that investors are going to be sent there. I would be the happiest if we delivered good news there that something similar is happening.

My colleague has just alluded to security. We want to salute the President for ensuring that we have peaceful boundaries and borders. Uganda belongs to all of us and security is enjoyed by all Ugandans. It is in the same spirit that I appeal to all brothers and sisters in this House to always preach peace. Recently, in south western Uganda, we saw clashes and we were all concerned because that conflict alone affected the entire country in terms tourism and the economy. So, we should always preach peace.

About the deployments in South Sudan and Somalia, this is a credit; when a neighbour is not peaceful or insecure, Uganda can never be peaceful. The good news is that those people in South Sudan are saying that if it were possible, we would maintain our forces there. Our business people who are South Sudan are enjoying that peace and their business because of the presence of our forces in the area.

What we need to look at is our foreign policy. We always contribute in pacifying our neighbouring countries but what do we bring back. We were in Somalia and we found that Kenyans and South Africans were investing heavily and reaping big. Ugandans who had fought –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: That is an important point; take half a minute to conclude. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to inform members that our people, including the forces on the ground, questioned us, the Parliamentarians, about what we were doing to ensure that after pouring blood to pacify those countries, we also scoop opportunities from those countries.

I want to request the ministries of foreign affairs and trade to make sure that we reap something from this blood and sweat so that our country can also benefit economically. We should be strategic in that aspect -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: To add to the point raised by hon. Muwuma, after South Sudan was liberated it was Kenya which went to open the first bank, KCB, and soon the Ethiopians also moved in. For us, we are here doing the work, paying the price and then sitting.

7.56
MS SYLIVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I also want to join my colleagues in supporting the motion and thanking the mover.

In the State of the Nation Address, the President did guide the nation on areas where we need to invest or where we need to put our emphasis if we want to create employment and create wealth. I am glad that he indeed talked about agriculture. I do believe that agriculture can really help us transform this country; unfortunately, we have not done substantial investments in agriculture.

I travelled to Kalangala sometime back and I saw the palm oil project. I wish that the kind of investment can be done in the rest of the country. The farmers in Kalangala, other than providing the land are supported throughout the whole quantum of production and marketing. They are given seeds, fertilisers and loans and they are helped to market and form SACCO’s and they pay later on. So, it is not surprising that that project has transformed the economy of the people of Kalangala. I wish we could do the same. I know it is expensive but if we are to use agriculture to transform this country, I think the Kalangala model is the way to go.

It is unfortunate that we are still talking about relying on weather for our agriculture. Our weather patterns are very unpredictable these days, so we need to think otherwise and invest in irrigation.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the President did mention that we have managed to half the population of people living in poverty in Uganda. This is commendable, but like he rightly said, this is not evenly distributed. Big parts of Uganda, mainly the rural areas, still have people living in poverty.

Madam Speaker, we have just concluded the National Family Planning Conference today and the theme was, harnessing what is termed as the demographic dividends. As Uganda, our population today stands at 35 million people and we have the highest fertility rate in the world, and 83 percent of our population is under 35 years. Madam Speaker, this population can be turned into an opportunity if we meaningfully invest in it. 

One, we must control our fertility by ensuring that the young people do not produce as many children as their mothers and fathers did. When we produce so many children, it means all the resources and investments will be wasted and we will not have a quality population.(Member timed out)

8.00
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague, hon. Adong Lilly, for the motion. 

During this time when we have regional cooperation, we cannot afford to have a country where all the banks are owned by private enterprises. It is very unfortunate. I hoped that when the President was giving his State of the Nation Address, he would include ideas on how we can make the country have ownership in commercial transaction issues. He promised but I do not know why he ignored it. We need to re-establish the cooperative bank instead of allowing private banks to come here and make a lot of profits.

The other issue, which I appreciate about the President’s speech, is the upcoming Bills. When he talked about the Tenant-Landlord Bill, we also expect that this Government will establish housing estates, which are owned by Government, so that we can make money through them.

Regarding the higher education financing scheme, we negotiated that the biggest percentage should be for sciences but the arts students should also be considered. However, the information we have got is that the arts students are being turned away.

Still in the speech, we did not hear the President appreciate regional integration and yet he has really made a very big landmark through the Common Market. In the same speech, we would have expected him to establish a pricing mechanism for the products that we are being encouraged to grow; for example, the rate at which we expect our coffee to be sold on the world market. We also expected that around five agricultural products would be targeted for export.

Regarding the quality of production, in the speech he talked about industrialisation but this time in my submission I would like us to look at regional production- (Member timed out.)

8.04
MR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the President for the clear exposition in the State of the Nation Address, which he presented to the nation. 

In my view, the President is a very consistent and persistent master planner and a great thinker. If I may think backwards, I really compare His Excellency the President to the late Mao Tse-Tung because that great leader of China made China what it is today as a result of the foundation he laid. Today our President, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, is telling the nation that let us first of all lay the infrastructure so that we can use it for development in the rest of the sectors, be it education, health and so forth. 

He has also told the nation that peace is fundamental for development. I think he has been very consistent on this. Without peace, you cannot develop a nation. So I really thank him for being consistent and persistent about peace.

The third component, which I would like to thank him for, is on the issue of Pan Africanism and the integration of the East African Common Market, which is fundamental. We need a bigger market in order to market our products and enable our economy to grow.

Of course, as you know, it is in this government, which is led by His Excellency, where we have seen a lot of development. In terms of indicators, talk about health; it is in this Government where we have seen the reduction of under-five mortality rates and the reduction of infant mortality rates. As I talk you are laughing, but this is a reality and it is what we have seen.

When our Government came to power, the infant mortality rate was in its hundreds but today it is below 60 per 1000 live births. These are indicators of development, but of course they say they have eyes but they cannot see and they have ears but they cannot hear. So, to me –(Member timed out_)

8.07
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for having chaired the State of the Nation Address. I took time to read the State of the Nation Addresses for Kenya and Tanzania and compared them to ours in Uganda. The fact is that the main intention of the State of the Nation Address is to give accountability of what the Government has done.

Let me give you the accountability that I picked out, which was just negative and contradictory. The President said that the global demand for coffee is 149.1 million bags, valued at Shs 13.2 billion unprocessed and Shs 32 billion processed. I asked myself, “Are you the President who sold the Coffee Marketing Board and the Cooperative Bank and yet you are giving us this?” That was the first the question.

Two, the President told us about his experiment where he was sent the UPDF to 25 former war zones with Shs 9 billion, which they used to buy 11 million seedlings of coffee. When you multiply Shs 500 by 11 million seedlings, you get Shs 5 billion. This means that even when he used UPDF, they cheated him. These are facts. I took time off to go to Uganda Coffee Development Authority; they spent only Shs 3 billion to provide coffee seedlings to the whole of Uganda. These are facts that you should go and look for. Now, the President said they spent Shs 9 billion and they bought 11 million seedlings for 25 former war zones and even if one seedling is at Shs 500, the total cost would be Shs5 billion. So, who stole that money? 

He advised the Minister for Environment to stop cutting trees but he is the one who was offering Mabira to be cut and the Basoga, the Baganda and other people were going to suffer. Here we are, after Indians were killed by Ugandans because Mabira was going and people were arrested, and there is a turnaround. 

Here we are getting Members thanking the President that he is the one who even brought the eclipse. Some of us have seen more than one eclipse since we were born; how do you talk about an eclipse being brought by the President? 

Madam Speaker, anybody who fails to give accountability to the President – The major project in Uganda now, which has taken most of Uganda’s money, is UPE. Give us the performance of UPE –(Member timed out_)

8.11
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the President for the good State of the Nation Address and for what he has done for this country since his early days. 

There are many things that the President has done very well but I want to mention one thing - he has promoted research. The Government has promoted research and science especially at our top universities. At the universities now, especially Makerere University, there are schools competing to produce and innovate something new. No wonder, Makerere has just been ranked seventh on the continent just behind universities from South Africa and Egypt. This is a very good achievement. 

I only want to request and urge Government to change the curriculum for the classes at lower secondary so that we are all looking at the same thing - innovation and research. We would then produce people who can create jobs and work on the present unemployment. I thank you.

8.12
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I cannot join those Ugandans who are thanking President Museveni for giving the State of the Nation Address when he gave an individual address. It was more like a state of an individual address than a state of the nation address. 

People have forgotten history and every time I get back home, I normally watch and listen to the speech that President Museveni made in 1986 when he was on the steps of Parliament here. He did mention in his speech, among the very many things he said, that the problem of African leaders is that they over stay in power. At that time, he must have thought that they were not going to over stay in power. Look at the current trend of events; one of the dimensions of the development index is governance. You cannot talk of governance when actually you think that you must be the one to stay in power until God comes. 

Why is that you are not mentioning that recently, some of your colleagues were given money to go and popularize President Museveni so that he should stand alone? I want to say that –

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Kasule Lumumba): Madam Speaker and honourable members, is the honourable member in order to talk about an activity of the NRM party, which is not even mentioned anywhere in the State of the Nation Address of the President? We are in a multiparty dispensation where each party has its own caucus and the liberty to do its own activities; is he in order when he is not a member? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if we start talking about party activities, it will mean that we shall have to allow UPC to tell us what they were doing and then DP will also tell us and JEEMA that has one member will also tell us. Let us concentrate on the State of the Nation Address.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you. Rt Hon. Speaker, this is a governance issue that he talked about in the State of the Nation Address; I am not simply picking it from nowhere.  

I want to tell my colleagues that from 1999 to 2004, there was a road construction project from Katungulu to Fort Portal but even before the road was actually commissioned, there were already potholes. As I talk now, they are simply doing massive rehabilitation of the road before it even gets to 10 years. When we talk about infrastructure, the infrastructure that we are talking about is the infrastructure that gets dilapidated before the end of five years. I know very well that – (Member timed out)

8.16
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also wish to appreciate the President for the State of the Nation Address. I wish to specifically thank the President for giving strategic direction by giving specific issues that will help Ugandans tackle poverty, create wealth and create employment. 

I wish to note further that the President did appreciate the need to invest in infrastructure.  that effect, I would wish to appreciate that the President was giving public accountability as the head of state. I would wish to state that in the spirit of being Ugandans, it is now a question of us and the private sector coming together to harness the resource allocation as it was well laid out by the President.

In the State of the Nation Address, there are other strategic questions that the President should have asked, for example, how Ugandans have ably used the investment in roads and how they have invested as far as agricultural support is concerned. To this effect, the President even mentioned the good experience we have seen from the deployment of the soldiers in the distribution of agricultural inputs. However, it was again a disappointment to hear that some Ugandans do shoddy work in the supply of agricultural inputs yet they are given the resources. 

This brings me to an issue which the President mentioned - let us all move towards monitoring. It is no longer a question of resources, it is about implementation. I would like to call upon Members of Parliament to take keen interest in all public resources and utilities that the President mentioned. The President also appreciated the fact that agriculture can do much as far as transforming the lives of Ugandans is concerned. As a youth leader, I would like to call upon Members of Parliament to interest the young generation in agriculture. We should not look at it in the traditional way but in the entire value chain, from the farms to production, processing and value addition. 

My prayer is that in the next State of the Nation Address, the President will talk about adding more resources as far as agriculture is concerned. Agriculture as the backbone of the country should have more resources allocated to it since it is a crosscutting area for all Ugandans. (Member timed out)

8.19
MS SUZAN NAMAGANDA (DP, Woman Representative, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to talk about the President’s State of the Nation Address in relation to poverty eradication in the country. I want to concentrate on agriculture because 70 percent of Ugandans are in the agricultural sector. 

A country that injects only three percent of its total budget in agriculture cannot boost that sector, which most of its population survives on. This puts the President’s State of the Nation Address in balance. Ugandans would like to know: is the President only joking or is he really serious about what he is talking about? Yes, we agree that Ugandans need to boost the agricultural sector to eradicate poverty, but our talk is very different from our actions. In that regard, I want to differ from the rest of the Members who are thanking the President on this matter. 

Secondly, imposing taxes on agricultural inputs cannot be the right way to boost that sector. I call upon my colleagues, the honourable members, to listen to the people that voted us into this House. They wonder whom we represent when we are imposing taxes on goods on which they survive. 

Ugandans would also like to know whether the President needs the citizens to get poorer so that he can rule them for a longer time or that he needs to rule a population –(Member timed out.)

8.22
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to commend His Excellency the President of Uganda for the State of the Nation Address. He mentioned and articulated many issues that affect Ugandans, especially programmes on poverty eradication, sourcing for development funds like PRDP, NUSAF, and many other projects that he has spearheaded. It is incumbent upon us and other stakeholders in the local government to oversee those projects so that we can have tangible results. 

I thank the President for the infrastructural development, especially the roads. New roads have been constructed and many others have been tarmacked. However, I would like to observe that we have opened up many roads but we have failed to maintain them. This is because since 2008,Government has failed to fully operationalise the Road Fund Act so that we can have enough funds to maintain our roads. 

I call upon Government, through you, Madam Speaker, and I call upon the Government Chief Whip who is here to also prevail over the Minister of Finance to bring the necessary amendments to the URA Act so that we fully operationalise this fund and realise its set objectives so that we consolidate our achievements. I thank you.

8.24
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the rest of my colleagues to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. I also thank hon. Lilly Adong for the motion. 

I want to commend the President for his efforts as far as infrastructure development is concerned - the road network and electricity. Without letting politics get into the way, one should appreciate that some steps have been taken. We need to compare the number of good roads now and those then; how long would it take you some time back to travel to your home at night? We cannot over emphasise this and it is very evident. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to make an observation on agriculture. I agree with the President about the challenges he highlighted, which we are still facing in the agriculture sector. He did mention high costs of inputs, underdevelopment of water for agriculture, low use of fertilisers and poor management skills by farmers. To the contrary, however, while the President is looking at the high cost of agricultural inputs, more taxes are being proposed on agricultural inputs. This is a contradiction. I therefore call upon the relevant committees to consider this issue when they are deliberating on the ministerial policy statement. 

Madam Speaker, we should ensure that we put a lot investment in agriculture. In contributions to GDP, agriculture ranks number one, but when it comes to budgetary allocation, agriculture takes between three to five percent of the entire budget. This is very discouraging. 

Yes, we have seen some irrigation schemes coming up, but these are still very few. We want serious investments in agriculture in terms of irrigation, mechanisation and the like to be considered. Once this is considered, very many issues will be covered, for example, food security, income inequality and the issues of poverty levels. We will really be on the safer side because agriculture is an activity for almost each and every person.(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, 19 members have so far contributed. The debate will continue tomorrow. I adjourn the House to 2 O’clock tomorrow afternoon. Thank you for the perseverance.

(The House rose at 8.27p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 31 July 2014 at 2.00p.m.) 

