Tuesday, 15 July 2014

Parliament met at 2.58 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I just have two items for communication. One is that on Sunday I launched, with the Ministry of Health, the National Campaign against Teenage Pregnancy in Uganda and I was alarmed to hear that in Butaleja, the rate of teenage pregnancy is 41 per cent; and of course we have not got the statistics for the whole country. So, I want to appeal to you to take keen interest in what the children are doing so that they can remain in school because Government is putting money to their education. But also, early pregnancies are causing fistula and other health problems. So, we want to really appeal to you to join the campaign so that the young people can be guided.

The second one is that on Sunday, I also launched the Weekly Cultural Gala at the National Theatre. Starting from last Sunday, there will be performances of traditional dances from all over Uganda from 3.00 O’clock to 6.00 p.m. every Sunday. So, if you have time and you are in Kampala on a Sunday, please go and see what Ugandans are showcasing. And you can also dance, I am sure you can dance. Thank you very much.

3.01
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the welfare of the Omukama of Toro, His Highness King Oyo Kabamba Iguru. It has been reported in the media that the Omukama of Toro is fasting in protest starting from yesterday. But I would like all of us to recall the circumstances under which His Highness Oyo was coronated King of Toro in September 1995 at a very tender age.

Madam Speaker, it is quite shameful that after King Oyo has come of age, he is now protesting against the very people who are supposed to be his regents and caretakers of the assets that were left behind by his late father. I am, therefore, requesting, through you, Madam Speaker, that Government comes up to explain the conditions under which the Omukama of Toro has found himself in that dissatisfaction and why he is fasting and what Government is doing to address his grievances.

Two, we want to know whether the words attributed to H.E the President, that he dismissed the protests by the Omukama of Toro as being irrelevant and of no importance, are true.

Thirdly, the Minister in charge of the Presidency restrains the Presidential Spokesperson from making statements against the Omukama of Toro that may again worsen the condition.

Madam Speaker, this is a very important matter. The Kabaka of Buganda, the kingdom where I come from, is one of the regents of King Oyo and I stand here in that capacity. King Oyo is the pride of all Ugandans; he is our king and so, we are supposed to ensure that he is always in good health and that he does not fast in protest and that we do not keep quiet as he suffers –(Interruptions)

MS TIBINGAMBA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker and thank you, colleague, for giving way. I want to give information that towards the beginning of this Session, the Toro Kingdom youth presented a petition to the Speaker. We are just waiting to be accorded time to discuss the issues in relation to Toro Kingdom and related matters concerning our Ebyeitu and we are just waiting for ample time to talk about those. 

In relation to fasting, I talked to the Prime Minister of Toro Kingdom and he told me that the King is doing his duty of fasting like any other Christian. (Laughter)

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, the lent period for the Christians is well over after Easter –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us not discuss the conduct of His Majesty the Omukama. Let us wait for the minister – I hope she will come in but don’t speculate on what he is doing.

3.03
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Madam Speaker, thank you so much. I rise to react to the shocking news you have told us about the teenage pregnancy levels in Butaleja of 41 percent. That should be a great concern for the women of Uganda. Who are these men impregnating these young teenagers? 

As we go for the awareness sessions, we must put men at the forefront because they are the very ones making these young girls pregnant. And I think Koboko is among those. So, let us carry out this campaign. It should not only be done in a few districts but all the districts mentioned. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: I will instruct the Minister of Health to circulate all the information across Uganda so that members can know where they stand so that they know where to put their energies.

3.09
MR MICHAEL WERIKHE (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, you guided that we should have the completion of composing sectoral committees but when I look at the Order Paper, I do not see any item on this and my worry is that we are beginning work on the policy statements and the Committee on Natural Resources is one of those committees that have not completed the constitution of members.

So, I do not know how we stand because we cannot move with work and yet you guided last week. I stand to be guided. If there is no way, Madam Speaker, I propose that the House gives you a go ahead and you complete the exercise for us so that we start our work. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, last week I appealed to the whips and the coordinator of the independents to sit and rationalise the membership of the Natural Resources committee because the chairman does not know who to invite and who to leave out because they are beyond the 30 membership stipulated. So, if nothing happens, tomorrow I will use my night and I will determine who will be on that committee.

Hon. Members, I would like you to join us in welcoming the students of Kubusa Secondary School in Bugiri. They are represented by the Government Chief whip and the hon. Oguttu, the Leader of the Opposition. You are welcome. We also have students of victory Junior School, Tororo. They are this side, represented by hon. Tanna and hon. Sarah Opendi. You are welcome. (Applause)

We have students of Salvation College Wakiso, represented by hon. Balikudembe and Commissioner Seninde. You are all welcome. (Applause) 

BILLS 
FIRST READING 

PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES BILL, 2014

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (ELDERLY AND DISABILITY) (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2014” be read for the first time and in compliance with the Budget Act Section 10, I wish to accompany the Bill with a Certificate of Financial Implication. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for scrutiny and report back.

BILLS 
FIRST READING 

THE FINANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you recall last time, the minister had attempted to move the Bill for first reading but there was still confusion about the other Bills with similar titles, which he had brought that is why I have allowed him to come back. You will have to explain to the House.

3.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, as the Speaker has rightly said, there was lack of clarity on the Bills which we laid sometime back and the ones which we were due to lay sometime last week.

The Bills which we laid some two weeks back are amendment Bills of the entire tax laws so that we could - subsections are now irrelevant and out-dated and there are new additions that are supposed to be put in so that we move with the times of the day. Those are the Bills of the other time.

The Bills before me, which I want to lay before Parliament, are Bills to amend the Tax Bills which are containing the proposals by the Minister of Finance when she read the budget. Those are meant to enable Government to collect the taxes. I submit.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed to the first reading.

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Finance Bill, 2014” be read for the first time.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think the minister is misleading us. He says that he is bringing the amendment Bills. We know we have the Finance Act already in place. So what he should be laying on Table should be the Finance (Amendment) Bill. Is he procedurally right to lay on the Table the Finance Bill? 

THE SPEAKER: No, I think what I have on the Order Paper is the Finance (Amendment) Bill. Are you doing something different?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I am reading exactly what the Bill says although the Order Paper is reading amendment. The Bill which, hopefully if time allows, we shall be debating this afternoon is the Uganda Public Finance Bill which is very different –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am sure the minister knows that Members of Parliament know what the Public Finance Bill means and the Finance Bill. We have the Finance Act which carries the harmonisation tax codes and others which he knows.

The Public Finance Bill that he is talking about, which is going to amend the Public Finance and Accountability Act, is talking about the management of public finance. And he knows that the MPs know it and he is coming to abuse us. Is he in order to abuse us that we do not know the difference between a public finance Bill and a finance Bill or Act? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, we received from your ministry a set of Bills, a letter first stating that you are sending the Finance (Amendment) Bill, 2014; the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014; the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014; the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2014 and the Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2014. But when you look at the list, Bill No.7 is a Finance Bill and not Finance (Amendment) Bill. So, the Bill is different from what you stated in the letter.

We then have the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014; that one is the same as what is in the letter. We also the Value Added (Amendment) Bill; the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2014; the Stamp Duty - actually this Bill also is a bit of problem. It is amendment of schedule. Hon. Minister, this is what I have.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, am I protected from my sister? (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What the hon. Minister read is actually not one of the Bills we have. Wouldn’t it be right that the hon. Minister withdraws what he is presenting, which we do not have and then goes ahead and presents the Finance Bill, which we know? What he read was the “Uganda Finance” something; so, wouldn’t it be right that he withdraws that and gives us the right Bill as per its title? Thank you.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: First of all, may I apologise, Madam Speaker? The correct title of the Bill, which we are going to be debating this afternoon, is the Public Finance Bill, 2012. The Bill which I would like to present is the Finance Bill, 2014. So, I do not know -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, will you then present a Finance (Amendment) Bill, 2014 also? After you have brought this, will you also bring another amendment Bill, 2014?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I think let me withdraw this Finance Bill, 2014 until further –

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Proceed with the others. Let him first lay these others, which appear to be in order.

BILLS 
FIRST READING
 
THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

3.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I wish to move that the Bill entitled “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee of Finance for perusal and report back.

BILLS 
FIRST READING 

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I want to move that a Bill entitled “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: But it seems the minister is alone as nobody is seconding your Bills. (Laughter)

BILLS 
FIRST READING 

THE EXCISE TARIFF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I want to move that the Bill entitled “The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2014” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded.

BILLS 
FIRST READING 

THE STAMP DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I want to move that a Bill entitled “The Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2014” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: I think that is the Schedule.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have the Order Paper here and it says there will be the Finance (Amendment) Bill, 2014. The guidance I am seeking from you is, is the minister bringing another Bill called the Finance (Amendment) Bill, 2014 today or tomorrow?

THE SPEAKER: Before we go there, I just wanted clarification from the minister. What I have here under the Stamp Act is a statutory instrument but I do not have the Bill. It is a statutory instrument and I do not see the Bill.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, can I beg your indulgence and that of the Members that we stay this one until I have got all the facts and come back?

THE SPEAKER: So, hon. Members, the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014, the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014 and the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2014 are sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back. But you should withdraw the other two. You should withdraw the first one because the second is not there.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I have got five Bills and I have withdrawn one, which is the Finance Bill, 2014 until further notice. I move that the Bill entitled “The Finance Bill, 2014” be withdrawn.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the Finance Bill has been withdrawn. Now the Bill for Stamps Duty is not there. What I have is a statutory instrument, which I think is just for laying. It is not for deliberation. Minister, your last Bill is not here.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, you are absolutely correct. I beg to move that the Stamps Duty (Amendment) Bill, a copy of which has not been provided, be withdrawn.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, so those two are withdrawn. (Mr Wafula Oguttu rose_) Are you clarifying on his behalf?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for allowing me to talk. From what we are seeing, it looks like there is a problem in the management of our affairs by Government. We are wasting a lot of time and the Parliament is blamed for not doing its work. We would like to appeal  that the government gets more organised and coordinates better with your Office so that we don’t - you can get more votes, it does not matter as long as you serve the country - waste time. When we come here, the government should be sufficiently prepared instead of wasting time the way we do. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: The next item.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, point of procedure. I want to thank you, very much. There are two fundamental procedural issues: the Budget Act is categorical about the Certificate of Financial Implication on any Bill that comes to this House. I have not heard of it here.  

The second one is that the practice that this Parliament has adopted and which is also part of the parliamentary power of appropriation is that taxation Bills should be approved before we finally approve the budget because it has financial implications on the overall budget. Now, I want to thank the minister because of the challenge from the technical people, he has said, “I withdraw the Finance Bill” indefinitely. That means that our process of budgeting is also going to be affected until further notice. We need to have this Bill concluded before we do the final appropriation. So, how are we going to proceed in the budgeting process? Can I request, Madam Speaker, that the minister gives us a date when he is going to bring all the Taxation Bills here so that we can conclude the budget within the timeframe provided for in the Budget Act.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: I appreciate the importance of these Bills. I appreciate the timelines of passing the budget and because of that – and one of the functions of my ministry is to ensure that the budget is in place and it is passed in time so that Government activities can go on uninterrupted. 

Madam Speaker, I promise all these shortcomings will be done with and we should be back here on Thursday, the day after tomorrow. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, you are aware about the urgency of this Bill and so, we really expect you to move very fast.

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I have committed myself and my ministry that we will be back on Thursday.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I just want your help. Parliament should not get worried because we already have in place the Finance Act. If he does not bring this one, it means that the old one will be in force. Even the Stamp Duty will be in force and what we have is sufficient enough for us to do work unless he wants amendments. If he does not want amendments - 

THE SPEAKER: Item No. 4  

LAYING OF PAPERS

    (A) MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

(i) Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development

3.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Madam Speaker, in keeping with Section 6 sub-section (2) of the Budget Act, 2001, I beg to lay on Table the Ministerial Policy Statement for Financial Year 2014/2015 for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development Vote 017; and Rural Electrification Agency Vote 123. I beg to lay.  

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on Natural Resources.

(ii) Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities

3.34
THE MINISTER FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mrs Maria Mutagamba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In accordance with the Budget Act, 2001, I beg to lay on Table the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities for Financial Year 2014/2015 covering votes 022 and 117. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the relevant sectoral committee for perusal and report back.

(iii) National Planning Authority

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I want to lay on Table the Ministerial Policy Statement for the National Planning Authority Vote 108 for the Financial Year 2014/2015. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the relevant committee for perusal and report back. 

(iv) Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries

3.36
THE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Buchanayandi): Madam Speaker, as required by Section 6 of the Budget Act, 2001, I hereby submit the policy statement of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries Vote 010; and its semi-autonomous agencies: the Diary Development Authority, Vote 121; the National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Data Bank Vote, 125; the National Agricultural Research Organisation Vote 142; the National Agricultural Advisory Services Vote 152; the Cotton Development Organisation, Vote 155; the Uganda Coffee Development Authority, Vote 160; and the Local Government Agricultural Grants, Votes 501-850 with draft budget estimates for the Financial Year 2014/2015 for consideration and approval. I beg to lay the document on Table. 

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the relevant sectoral committee for perusal and report back.

(v) Ministry Of Gender, Labour And Social Development

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (ELDERLY AND DISABILITY) (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Madam Speaker, I am sorry but I do not have the policy statement here. (Laughter)

(B) FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR 30TH JUNE 2011 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND THE OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

THE SPEAKER: Commissioner Akol.

3.38
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table financial statements for the year ended 30th June, 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following municipal councils: 
    i) Central Division – Kabale Municipal Council
    ii) Western Division – Soroti Municipal Council
    iii) Northern Division – Soroti Municipal Council.
    iv) Lopoko sub-county – Napak district
    v) Iriri sub-county – Napak District
    vi) Lorengechora sub-county – Napak District 
    vii) Mukula sub-county – Ngora District
    viii) Namungalwe Sub County – Iganga District
    ix) Nakigo sub-county – Iganga District
    x) Nawanyigi sub-county –Iganga District
    xi) Makuutu sub-county –Iganga District
    xii) Igombe sub-county – Iganga District
    xiii) Nabitende sub-county – Iganga District
    xiv) Bulamagi sub-county – Iganga District
    xv) Nambale sub-county – Iganga District 
    xvi) Buyanga sub-county – Iganga District
    xvii) Nawandala sub-county – Iganga district
    xviii) Namalemba sub-county – Iganga District
    xix) Ibulanku sub-county – Iganga District
    xx) Kaato sub-county - Manafwa District
    xxi) Sibanga sub-county - Manafwa District 
    xxii) Buwabwala sub-county - Manafwa District 
    xxiii) Bubutu sub-county - Manafwa District 
    xxiv) Bumbo sub-county - Manafwa District 
    xxv) Magale sub-county - Manafwa District
    xxvi) Bugobero sub-county - Manafwa District 
    xxvii) Buwagogo sub-county- Manafwa District
    xxviii) Bupoto sub-county - Manafwa District and
    xxix) Kapiri sub-county - Ngora District. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, all those are sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for perusal and report back. 

(C) THE LAND FUND REGULATION

THE SPEAKER: There is no one from the Ministry of Lands; next item. 

(D) THE NATIONAL LAND POLICY

THE SPEAKER: I think the Minister for Lands is not here; proceed to 4(e)

(E) REPORT ON THE SYRIAN PROCESS COORDINATED BY IRANIAN PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson for the Committee on Foreign Affairs, please come and lay the report. 

3.41
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Dr Sam Okuonzi): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay an electronic version of the report – (Interjections) - on the Syrian Political Peace Process Coordinated by the Iranian Parliament. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, an electronic copy has been laid. I direct the Clerk to upload it on all the Members’ iPads –(Laughter) 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter because my understanding is that when you lay on Table a physical object, it becomes property of Parliament and the one who lays it ceases to own it. So, do I now take it that the iPad has not become property of Parliament? (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: The iPad is only the tool of laying. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we know that the reason why we receive hard copies is because they contain signatures. I am sure the chairperson had somewhere to sign. Can he tell us whether the copy on his iPad is signed? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are a former commissioner, you were part of the decision to buy these iPads; next item. 

(F) INFORMATION REPORT TO PARLIAMENT ON ACTIONS TAKEN ON INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT REPORTS FOR THE PERIOD 2006 – 2013

3.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Madam Speaker, in accordance with Article 231 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, I hereby lay information of the report to Parliament on actions taken on the Inspectorate of Government reports for the period 2006-2013. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, is that by way of a Treasury Memorandum? – (Interjections) – Okay, lay it. 

(G) THE ANNUAL REPORT 2012/2013 UGANDA REGISTRATION SERVICES BUREAU

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Justice is not here; call item 5.

PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS

(A) PETITION BY THE COMMUNITY OF LIRA DISTRICT ON THE LOW STATUS OF LIFE-SAVING  EMERGENCY SERVICES FOR PREGNANT WOMEN AND NEWBORNS IN THE HEALTH CENTRES IIIs AND IVs OF LIRA

3.46
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I present this petition under Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. This petition is from the residents of Lira District and the subject matter of this petition is to bring to the attention of this august House the urgent need for basic and comprehensive emergency obstetric and newborn care services at the Health Centres IIIs and IVs in Lira District: 

Madam Speaker, Lira District recorded over six maternal deaths and 184 neonatal deaths in only the first half of the Financial Year 2013/2014. 

The humble petitioners seek your indulgence and that of this august House and pray that:
    1. Parliament prioritises and allocates sufficient funds for emergency care services for maternal and neonatal health in the budget for the financial year 2014/2015 and to increase health centres offering these services.
    2. Parliament urges Government to uphold its commitment to meet the basic and comprehensive emergency obstetric and newborn care services across the country. 
    3. Parliament urges Government to urgently address the staffing gap and retention of health workers in Lira District.
    4. Parliament investigates this matter. 

Madam Speaker, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures. I beg to present.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The petition is sent to the Committee on Health for expeditious handling and report back.

    (B) PETITION ON LOW STATUS OF EMERGENCY LIFE-SAVING SERVICES FOR PREGNANT WOMEN AND NEWBORNS IN OUR HEALTH CENTRES IIIS AND IVS IN KABALE

3.48
MS RHONA NINSIIMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. With me here is a humble petition of residents of Kabale District with a subject matter of bringing to the attention of the august House the urgent need for basic and comprehensive emergency obstetrics and newborn care services at the Health centres IIIs and IVs in Kabale District.

Madam Speaker, the humble petitioners are concerned and aver that all the seven health centre IVs do not have the capacity to provide caesarean services and blood transfusions to the mothers who face complications during pregnancy and child birth.

While the health centres IVs require 14 medical doctors, 14 anaesthetic staff and seven theatre assistants, none of these have been recruited for Kabale. Only seven out of the 22 health centres have piped water in the labour ward. The situation has compromised clean and safe birth hence the risks of infection which currently account for about 22 percent of maternal deaths in Uganda.

Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, just read the subject and the prayers. The details will be handled by the committee.

MS NINSIIMA: Therefore, your humble petitioners seek the indulgence of this august House and pray that: 
    1. Parliament prioritises and allocates sufficient funds for emergency care services for maternal and neonatal health in the budget for the financial year 2014/15 and the increase of health centres offering these services. 
    2. Parliament urges Government to uphold its commitment to meet the basic and comprehensive emergency obstetrics and newborn care services across the country.
    3. Parliament urges the Ministry of Health to urgently establish mobile health services in all the 25 sub counties in the short term.
    4. Parliament urges Government to urgently address the staffing gaps and retention of health workers in Kabale District.
    5. Parliament goes ahead to investigate this matter. 

For these, your petitioners as are duty bound and will ever pray and hereto, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures.

Madam Speaker, finally, I would like to say that your petitioners’ assertions are further supported by a study that was conducted by the White Ribbon Alliance, annexed hereto as Appendix A. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, the two petitions have almost a similar subject matter. I will ask the Committee on Health to have them consolidated when they are reporting.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The guidance I am trying to seek is: we have brought petitions here and you have guided and passed them over to the respective committees with an instruction that they should be handled within 45 days. However, I would like to inform you that there are petitions from Mbale that were presented on the Floor of this House – it is now more than six months and they have never been handled moreover the law is clear that they should be handled within 45 days. 

When people come to present petitions, they want assistance from Parliament but we hear of nothing and no action is taken. The petitions are presented, passed over to the relevant committees but nothing comes out. For example, the petition by the Nkoma residents about their land that was taken by IUIU in Mbale, the petition by the mayor and the councillors about land grabbing in Mbale, the petition by BCU – there are so many petitions from Mbale but we have never received the findings.

THE SPEAKER: But it is also true that before we closed the Third Session, many petition reports were brought to this House. So, may be they are part of those that have delayed but certainly, the committees have been working. So, we shall urge them to expedite those that are outstanding.

But also sometimes, hon. Members, there are petitions that come in here with one leg to be handled by the relevant ministry and the other by another body. So, all those factors cause delays. So, I think we should try to focus on what Parliament can do because sometimes the prayers are overlapping and so even the areas of coverage overlap. Thank you.

Let me now welcome the members of the White Ribbon Alliance. I think they are here. You are welcome; they have been sponsoring those studies on maternal health.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, the issue of petitions is a very crucial matter because that is how the wider public interacts with Parliament. In some parliaments, there are specific committees to handle petitions – like these ones you have sent to the Health Committee are specific. But because the committee might be concentrating on the policy statements and the budget, it might take time to have the reports.

Could it be possible that when we review our rules we try to explore whether we can create a specific committee to handle petitions so that when members of the public present their petition here, it can be expeditiously handled for them to get answers from Parliament? Otherwise, it is a crucial matter that we must address ourselves to.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think it would be important for the Rules Committee to identify all the areas that need reform so that we don’t leave them for the tenth Parliament. They should be handled by this House.

BILLS
THIRD READING

   THE PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP BILL, 2012

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you may recall, we have majorly completed the Bill but there was a request for a recommittal. I think we are expecting a report. We sent the minister out with a number of Members. Can we have the report first?

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT)(Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, as you recall, last Thursday I requested that Clause 18 of the PPP Bill, as amended by the Finance Committee, be recommitted and that I be given time to consult on this important matter.
As part of the consultation, I held meetings with some Members of Parliament to harmonise our positions and written agreements in order to expedite the passing of the Bill.

Madam Speaker, during the meeting, the following were agreed to:

    1. Clause 6(2) be amended by deleting the words, “...in the budget of the contracting authority” appearing at the end of that clause. The justification is that this is being done in order to enable any accounting officer entering into any PPP agreement or amending any PPP agreement to report back to Parliament at any stage of the process instead of limiting the reporting to only the budget or the appropriation process.

    2. In Clause 6(4) be amended by increasing the penalty from two to seven years imprisonment. That sub clause should therefore read: “An accounting officer who signs an agreement contrary to the Act -”

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I thought that the clause we were handling was 18 but you are now dealing with Clause 6. It was Clause 18 (6).

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, I will be coming to Clause 18 –

THE SPEAKER: No, but why are you bringing in Clause 6? That was not for recommittal.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I was part of this committee with a number of Members of Parliament including Members from the Opposition and Clause 6 is being talked about here because Clause 18 is talking about the involvement of Parliament. But we actually discovered that if we amend Clause 6(2), then that would take care of our demand that we had in Clause 18. So, if the minister goes on to read the whole report, I think Members would be able to appreciate where we are coming from.  

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, we sent them out to consult; let them give us an update where they are.

MRS OGWAL: I just want to give an update here. Madam Speaker, it is true that Clause 6 is very similar to Clause 18 but it is important that Parliament understands the reason why Parliament has taken a position on that; that when the government commits the country in terms of borrowing whether in the future or in the present, already it is a loan and therefore, the spirit of this particular clause is that there should not be any borrowing for the future without the approval of Parliament. Whether the loan is committed today or in the future, Parliament must be involved. 

But I know why the government is insisting on this; the Minister of Finance wants to remove that clause so that Parliament is not involved in any contractual obligation which has a loan implication. I think that is what the government wants but whether a loan is committed today or in the future, Parliament ultimately remains responsible and that is why Parliament must understand the meaning of this. That is the clarification I wanted to give.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, if I may give further clarification, PPP –(Interruption)
 
MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We had agreed that the Minister of Finance would come back here after consulting. The plea he had made to the House was about Clause 18 and that was supposed to be by way of a motion for recommittal. I understand the statement of hon. Ajedra who is making a second party report because he was not in the House even that day. He is reporting for somebody else that he is now beginning to suggest to this House that the recommittal included Clause 6, which they did not even have in their motion. Is this the way we would approach a recommittal, Madam Speaker? Can it be done in a neater way because recommitting by insertion is not in our Rules of Procedure? I need to be guided so that I can follow this matter quite accurately.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the minister is trying to do something which we already know. 

MR SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you instructed, we held a meeting and hon. Bahati was the chairperson, the Attorney-General and some of us who were mentioned here on the Floor were present. So, I beg that hon. Bahati gives the position because he was present in Parliament and he was present in that meeting –(Interjection)– because it was infectious for the minister to recommit Clause 18 as it had a cross reference to Clause 6. So, let somebody give the report and then we shall understand it better if we go to the committee.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, it is not just a question of understanding. We had gone to the third reading and the minister requested for a recommittal on only one clause. So, we cannot now bring in another thing. It was only one clause he wanted recommitted. It was only Clause 18.

MR AJEDRA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker, let me go to Clause 18. The chairperson had already alluded to the fact it was brought up because of the cross-reference. That notwithstanding, on Clause 18 the following was agreed:
    • Clause 18(1), (2), 18(3)(a), (b), (c) sub clause (4), sub clause (5) were retained as provided for in the PPP Bill.
    • Clause 18(6) was amended to read as follows: “An agreement shall, among others, provide for the following:
Clause 18(6) –”
 
MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, may I request hon. Ajedra to remind himself of the Rules of Procedure and the language so that the Hansard can capture it properly. What do you mean by “dash-dash”? How does the Hansard capture this?

MS ALASO: Can the hon. Minister care to circulate the dash so that I can follow him. It is very difficult to conceptualise those things and this is a serious matter of making the law.  A story is told in the Parliament of Ghana when they were making their petroleum laws that actually the House said about a certain provision, “shall not” and then when somebody came with a proposed amendment, they just removed the “not” and that has cost the country billions of money. So honestly, Madam Speaker, may I have a copy of the dashes so that I can follow?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, do you have the copies?

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, as a matter of fact the rest of the sub clauses remained as contained in the Bill. The only sentence that changed was in the beginning. If I may read for the benefit of those who do not have a copy of the Bill. Clause 18(6) originally stated as follows –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, we are not here to joke; we are talking about matters that concern this country where the country is making a law for future investment where money will have to be spent. So, we need to understand the law we are making. Is the minister in order to continue ignoring our plea that the copy of that “dash-dash” be given to us so that we can understand it better? It is possible the minister is not ready; is it therefore in order for him to continue behaving as if he is ready when actually he is not ready? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, unfortunately I do not know why your colleagues abandoned you because he was here throughout the debate. Maybe you need to give it back to your colleague to complete because he was here during the debate.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, I hope my colleagues have copies of the Bill. That is why I said if you had a copy of the Bill, I would make reference to it and also incorporate what has been said on the committee report. (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, you have already instructed and guided that we have those amendments as proposed; if the honourable minister is not able to do it, let him call the person who was here the other day. 

Is the hon. Minister of Finance in order to insist and defy the guidance from the Chair? Does he want this honourable House to operate on assumptions about a business as serious as making a law for posterity? Is he really in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, have you circulated the amendments? Are they on the iPads? [Honourable Members: “No.”] So, can you arrange to circulate them? We can stand over this and do some other work.

MR AJEDRA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. We will submit these and post them on the iPads so that Members can cross-reference from the Bill as well as the report.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Very well; we stand over that. Honourable members, please, join me in welcoming Mr Jonathan Latim, who is up in the gallery. He is a Ugandan student studying aerospace engineering at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University in the USA. He is one of the few Ugandans pursuing those hard courses. You are welcome. (Applause)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC FINANCE BILL, 2012

THE SPEAKER: The motion for the second reading was read, the report was presented and we are ready for debate. Before that, let me allow the Minister for Justice to lay on the Table a report he was supposed to lay a bit earlier.

LAYING OF PAPERS

ANNUAL REPORT 2012/2013 UGANDA REGISTRATION SERVICES BUREAU
	

4.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity. I apologise, I had just gone out. 

I beg to lay on the Table the annual report of the Uganda Registration Services Bureau for the year 2012/2013. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC FINANCE BILL, 2012

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, who is going to handle the Public Finance Bill? This is your Bill. (Laughter)

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, I was just stepping out to make a call to my honourable colleague so that he can come and handle it. He is handling the Public Finance Bill.

THE SPEAKER: No, I will ask the Clerk to do that. You stay here; let us have the debate.

MR AJEDRA: Much obliged. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you received the report and you are free to debate. Does the chairperson want to give a synopsis? You know, the report was presented before we prorogued the Third Session. Can you give a synopsis - just an executive summary because the report was presented? I just want to refresh Members’ memories but it should still be on your iPads.

4.13
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Ssebunya): Madam Speaker, if the Members can look at their iPads, they will see the report we presented from the Committee of Finance, Committee of Natural Resources and the Committee on Budget on the Public Finance Bill, 2012. 

First of all, I would like to thank the members who sat through all those many hours and deliberated on this Bill. What we can say is that the Bill entitled “The Public Finance Bill, 2012” was read for the first time on 8 May 2012. The object of the Bill is to provide for public finance management in Uganda by establishing – 

    • the principles and procedures for a sound fiscal policy and macroeconomic management; 
    • the processes for the preparation, approval and management of a transparent, credible and predictable annual budget;
    • a mechanism for the operation of the contingencies fund; 
    • a mechanism for cash, assets and liability management; 
    • reporting and accounting systems, and an internal audit framework; and 
    • the legal and regulatory framework for the collection, allocation and management of petroleum revenue.

Madam Speaker, this being a technical Bill, I do not know how Members are going to debate -(Interjections)- Okay, they are going to debate but I do not know how because it is in three sections: the petroleum revenues, the fiscal policy and the budget process. 

Honourable members, we have made observations and I am not going to read them all because they are many, but I hope they will be discussed later. I can only note that UWOPA - the ladies with vision - brought in another amendment on gender and equity consideration in public finance management. 

The committees also observed that more often than not, gender and equity issues have been glossed over by Government and yet the process does not involve separate budgets for men, women and persons with disabilities, nor does it necessarily mean a radical reform. So, the gender issues are going to be considered in this Bill. They also proposed that a certificate of gender compliance be issued. 

That is the brief statement I can give to Parliament. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you can discuss any of those issues - revenues from the petroleum, the fiscal policy and the amendment of the Public Finance and Accountability Act. As you are thinking about that, can I invite the Minister for Gender to lay the policy statement for his ministry.

LAYING OF PAPERS

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015 FOR THE SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT SECTOR

4.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (ELDERLY AND DISABILITY) (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for Financial Year 2014/2015 for the Social Development Sector.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the relevant committee for perusal and report back. Hon. Amongi, I will give you five minutes since nobody is willing to speak yet.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC FINANCE BILL, 2012

4.18
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the chairperson has stated clearly that this is a technical Bill and this means that we should handle it technically. This means we should be able to do real work on this Bill so that it is a good law. Limiting time will therefore be a problem. 

By the way, I agree with the Deputy Speaker when he says that Parliament nowadays is not doing the right thing because people discuss issues they do not understand or know very well. The procedural issue that I am raising is that you give us the opportunity to discuss the Bill because it is repealing many laws, including the Budget Act.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable, I do not know why you are accusing me for not giving you enough time. I am seated here but nobody is standing. If it is technical and you do not want to contribute, nobody will force you. If you are not ready, nobody will force you. Let those who are knowledgeable speak about it. No one is going to force anyone to speak.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, according to our rules, at least one-third of the membership is supposed to sign the document before we discuss. This report is signed by less than one-third of the membership. Maybe the chairperson has a reason as to why he is bringing to us this report when it is not signed by at least a third of the membership.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson -

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, in as far as I am concerned, these were three committees and I have lists here of the three committees and the members who signed. Ten members of the Finance Committee signed out of 22 –

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I can confirm that.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: For the Committee on Natural Resources, out of 33, 12 signed and for the Budget Committee, out of 29, nine members signed. Given that the Bill was from finance but the Speaker guided us to handle it as a trio, we managed to get those few members. 

Honourable members, you will note that all these other committees had their own business pending and so we could not force anybody to –

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the chairperson of the Finance Committee is presenting this report, which comes from the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Committee on Natural resources and the Committee on Budget. 

This report is, in principle, a report of the Finance Committee but the Speaker recommended that to make the work easy, the other committees could strengthen the committee on Finance. Is it, therefore in order, instead of owning up to the mistake that has happened by not complying to the rules of having at least one-third sign, for this chairperson to insist that there are no errors? He knows very well that this particular report he is presenting on the Floor of Parliament is only signed by eight people. Is the chairperson in order? I have the report in my hands here and it is only signed by eight out of 29 people. Is the chairperson of the committee in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think that you have not read properly; 12 members have signed on two sheets. There is an additional sheet there. This is the Budget committee. Honourable member, the chairpersons are hon. Amos Lugoolobi and hon. Mudimi. This is the Budget committee, please.  Hon. Amongi, please, take the Floor.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support most of proposals in the committee report. This Bill is a very important Bill because it is amending key laws - the Public Finance and Accountability Act 2003 and the Budget Act. For us who were in Parliament in 2001, we participated in making the Budget Act; so the Budget Act, which was enacted in 2001, is being amended by this. It is also amending the Bank of Uganda Act and the National Audit Act. So with all these consolidations, this is a very vital Bill that is going to help us manage revenue, finances, and ensure accountability for this country. 

The first issue that I want to support in the Bill is the issue of the single account. We have been grappling with the issue of corruption in this country. If you look at the different fragmented mechanisms within which accounting and accountability is being done, the proposal in this Bill of harmonising all the accountability in one single accounts system is important and vital. I want to support it. If this is enacted into law, it will give the Ministry of Finance the opportunity to manage the single accounting system, which is already being experimented, and of course, causing problems. However, this will try very much try to curb corruption. So, I want to support that aspect.

Madam Speaker, the Bill in its original form attempts to remove the power of scrutiny of Parliament in the Budget Act. I want to appeal that the role of Parliament is even embedded in the current two laws related to oil; the management of oil revenue and the scrutiny of Parliament are embedded in this law. So, it is unfortunate that the proponents of this Bill attempted to actually remove the scrutiny and oversight function of Parliament. However, I am happy that the committee attempts to reintroduce some of the functions embedded in the Budget Act. 

I want to support that we retain the Budget office of Parliament; we need to retain the issue of scrutiny and the oversight function of Parliament as embedded in the current Budget Act. Therefore, I want to appeal to Members that when it comes to amendments, we support this. The revenue from oil will start being generated and there is the National Oil Authority that will look at the commercial interest, but we should support the role of Parliament in ensuring that there is an annual budget laid before this Parliament and that the processes within which we conduct the budget remain intact under the law that will be made. So, I would beg that we support the amendments and, of course, some of us will move amendments beyond what the committee has indicated in respect to ensuring that we strengthen parliamentary oversight and scrutiny. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of the gender certificate, this is long overdue. I want to state that the gender certificate was a product of the Committee on Gender working together with the Committee on Human Rights, the Committee on Equal Opportunities and UWOPA. Here it has been proposed that the certificate of gender equity should be issued by the Attorney—General. I want to appeal that we give this duty to the Commission on Equal Opportunities so that they are the ones to issue the certificate of gender equity. This is because the Commission’s role and mandate encompasses issuing of the gender certificate. 

The Attorney-General sits in Cabinet, so for him to issue a certificate of gender equity might not augur well. My proposal is that we should amend the proposal of the committee and allow the current Commission on Equal Opportunities to be the one to issue it because it is their constitutional mandate. Technically, they are aware about the issue of gender equity and they are better placed to deal with the issue. 

Otherwise, I appeal to Members to support the certificate of gender equity because it will disaggregate data in respect to revenue and the budget allocation that will benefit the boys and girls, the women and men equally. Currently, gender budgeting is blind and that is why that proposal has been brought on board. I want to therefore support some of the amendments and I appeal to Members to support the proposals I have made. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, the chairperson of the Committee on Finance rightly observed that this is potentially a complex Bill. Part of the complexity is not in the content of the Bill but in the way the committee handled the Bill. For starters, the Bill was amended twice and the amendments went to the committee. The original Bill was gazetted and out of the 80 clauses, 50 were amended and these were very fundamental. In effect, they changed the structure of the Bill without fresh gazetting. 

At the moment, we have the report of the committee but we do not have a consolidated Bill for Members to use for debate. I do not know whether this does not provide a challenge in aiding Members to debate appropriately and whether the committee chairperson has a consolidated Bill after 50 of the 80 clauses were amended by Government. I guess some of the members of the two committees that considered this Bill might not be aware of these amendments. For me, this is seemingly a whole new Bill from the one that was gazetted and we do not have a new Bill consolidated. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what is the purpose of bringing the Bill here? It is for us to consider it. It goes to the committee and they make changes. What are you afraid of? Do you mean we should just accept what the Government has said and the committee; we just say, “Thank you, we agree with everything”? (Laughter)

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, the basis for my procedural matter is that the report of the committee has a premise. We do not have the premises of this report. The amendments only went to the committee and Members do not have them consolidated. 

THE SPEAKER: Consolidated in what way? 

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, I said, out of 80 clauses, 50 were amended and the Bill that was given to Members was the original Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: The work of Parliament is to make proposals not to accept everything that comes from the Government. So, you can speak to the motion.


4.33
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start from where my colleague stopped, that this Bill was substantially amended; out of 80 clauses, 50 clauses were amended. If a Bill like this comes to Parliament, we are supposed to consult with our people to make sure we are on the same page. However, here we were consulting on a different Bill and the committee was also working on an amended Bill. On that issue, I want to stop there - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, every Member is free to go to the committee. You should have gone there to raise the issues, which you wanted; do not delay our work. I am not going to allow you to create avenues for delaying this work. You either speak for it or against it; no dodging. 

MS ALUM: Madam Speaker, I will go ahead to speak on the Bill. I would like to address myself on the role of Parliament. As we can see, the report of the committee, under point No. 4.2, refers to the role of Parliament. Bullet (a) says, “Approve the Charter of fiscal responsibility”. Bullet (b) says, “Consider Minister’s report on deviation from the objectives in the Charter of fiscal responsibility.” Bullet (c) is about approving the budget framework paper for each financial year. 

We have been doing this. To me, when you read through the role of Parliament up to bullet (e), you find that these roles do not address the worries of this Parliament. We have been so involved in the budget process to the extent that we had a point where if we wanted to reallocate – Remember, we are the representatives of the people and we know what is needed in our communities. If our communities are lacking health centres, for example, we would come here and see what the technical people have done and use that chance to reallocate basing on what we feel the needs of the communities are. In this report, however, I see that the role of Parliament is not captured. So, on this note, I urge my colleagues that once we come to the committee stage, we must analyse the role of Parliament very critically. 

As far as oil is concerned, I feel this is a very good opportunity for us to put forward the issues of gender very carefully because –(Interruption) 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. To the best of my knowledge, approval of the budget framework paper for each financial year involves scrutiny of the figures that have been prepared by Ministry of Finance and other relevant entities. Is it procedurally right for an honourable member to stand on the Floor of this House and begin misleading the House that powers of Parliament are being taken away because Parliament will no longer have an opportunity to look into these budget figures, when actually that is one of the roles that the committee report is providing for? 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, I do not think we should intimidate colleagues. Let Members speak what they want about this Bill. That is why we are here. 

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think that was intimidation –(Laughter)– but all I was saying is that what we are doing here is not sufficient if this bit is removed. That is the message I want to pass on, not that we do not have the opportunity to do that at the moment.

Finally, this Bill will present us with the opportunity to raise gender issues as far as oil is concerned. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. The Bill before us raises fundamental legal issues that require clarity. First, we need clarification on the principle of legislation in this Parliament – the principle of latter legislation or current legislation. I am saying this because this Bill in Part xi intends to amend the Bank of Uganda Act and it also intends to amend the Income Tax Act, the National Audit Act and the Budget Act.

According to the Constitution, Madam Speaker, and with your permission I can read it - Article 162(2): 
“Functions of the bank 
(2) In performing its functions, the Bank of Uganda shall conform to this Constitution but shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority”. That is what the Constitution says, but in this Bill we have the Bank of Uganda Act, which gives independence to the Governor of Bank of Uganda and the board. In other words, the Bill here intends to amend the Bank of Uganda Act, and this Bill is under the control of the Minister of Finance. That is one procedural issue –

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of procedure?

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, with due respect to the Shadow Minister of Finance, first he is a member of the finance committee. Secondly, he did not prepare a minority report on this Bill and yet we went through all these processes he is talking about before getting the report here. He was there with us but he still did not raise all these points.

Is he, therefore, in order to come here and say that the Bill amends this and yet we agreed in the committee that Parliament has the mandate to amend any sections that will appear in the report? It is the wisdom of Parliament to decide on any section of any Bill that is brought to the Floor of the House. So, is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: You know, honourable members, I do not know why very many attempts are being made to stop debate on this matter. Really, hon. Shadow Minister of Finance, you are very senior in this House and you know the Rules of Procedure. Do not try to disorganise the debate and do not try to import things that you should have said in the committee. You want to come here and shine here in the plenary when you have an opportunity to help the committee! (Laughter) No! Let us have hon. Niwagaba.

MR EKANYA: But Madam Speaker, I did not sign the report and this is the document. All these matters –

THE SPEAKER: Please, hon. Niwagaba is now on the Floor.

4.42
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Ndorwa East Constituency, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join hon. Betty Amongi in thanking the three committees for a very god job done, subject to inviting your clemency when we go to committee stage to allow Members who are not members of the three committees to move the amendments they wish to propose.

There are three key areas in this Bill, which all Members of Parliament must interest themselves in. One is the oversight function of Parliament. I thank the committee because it has done a good job to re-emphasise that oversight function of Parliament. However, there are some areas that the committee could have overlooked by delegating some of the oversight functions to the minister, which, when we get to the committee stage, we need to plug. When we bring those amendments, I hope the chairman of the committee will concede.

The other area relates to oil revenue management. When Parliament passed the upstream Act, when we created the National Oil Company, we did not provide for a source of funds, we did not provide for how it will account to this House and like matters. I thought those would be covered under this particular Bill. However, the committee did not seem to look at it. So, when we start handling the provisions of clause 52 upwards, we intend to table amendments to provide for source of funding for the National Oil Company and how the same will be audited and how it will account especially to Parliament.

Madam Speaker, the third area, which is not covered in this report and which we need to be conscious of, is the likely volatility in the market when these oil revenues start to flow in. I hope when we are considering those particular provisions and we come up with amendments to strengthen the market forces and the accountability aspects of the oil revenues, the committee will be kind enough to appreciate.

Otherwise, I agree to the fact that the Bill as it is seems to have been substantially affected by numerous amendments. However, I think this is now the time for us to consider those amendments and others that we will bring forward to ensure that we make a law that will live for posterity. I thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion.

4.46
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I appeared before the committee when I still held the office of the Leader of the Opposition. During that appearance, I raised some issues, some of which I will now re-echo. I also would like to tell the committee that they could have done a good job but as hon. Niwagaba said, issues of transparency, accountability and oversight of Parliament have been emphasised in the report but not in the law. When you just talk about it in the report and you fail to raise it in the clauses, that is a problem.

Madam Speaker, I know that some Members raised issues that 51 clauses in this Bill were amended. I want to think they were not clear on what they meant. I would like to think that what they meant is that the Minister of Finance brought a Bill but immediately, on her own, went and changed that same Bill she had presented here by amending her own clauses to the tune of 51 out of 80. This means that what the members have are only 29 clauses but the 51 were changed by the minister. This substantially changes the Bill. That is what those Members were raising; their point was that what was gazetted, which is what the public knows, is different from what we are discussing.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, in that case, the committee should have come back here to report to the House that what they were given is different, that someone has now brought in something else. I cannot guess what goes on in your committees.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, that is why we are saying that there is a problem with our committees. When the ministry brought those documents, I do not know what they did to them. Otherwise, under normal circumstances –(Interruption)

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, hon. Nandala has on several occasions participated in shaping this Bill and indeed, he even travelled to one of the countries to see what goes on there. To a certain extent, he was in agreement with some of the issues that were raised and reported. He never even disagreed with what was going on; so is he in order to wait and come here today and say that the report was changed several times? Is he in order to waste the time of Parliament by misleading the House that he was not part of the process that we are discussing as far as the report is concerned?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Nandala-Mafabi was the Leader of the Opposition and he was a member of the finance committee even when the report was published. You were a member of that committee; so, you are abusing the rules of this House. You are part of that report.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want it to be clear I was never part of the report. Let me be clear so that everybody knows. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the Finance Committee and I have been on that committee for quite some time. I have been following this Bill from the beginning and I admit that I have been part and parcel of this report.

I want all the members of finance committee who are here and who are honest to themselves to disprove me now if we did not raise this issue of the percentage of the amendments from the committee. The chairman of the committee knows very well that we raised this and the members who were there know about this issue of the volume of amendments. We actually proposed in the committee that if the authors of the report were sincere to themselves, they would have made it appear in the report.

Members were even raising it again and they were advising that we would advise Ministry of Finance to first withdraw the original Bill and we re-table it including the amendments. I want members to come and shut me down on this.

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, you were all here when the Bill was read for the second time; why did you allow the minister to read it for the second time? Why did you allow the minister to read it for the second time?

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is need to clarify processes that normally happen in the committees. When the committee sits to consider a Bill, it is a public hearing and anybody is free to submit. It is true the minister brought various amendments, but I want to say that unless the minister decides to bring another Bill and it is gazetted, then the Bill that we know is the one that was laid on the Table and that is the Bill that we considered. As for the amendments that were brought to the committee, it was up to the committee either to accept or refuse them and that is what we have done.

If the minister therefore insists, then the minister has to come on the Floor. However for us as a committee, we are free to receive those amendments from the minister but it was up to us either to take them or leave them and what we did is what we have done. So, that is what is in the report. It is not true that the committee took all those amendments. It was up to the committee to take them or leave them.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It has been a practice here with many of these Bills that ministers make amendments in the committee and this has been accepted; we have never talked of percentages. The argument now is that 51 were changed out of 80, but we have never talked about percentages. We have accepted the practice by ministers of making amendments in the committees.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when these Bills are brought here, you have a public hearing, you meet stakeholders; if the minister is enriched by what he or she has heard, what is the problem?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, our concern, which we told the chairperson and it is part of the report, is: what is the purpose of gazetting? When you gazette a Bill, then the public will have access to that Bill so that they can make their comments. This Bill amends about three other Acts. If the minister now comes to amendment 80, which is not gazetted, how does the public then participate?

MR LWANGA: Madam Speaker, I am a member of the finance committee. This has been a fairly complicated Bill because it touches three different laws and many times, the minister and her team came before the committee. We have discussed and convinced her many times to change what had been put in the Bill and amendments were made. We do not think that there is anything abnormal about that. Now the Bill is with us here and we are discussing it and there will be more amendments. That is the information that I want to give.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minute we begin bending our own Rules of Procedure, we shall land into serious trouble; this is plenary and not just a committee. We all have views and amendments we would wish to bring. We have a copy of the report of the committee duly signed by the members of committee.  We do not have a minority report by the members of the committee dissenting from this report. For sure, we have no alternative but to proceed and any member with an amendment can bring it forward. If we now begin to change our rules and bend them here and there, we shall land into trouble. Madam Speaker, I beg that we proceed with the report.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I am a member of the committee and I want to assure the House that some of us who participated in the Budget Act did it because we wanted efficiency and improvement of the budget process. That is why when the minister came with the first Bill, not accommodating the whole build of the Budget Act, trying to delete, we refused. 

We carefully went through all processes to make sure that the whole Bill - The practice of this House is that if there is a law, then you bring an amendment to that law. However, because finance had a problem of bringing them in the same law, we said that we must integrate where we feel that the Budget Act is accommodated in the law. That is why when the minister brought 50 per cent, we rejected. We liked at our interest as a House and we said it is transparency and accountability, and not all the 50 per cent brought by the minister was agreed to by the committee. We rejected it. 

In addition to that, the practice of this House is that the committee brings a report here. The mandate to change sections in the Bill belongs to this House. So, I do not see any reasons as to why Members are objecting. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are bound by our rules and practice. The Bill was read here for the second time and you were here; you should have objected at that time. Let us proceed. (Applause) (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)- Hon. Member, you are a member of the committee; your name is here.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am now a member of the committee but I appeared before the committee as the Leader of the Opposition. Two, my brother, hon. Werikhe, said I went with the committee; true, I went with the committee as the Leader of the Opposition to Botswana not as a member of the committee –(Interjections)– Please, listen! I want to tell you, Members, that when we travelled, we discovered many things. Many of these Members who pretend that they go for these missions never go to listen. They are never at those meetings. There are many issues, which I am going to tell you about this. 

Madam Speaker, I want to tell you that I was not a member of the committee and that is the reason I want to raise issues on this Bill. One is on the single account, which my sister has raised. It is a very good one but what does it mean? It means that this will depend on the absorption capacity; so, the ministry which will have the biggest appetite will be the first to finish its money. To be able to have a single account managed well, you need serious safeguards in this law, which I do not see. If you do not put them here, institutions like State House, which have a good appetite, will finish and will come for a supplementary - (Interjections). 

If you have never known what a single account means, let me who knows something tell you. Money will be on one account and whoever wants the money is the one to go and pick it from the account -(Interjections)- Please, you are talking to me but I am one of those who participated in designing these accounts. So, that means we must have safeguards. A single account is very good as it means those who do not perform will be declared inefficient but those who have big appetites will make others suffer, so we must have safeguards on a single account –(An Hon. Member rose_)– Madam Speaker, I am well informed for today. (Laughter) 

The other issue I want to raise is that we should not under look –(Interruption)

MS AMOIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to find out from the former Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, what single account he is talking about. Is it the oil revenue holding account or the Consolidated Fund account? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I think, my mother, I was right to give you an opportunity. Currently, when you appropriate the budget, it means the Ministry of Works will run its own account. So, the money is moved there quarterly, whatever the amount is. So, whether they spend it or not, this is what happens. However, what happens in the single account system is that you will make a request for money and it will be passed onto your account but that money will have to be spent immediately and will not lie there redundant. What this means is that those with big appetites will request for more –(Interjections) – I have said those with big appetites, and you know they exist. 

Madam Speaker, this is why I am saying that you will need safe controls on that. Of course, it is good because those who are inefficient will not have redundant resources on their accounts. That is the best part about this. However, those that are over performing will do so at the expense of even the good ones.

The other point is that the committee raises very good issues concerning asset management and liability but they do not put anybody in charge. We used to have an officer who used to manage assets. If I asked Government now whether they have an asset register, they will not produce it. Why? This is because whenever you spend money, say for buying a car, it is immediately expended as an expense. So, even if they steal it or crash it, - that is why Government will never insure cars - they will just write it off. That is why many assets are being lost.

When I joined the Ministry of Finance in the late 80s, there was somebody in charge of assets. By the way, the Auditor-General of those years used to be called the Auditor-General and Controller. The reasons were simple; when he gave you the warrant to spend on buying a car, for example, he would inform the man who is managing the assets to record that Parliament has bought ten cars. So there would be a state register. That is the reason.

When you talk about asset management here and assets and liabilities, you need to create an office to manage this. If you read the Constitution of Kenya, which I want to quote from –(Interjections)– Yes, you wanted to know; this is about management of finance. Under Article 228, they established an office for a controller of budgets. This person is to control the budget and produce the assets register. If you say that you are following Kenyan and Tanzanian laws and you do not include the person who is going to control assets in this law, it is not right. So, at an appropriate time, we shall deal with that. Of course, these are issues we raised but we have to bring them here again. 

Madam Speaker, we have raised an issue of the office of an internal Auditor-General. This is a very important office. It was started in Kenya and it is now a global issue, but we are making a mistake. The function of the Treasury is very big; it deals with budgeting and accounting but you have now decided to make economists manage the Treasury function. I am an economist, by the way, sometimes. Economists simply make forecasts of how the weather will be as far as the economy is concerned. That is all. You need a financial expert - people who have read books in accounts - to deal with the budget. If we are going to do that function now as we are doing the Public Finance and Accountability Act, it is important that the Treasury is uplifted so that it is able to manage the budget and expenditure.

Madam Speaker, concerning warrants, the reason we are having a problem is that we give Government one warrant and Parliament loses out. I want to apologise to the people of Uganda because in 2003 when we were making this law, we thought it would work but I recall, and you may go to the Hansard, I got up and said, “do not give one warrant; at least let us give four.” They refused. I said, “Okay, let us give two” and they also refused.

The reason we are having mismanagement of public resources is because we issue one warrant. It is important that as we are making the law here, the warrants should be a minimum of four - quarterly. The purpose will be that before I give you the next warrant, you must show how you have accounted for the first one. If Parliament wants to use the oversight function it is talking about, that is how they shall be able to control so that they are able to deal with that. I hope you are noting this. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I want to again thank the committee for talking about control planning and cash flow management of every ministry, but they forgot one item; you can give somebody cash and tell him to go and buy chairs but instead they buy tables. So, if you have got a procurement plan and the cash flow that you have approved is for chairs, before somebody goes and diverts to buy another thing you should get parliamentary approval. That is the oversight that I am telling you about. You may give me Shs 10 million and I spend Shs 10 million but what did I buy? I bought tables instead of chairs. That is another fundamental issue. If you want to enforce oversight as far as the performance of the procurement plans and the cash is concerned, then when any ministry wants to divert from what you have agreed, it must come here to Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, do not overlook the issue of amending other laws. How many laws is this law going to amend? In fact, it is repealing the Budget Act and if you are not aware, you are giving away your powers. They are going to say that they are remaining somewhere but I can tell you that when they are in somebody’s office, they are easily managed there. 

The other one is the Income Tax Act. If we want to make amendments, we should make them in the Income Tax Act. If you want to deal with the Bank of Uganda law, we should amend the Bank of Uganda Act. If you want to amend the National Audit Act, we should do it in the National Audit Act. When you do these things fragmented like this, you are making a mistake. One person will come and say that the Bank of Uganda Act says such and such a thing and Bank of Uganda is independent. So, they will say, “we do not know the law you are talking about; we are independent.” 

So, honourable members, I ask you kindly that where the law is touching on another law, let us push it there. If we do not do it that way, somebody will come and say even the Constitution says that Bank of Uganda is independent and we may overlook some of these issues. So, be careful on that. That is why I am pleading that we should be careful when dealing with some of these amendments.

I have read the Bill and from what I see, some people were trying to create for themselves a comfort zone in the ministries that they are in. I request that when we look at these Bills, as hon. Niwagaba said we should go further to look at them in detail. Let me give an example. I do not want to say that I am against the Auditor-General and I want to say that it is an office of Parliament. They say Auditor-General will be charged one per cent for his fees. I do not mind giving him one per cent but he must submit even two per cent equivalent plans and he can get two per cent. We either make a law saying “up to” or this money might be too much and also be mismanaged. Giving a fixed percentage on a budget is very dangerous. It should be “up to” and not something like that.

Two, we have really talked about the office of the Auditor-General but we have left out offices like that of the Accountant-General. Incidentally, the people who do the work are in the Office of the Accountant-General as far as public finance is concerned. The Auditor-General comes to do a post-mortem. Garbage in, garbage out; so we need to think about the office of the Accountant-General. 

There is no school that says that this accountant is for the Auditor-General and this other accountant for the Accountant-General. You have done ACCA and all of you have done the same papers - it is because of different offices – so why should we remunerate some better than others? Incidentally, we should think about equating the office of the Accountant-General to the office of the Auditor-General because they are the ones who produce the accounts which the Auditor-General comes to audit. 

At an appropriate stage in this Bill, some colleagues and I, who understand what I am saying, will move an amendment so that the office of the Accountant-General should not be treated like that. We have treated the Auditor-General well and I am happy. The Accountant-General is also a “general” and he should also be treated like a “general”. I am aware that there are generals in the army; there is one in charge of our Northern Division, there is a general in charge of Southern Division and I am sure that they are paid the same. So, the moment you are a General, you are a General. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am about to conclude. On revenue management from oil, I want to interest Members about what is happening world over. In Africa, laws are coming up to say that for any loyalties to be paid to Government, the minimum should be 10 per cent. The reason is that the people who sign these agreements, for example the petroleum agreements, are businessmen who know; for us, we do not have competency in that area and these businessmen will negotiate hard. 

Recently, there were amendments that were being proposed in Senegal and the civil society got up and said, “We do not accept this three per cent, unless you pay us 15 per cent.” That was a French company dealing in oil and other things and they said, “We are withdrawing.” The people then said, “Withdraw”. When they discovered that the people were serious, they came back and asked the government if they could make it 13 per cent or 12 per cent instead of 15 per cent. Can you imagine! Here we were paying three per cent. Who signed the contract? The people in government, but the people who raised it were the civil society. In this law, which we are making about management of oil revenue, at an appropriate time we shall say that we start from 10 per cent so that people do not cheat us in as far as revenues are concerned.

Finally, how do you account for money that has come in? Money has to be invested or spent on productive sectors. I am not so sure if oil revenue is different from other money. I am not so sure because all the money should come to one point. So, let the money come to the consolidated account and then –(Interjections)– Just give me an opportunity and I will explain what you are interested in. So, when the money comes –(Interjection)– Whatever it is! 

What is a consolidated account? A consolidated account does not mean that one you are operating alone. Any account that is maintained on behalf of the Government in the central bank can operate as a consolidated fund account. So, we can have a consolidated fund account for petroleum so that the money that leaves that account to the other consolidated fund for expenditure is appropriated by Parliament; so also the one for investment would be appropriated by Parliament. But to say that we want to create special accounts for investments, this means that you are again giving money of the people of Uganda for them to spend anyhow. You have to be careful. 

We can have an account in the Bank of Uganda for oil, which I do not mind, but that account will have our money and we shall call it our consolidated fund. Now, when we want to remove some of it to the other account, we come here and agree –(Interjections)– You have not mentioned it clearly here. (Mr Werikhe rose_) Please, Mukwasi, I have gone to school and have read books –(Laughter)– You know it. Sorry, this is my muko you know; I gave him my sister – hon. Werikhe. What I am trying to tell you is that I have read books and do not worry.  

What I am saying about revenue on oil is that we will have to agree on the one which we will move here and the one that we shall invest. All the investment plans that we are going to come up with must be approved by Parliament. I want to again agree with hon. Niwagaba that when we made the law – I have looked through the law forming the National Oil Company - the reporting mechanism, accountability and funding for the oil company were all not there. We must deal with that part - establishing how the National Oil Company will report. For us, we believe that since Parliament approved it, it should be the one to which they should report to. If they want money for appropriation, again they will submit their demands to Parliament. If you do not do it, we are in problems. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, we want to seek your indulgence at committee level to overhaul the Public Finance Bill. But in my mind – the committee said we shall have a budget office, which is important world over. But if you asked me, I would not agree to repeal the Budget Act. 

I am going to seriously review it so that we have the Budget Act brought here and whatever is enhancing it is placed in the Budget Act. The budget office will remain; independence of Parliament will remain and oversight will remain. Short of that, the Ministry of Finance can use a statutory instrument – they may bring it on a Thursday and the statutory instrument may say, “Delete this” and it shall be deleted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are giving guidance on what? There is no Member on the Floor. Let us hear from hon. Muwuma –(Member rose­_) – no, do not smuggle it in; honourable member, take your seat. 


5.19
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising up to debate the Bill and report of the committee. I have five reasons why I support this Bill particularly on operationalisation of Article 157 of the Constitution, which reads, “Parliament shall make provision for establishment of a contingency fund and shall make laws to regulate the operations of that fund”. Since 1995, we had not operationalised this Article of the Constitution. It is now that the Article is taking root; so I have every reason to support this Bill. 

We have had serious challenges especially on disasters. On a number of occasions, I have been rising here on matters of national importance regarding disasters in my constituency. By us having a contingency fund, it will minimise the issue of coming up with harphazard approaches to sorting out disasters in the country. When we were invaded by Foot and Mouth Disease in Western Uganda, there was an urgent session here in which we were summoned to discuss how we could mobilise funds to settle this crisis in the country. So by having a contingency fund, it will be a solution. 

Madam Speaker, I am a member of UWOPA and a committed one. But in most of our budgets, the issue of gender and equity has been missing. I am happy that the committee and the entire Bill is making mention of this aspect. Most of the ministries including Works and Defence have not come out explicitly to provide for gender. We have PWDs in some ministries who are not allowed to access some offices or positions. So when we look at gender and equity considerations, that will be settled and I feel this law should have come yesterday. So I want to support it along that line.

Madam Speaker, recalling what happened here on Thursday last week; you had to consult various laws on pronouncing yourself about the supplementary that was being sought retrospectively. I saw the challenge you were subjected to, but we thank God you managed to overcome it and did the needful. But this was one of the key concerns because supplementary budgets had become a culture in this Parliament and yet they are prone to abuse. By bringing in the preparation of the budget and approving it by 1st July, I feel it will sort out so many challenges and problems including causing paralysis in government institutions. So by reviewing this, it will help us a great deal. So I implore Members to support this law. Where there are gaps, we can review them. But the law is a necessary evil that we cannot work without. 

Most of the local governments have been suffering with the issue of unspent balances. The centre normally releases money when the financial year is about to end. It is at times deliberate; I am sorry to say so. But three days before the end of a financial year, the resources are sent to the districts. Before they can spend them, the financial year is ending and they have to send back this money. 

But in recent times, no one can explain how this money was spent. So this law is empowering Parliament to revert these resources. In case there were funds already committed to something that was not spent, Parliament will revert these monies. So I feel this law will sort out a number of challenges. Along those lines, Madam Speaker, I have every reason to support this law and I implore Members to place aside their reservations and we adjust where need be and we support this law. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Alaso, you are a member of the natural resources committee – Hon. Karuhanga, hon. Sabiiti, and hon. Bamulangaki. But before they come, this morning I met the LC I chairperson of one of the sub-counties in Jinja and he told me that this miserable Shs 10,000 we are giving them is now being taxed. We want to hear from the minister why you are taxing the Shs 10,000.
 
MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give more information regarding the taxing of the councillors’ payment and that of the LCs. One time, we instructed Ministry of Finance that people getting money to the tune of 100,000 should not be taxed. But these councillors get less than Shs 200,000 but whenever we go to the districts, their money is still being taken – the 30 percent; yet you ruled in this House that they should refund their money. Up to now, they have never got anything. 

THE SPEAKER: I hope the minister will explain to us. 

5.27
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The aspect of oversight and accountability being one of the cardinal roles of Parliament can only be emphasised and cannot be reduced by any Act or Bill proposed. Therefore, I pray that as we debate this Bill, clause by clause, we demand and provide the very provisions that betray that position. 

Madam Speaker, specifically, I would like to address my mind to the certificate of financial implications that is saved in this Bill. Whereas the intention and the essence of demanding a certificate of financial implications from a Member who is presenting a Private Members’ Bill is understood and important, the Ministry of Finance has chosen to use it to curtail and chew the constitutional mandate of Parliament to make laws. 

A case in point is hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi, who while processing a certificate of financial implication over the Tobacco Control Bill, it took him two years to obtain that certificate; and even the Permanent Secretary had the courage of writing to him as to whether he had consulted the farmers. And the question is: is it the role of the Ministry of Finance to manage to what extent Members of Parliament can move Bills in this Parliament? What is the purpose of the lawmakers then?

Madam Speaker, as youth MPs, some time back we also moved a Bill on Capital Venture Fund. But it is now two years and we have been lobbying, persuading and trying all sorts of ways to obtain a certificate of financial implications to no avail. I know there are several members here who have gone there – including the hon. Alice Alaso and many others – and really suffered and gone through hell to obtain a certificate of financial implications.

Madam Speaker, the Constitution gives a period within which the President must assent to the law that has been passed by this Parliament; and if he doesn’t do it within that period, it is deemed law anyway.

I don’t know why we shouldn’t find it important that when we are moving clause by clause, we amend that particular clause that requires a Private Member to produce a certificate of financial implication to the effect that if the Ministry of Finance does not provide it within a given period, that requirement is dispensed with. This is because the constitutional mandate of Parliament to make laws cannot be curtailed by anybody other than this Parliament. It is only this Parliament that has those powers. Madam Speaker, that is what I specifically wanted to address. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, maybe just to respond to you; let me give you the background to the certificate of financial implications. In the Sixth and Seventh parliaments, we used to enact laws here but they would just remain in the books. And the minister would say there was no budget to enforce it. So, it was the House that instituted that measure just to ensure that when we make the laws, there must be capacity to enforce them. That is how we insisted on that certificate. It was our tool to ensure the laws are implemented.

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, if I may just add something. We appreciate that and fortunately, I have consulted you on this and you have emphasized that very position. The problem is that the bureaucrats at the Ministry of Finance have now chosen to use that particular provision in our laws to think that they can actually control Parliament and its mandate of legislation – (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: I would like to re-echo on the guidance you have given, Madam Speaker. Yes, one can bring a Private Members’ Bill and Parliament is mandated to pass it into law. But you need to realise that that law now becomes a cost yet there may be no money in the budget that has been provided for that purpose. So, what happens? That law becomes useless. That is why Parliament had to pronounce itself on that – that is what we avoided by saying that when you bring in here a law, it will be passed but we have to be sure that immediately it is assented to, it has to be implemented. But when you bring it in the middle of the financial year and the money is dispensed, where will you get that money to implement that law? The law will remain redundant. That is why we emphasized that certificate in the Budget; even in that law, we should emphasize the fact that for every law that is passed on the Floor, there must be money and the Ministry of Finance must implement it immediately it has been assented to.

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, just one second to conclude –

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it seems that if you don’t allow information from hon. Alice Alaso, she will not smile at you. (Laughter)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, we do appreciate the spirit of the certificate of financial implications and that is not the problem. The problem is that the Ministry of Finance and the bureaucrats therein are abusing this particular provision. They have all the human resource and the capacity they need to identify to Alaso that your motion to the House seeking to move this or that Bill to remove the death penalty, for example, has the following financial implications: the rope will cots this and that – (Laughter) – the lethal injection is this and we don’t have that provision in the budget and that when you seek to remove that, the financial implication is zero. But what these people do is not that. They just withhold that certificate. They write to hon. Karuhanga, hon. Dr Baryomunsi to say they first go and identify the financial implications. So, I ask myself why I, as a taxpayer in this country pay the bureaucrat at the Ministry of Finance if they have no capacity to cost the proposed Bill and tell this country the financial implication. They can sit on these certificates. 

Madam Speaker, I came to this House in September 2013 but to date I have not obtained that certificate of financial implication. That frustrates our work. That is the clarification I wanted to put across so that my colleague, hon. James Kakooza, does not go away with that false impression that we just want to bring in Bills that affect the budget.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we may have to find - because without going to details, somebody from the frontbench also came here with the same complaint. So, it is not only the backbenchers. So, I think let us find a solution.

MR KARUHANGA: Let me propose a solution, Madam Speaker. The proposal I would like to make is: let’s give the Ministry of Finance a stated period just like we do the Bills that we pass here in Parliament so that within that period if they don’t provide a certificate, Parliament proceeds. You can imagine if a Member wanted to introduce a Bill now and at the back of their mind, they know that it takes about two or three years to process a certificate of financial implication, certainly one will not get the energy to begin bringing any such Bill now. So, we should give them a period within which if they don’t, then we proceed to do our legislation as mandated by the Constitution. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.36
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me also thank the committee for trying very much to bring the three Acts together. But when we first met to look at this Bill, my first question was: What was the rationale behind amalgamating these three Bills together? Was it for convenience, or there were other ulterior motives for this?

Madam Speaker, I have read this Bill about five times but I have failed to understand why the three Acts were put together. For example, if you look at the role of a Minister in the Constitution of Uganda, their duties are clear and well defined. If you look at the role of the Attorney-General and the Auditor-General, their roles are clear. But in this Bill, because of the amalgamation of these Acts, they have shifted the roles of these – when you look at clause 30 on the issue of issuing warrants, you have given it to the Minister. I find it strange. Why should the minister be given this function in the Constitution? Has the minister taken over these functions of the Auditor-General and those of the Accountant-General? That is what hon. Mafabi was talking about. If we do not seriously look at the functions of these three offices and analyse what each office is going to do, we are going to delegate all the functions regarding the management of public funds into the hands of the minister and certainly the work of Parliament is going to be undermined.

Thirdly, when you talk about local governments, Central Government has taken over most of the resources of local governments. We only donate in grants, about between 10 and 20 percent. They have nowhere to get money so when you allocate that money to local governments under the constitution, they are autonomous bodies why do you rush; if you have given out that money and they have not used that money, why don’t you leave that money to remain on the accounts; why do you want to take it back to the consolidated bank account? For what? Because this money should remain in local governments so that the following year they spend that money for the project which they had identified.

Fourthly, the councils, we brought here about five Bills on local governments and the issue of local council pay was raised. They continue to cry; they have no money; they are not part of the grants that we give and they have really suffered. There is no way these councils can legislate, play their rightful roles in local governments unless we fully budget for these councils to make sure that things move right. I have many amendments which I hope to present when we start to make amendments. I hope that is when I will make my amendments.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I ask the members of those three committees to refrain from contributing so that we hear the comments of others. 

5.42
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu East Constituency, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The committee did a lot of work. But I also want to call upon the members that this Public Finance Bill should be given due attention and support because if I have to bring in the experiences from local governments, where I stayed for some time, apart from local governments getting a raw deal in sharing of resources is concerned, there are other happenings that have been going on and I must say that this country has lost a lot.

One of the issues is the delays in implementing the budget. The local governments have had their works starting in December, the budget is read in June, the processes in September then from there we have procurement processes. Implementation in districts has been starting after September, even then the money is delayed in Finance; the releases are not made on time and much of the money is brought around the end of May so that it becomes unspent. We need to deal with this aspect of delays in the new Bill. In that regard, we need to give it a critical look and see that we really fight to make sure our budgets for the centre and local governments start when the financial year begins.

I do not know how superior this law will be in relation to this PPDA Act because if that one is not looked up also, we may not solve much of the issues of delay. So hon. Members, the new process and the intention of this Public Finance Bill is really good and we need to support it.

5.46
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Bullisa County, Bullisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The amalgamated consolidated committee for this job - at the beginning of the upstream oil and gas law, I raised a procedural issue here why the three laws were not being brought at the same time. My point was not understood. I am sure colleagues now understand that there are issues we legislated in the early upstream and midstream Bill which we should have understood especially in the revenue side of the law. Even when we put in place the national oil company, we did not address the financing of the national oil company and this really brings out the gaps of piecemeal handling of the oil and gas legislation.

Again, I support this law so much that I thought that this budget would be implemented under this new arrangement and that we did not need to have a vote-on-account that supplement what the Speaker and Parliament are suffering some of which cannot qualify to be supplementary; they could have been dealt with in the contingency.

The single treasury account is what some of us have been longing for and the concern that the over performing sectors with high appetite can be addressed by two areas: One is that we appropriate as Parliament and because we appropriate, however much you perform you cannot go beyond what Parliament appropriated for you. Also, since there are quarterly releases, those are enough speed governors as far as those who have appetites can be addressed.

I also realise that there seems to be over emphasis on budget and expenditure and possibly eroding the mandate of National Planning Authority and the planning function because the planning function is much broader and should actually be more superior to budgeting and expenditure. I hope Ministry of Finance, at that stage of implementation, does not erode the planning role of NPA, well aware that the NPA, which is the chart of fiscal responsibility, should actually be derived from the MTEF. As we go for the NDP II, I hope that the role and function of planning is kept above that of merely looking at financing the budget of the day and expenditure.

The other concern is the Investment Advisory Committee. As we look at this committee, on purely areas of oil resources, we should not lose the bigger picture of the National Development Committee, which looks at issues of macro-economic stability. You know that NPA, Bank of Uganda and Ministry of Finance working with OPM have a bigger responsibility than the money makers, the bank association, the ones we are now putting in this advisory committee, the Capital Markets Authority, the securities exchanges - they have more financial markets responsibility than the bigger macro-economic stability, which the National Development Committee had. I thought therefore that we should look more into that and make sure that it is provided for.

In addition, the financing of a National Oil Company is going to determine the leverage or latitude it is going to have in as far as defining the development agenda of this country is concerned. I am happy this is coming when we stood over the PPP as this was one of our major concerns. The PPPs are coming here because we are becoming credible. They are coming here because they know we are going to have the money and if we did it without state participation of an equivalent of a UDC, we risk this country without making the necessary fall-back position of a government function. 

So I am happy that Parliament stood over that aspect and that Cabinet has promised that within a short time, we shall have a full-fledged UDC brought here so that we do not just hand over the economy to foreign interests without taking care of the future of the unborn and the country security at large.

There seems to be a mix when we are talking about the contingency fund. People seem to expect even the other big disasters to fit in but with oil and gas, you never know what will happen, God forbid. I think we may have to look into other funds like the environment fund, given the bigger challenges which would come because I do not think the contingency fund we are looking for would be enough to handle a disaster like the ones in some of these countries and I want to say, God forbid. So it is important that we look at some of these funds.

The other area is stabilisation fund. These multi nationals are so sharp that they will never sign a contract without taking care of their own stabilisation and we are entering an economy, which is very volatile. We may have to consider bringing into play the -

5.53
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the committee for a good job done. I would like to raise the following issues with respect to the implication of this law particularly on local governments and especially the sharing of revenues on petroleum.

The first issue I would like to raise is on the amounts that should go to the local governments as royalty. I am wondering why the committee was silent on this matter because in the Bill, the proposal is that the government should retain 93 percent and only seven percent should go to the local governments as royalties.

When you look at the royalties from the other sectors, at the moment, there is nothing less than 10 percent. When you look at the extent of devolution and the responsibilities of local governments, for sure this would be the occasion to help boost the local revenues of these local governments. My own proposal is we should not go for anything less than 10 percent.

The second issue I would like to raise is the question of definition of local governments vis-à-vis the districts. I would like to concur with the committee that we should change it to read local government rather than districts and the purpose is to ensure that even the urban councils, the municipalities and town councils do benefit from those royalties. However, as we debate the Bill, we shall need to define the sharing arrangement between the districts and the urban authorities, which at the moment does not exist.

The third issue I would like to raise is which districts should qualify for these royalties. The proposal in the Bill is that those districts should be specifically mentioned in the law. The committee proposes that this should be left to the minister and I would agree with the committee because in case of future exploration, it would mean that we have to keep on amending the law to bring in the names of new districts. We should leave it so that it is defined by the minister in respect to those districts, which lie in those regions.

Fourth, is the amount that goes to the districts as royalties.  The Bill is proposing that the amount should not exceed the non-oil local revenue of the districts and that if it exceeds that amount, then the excess should be held by the Minister of Finance in trust for that district. This is dangerous. It is a recipe for mistrust and abuse and we should leave it with the district. If they get Shs 10 or 20 million, let them remain with their money.

Finally, on the cultural institutions, I would like to differ from the committee because they propose that one percent of the seven percent should be automatically given to the traditional or cultural institutions. 

At the moment, we do not have an arrangement where the local governments or districts share their local revenues with cultural institutions in the law. The moment we do this, we shall start a process which may not end. We will for example have to answer why not religious institutions because they do provide spiritual services to the people in those regions. Why not the traditional healers institutions because they provide medical services to the people? 

So I think we are going into a dangerous area. I would rather propose that we retain the current definition of royalties whereby it is a share between the local governments and the owners of the land of those - (Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, hon. Magyezi, for giving way. The information I would like to give you on cultural institutions is that actually the Petroleum policy gives some roles to cultural institutions but there is no provision for funding these roles. My thinking was that this particular Bill would give effect on how funding for the roles given to these cultural institution would be carried out. This would be by availing some funding to them instead of legislating no funds for them because that actually means that they cannot play the roles given to them under the policy.

Secondly just like you observed, how are we going to determine the extent of the cultural institutions given the current proliferation because we have a challenge here. Almost every other day, you have an emerging cultural institution and given the impetus of oil revenues, the law must be very particular on legislating revenues for cultural institutions.

The last piece of information is on the districts you talked about. I think that is the problem regarding oil districts because we have two types of districts; we have hosts and those affected by the oil activities. The law is ambiguous on types of districts. We have hosts and those are affected by the oil activities. The law is not very clear and is ambiguous on districts and we should not leave this to the minister to determine. This House must deliberate on the concept of districts and we clearly clarify it for the sake of the law. I thank you.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you for that information. My own view is that whether it is a cultural, religious or traditional institution, all these have roles to play to the population in those areas. Now, if in the current arrangement of inter governmental fiscal relations and transfers we bring into play the cultural institutions – if tomorrow the religious institutions come up and say that they are also playing a role, we will have a challenge. We also have a bigger challenge of the formula we shall have used if they are fighting over regalia, drums and so forth. What happens when it comes to oil and money? Madam Speaker, when it comes to royalties, this for me is an area where we shall need a lot of debate. I thank you very much.

5.59
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I want on the onset to associate myself with the submission of hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi and hon. Mukitale.

I appreciate that whenever we talk about this Bill, it tries to address all other aspects but leaves out one aspect, which is planning. I have had the benefit to read the Auditor-General’s report and they do raise issues of compliance of budgets with the National Development Plan. There is variance and these have been audit issues. I am of the considered opinion, that as we deal with this Bill, we must introduce Certificates of Compliance from the National Planning Authority. 

When you look at the NRM Manifesto as an example, they were drawing it like – actually it was like a transplant of what is contained in the National Development Plan – they made it the NRM Manifesto and actually even failed to follow their own manifesto. 

I can talk about agriculture. When you read the National Development Plan, they talk about boosting agriculture and they say that they will do that by trying to see that the inputs are very cheap, the implements are also very cheap and the NRM transplants that and it forms part of the manifesto. But when it comes to the implementation, they proposed taxes to defeat what is contained in the National Development Plan. 

Having said that, I am of the considered opinion that if we introduce compliance certificates – that before the entity – say you are submitting a budget for the next financial year, they should be required to go and obtain a certificate of compliance from the National Planning Authority so that we pursue the National Development Plan. 

When you look at these visions that we talk about like Vision 2040, what we do in terms of implementation is variance in terms of the Vision 2015/2040. So now one wonders how we are going to achieve that yet our actions do not lead to that direction. 

I want to put this House on notice that I will have an interest to introduce a provision to cater for a certificate of compliance and the justification is simple. I have heard the Minister for Finance on several occasions argue when they bring the supplementary requests that we are still within the three percent. Actually to them, they do not know that the law says that you must be within the three percent - they even bring things that should be planned and budgeted and implemented through a normal budget cycle but to them, it is like as long as there is a gap or space on the three percent, they must spend all of it. To me, it has been very surprising. I know my good friend, hon. Ajedra, to be professional but that argument, to me, has been falling on the way. 

It is not that whenever you have the gap of three percent and say that you are going to buy tractors in the supplementary, the law does not provide for that. There are certain things that they do which do not even form part of their MTEFS or unfunded activities. But because there is a loophole in the three percent, they raise something to show that they spend all the money and cover the supplementary.

I am of the view, Madam Speaker, that the certificate of compliance will cover up that aspect and I want to leave it at that. If you go to the issue of the certificate of financial implication, I sought leave of this House with hon. Rwakajara to introduce a Private Member’s Bill with a minimum wage and the front bench was represented. They all supported the bringing of this Bill including the ministers for Finance. When we wrote to the ministry, they are saying that the President is not clear on this matter. We have heard him on several occasions but it not clear and so wait. 

I approached my good friends, the ministers, and said that since we are colleagues, you are failing me in my work. My people there want to see that we have brought a law and they promised me that I have to be patient so that we organise the meeting of the movers of the motion with the minister and you get direction on where you will go. (Laughter) I was now wondering whether the Executive is taking over the legislative function. I failed to understand what it was all about. But Madam Speaker – (Member timed out.)

6.04
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity and I really appreciate it. I have two major issues and I certainly want to express my passion for the continued and active role of this Parliament in the budget process. I identify with the sentiments in regard to the repeal of the Budget Act and what we shall do to save our active engagement.

The two issues that I have previously raised at the workshop and I wish to restate them now are: One to do with the petroleum revenue investment reserves. I notice that and I am passionate about our oil revenues serving us in this present generation and also more importantly, serving our children and great grand children. I think that it is important that this law is very clear on how the oil revenues will serve those generations after 30 or 40 years from now particularly given the fact that they will suffer the environmental implication of oil extraction and production in this country.

The current position in the Bill under clause 52 (b) with the creation of the Oil Revenue Investment Reserve attempts to address two things; one is the question of micro-economic stability and I think that the Bill pays more attention to ensuring that the monies do not disorganise us which is okay. But the Bill does not provide for security of the same revenue which we are putting aside for our children and grandchildren to benefit from. 

It would look like the benchmarking that we did in Norway, Mexico and wherever you sent Parliamentarians did not appreciate the idea of gazetting and ring fencing that revenue so that if any attempt is made to pick resources from it for current use, there should be a body, maybe Parliament, that should make active decisions on how it is going to be used. Unfortunately, the best provident fund, I understand, is the one of Norway. Ghana has tried to do the same and they are having issues. Maybe we need to push this later on provided we make a provision here but also create for a constitutional ring fencing of this fund otherwise we can have two thirds majority of this Parliament just saying bring all the money and we ‘eat’ it and we shall ‘eat’ that very day and the children will have no future in this oil revenue. 

The second problem that I have which I also raised was in regard to clause 22 of the Bill. The Bill talks about operationalisation of the Contingency Fund. The Contingency Fund is of course under Article 157 of our Constitution and we need to operationalise it but there is an attempt by the Ministry of Finance to make belief and Constitution that is perfect, we need to operationalise it. But there is an attempt by ministry of Finance to make belief and in this I take exception; they want to make belief that with the operationalisation of the contingency fund, they will not be coming back to this House with supplementary. They are hyping it that it will cut budget indiscipline and such related behaviour, which is wrong. 

Madam Speaker, you know that the supplementary provisions are taken care of in the Constitution. Who do you want to imagine that by making this provision in the Public Finance Bill that we are amending the Constitution? I have a fear and I must caution this House that even after we put four percent on the contingency fund, nothing will stop the Executive, particularly the Minister of Finance, from doing the thing they normally do; to come back to this House with a another provision of supplementary. Actually we are just widening the space for abuse; four percent is contingency, then they come with another three percent as supplementary; after all it is constitutional. So I am not yet convinced. They want to make it appear very clumsy; they are telling us that now they will be disciplined. If they were not disciplined with a constitutional provision, how will they be disciplined with a provision in a smaller law, the Act that we are going to pass? 

So, Madam Speaker, I think that it is important that we address our minds to those very important issues. 

Lastly, I want to call on the Members of Parliament to move every amendment, clause by clause, to preserve the Budget Act –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am obliged to terminate this sitting today, now, because I do not want to violate the rights of the Muslim community of this country, mainly Members of this House. So debate will continue tomorrow at 2 O’clock. But hon. Minister of Justice, we are still waiting to hear about why you have not implemented the Transfer of Convicted Offenders Act, in relation to Ugandans convicted abroad. House adjourned to tomorrow, at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 6.10 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 16 July at 2 O’clock)

