
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Official Report of The Proceedings of Parliament

FIFTH SESSION - 17TH SITTING - FIRST MEETING

________________________

Tuesday, 5 July 2005
 
Parliament met at 2.33 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to give you notice that from tomorrow, 6 July 2005 we shall resume sitting at 10 O’clock in the morning. So we shall have a sitting in the morning, in the afternoon and possibly in the evening. So I urge you to free yourselves from other responsibilities so that we can take up the Committee Stage of the Constitution Amendment Bill and consequently there will be no Cabinet meetings.  So, the Cabinet Ministers, you are expected to report here directly from your offices.

Secondly, the core members of the Budget Committee are requested to attend a meeting at 9 O’clock tomorrow together with the Chairs or the Vice Chairpersons of other committees to consider the responses on what was presented to the President on the micro economic framework, indicative revenue and expenditure estimates for 2005/2006 to 2006/2007. We will also discuss a draft format for presentation of policy statements and any other business. But the meeting will last only one hour to enable you come back and deal with the Constitution Amendment Bill. 

The third matter concerns the privileges of hon. Col. Bogere, which was raised yesterday. The Government has directed the Minister of Defence to come here with a statement tomorrow. So we shall receive a statement from the ministry on that matter.

2.37
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine is a point of public importance, something to do with the new districts. I have received several reports from several districts that they are failing to budget simply because a resolution on new districts has not been brought to this House. So, I would like to seek your indulgence. Could the Leader of Government business assure us, because several districts are failing to plan simply because some new districts are supposed to be created.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the question of the new districts, the minister assured us yesterday that he would be coming with a resolution towards the end of this week. So, let us wait for him.

2.39
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of public importance. Some time back we did raise concern of members of the public about the famous employment opportunities available outside this country. I have been receiving complaints from members that they are extorting money from those who registered in the President’s Office under Naava Nabagesera. These complaints have also appeared in the papers. 

My request at this moment is to ask the Leader of Government Business to help us and either bring or direct either the Minister of Foreign Affairs or of the Presidency to bring a statement to this House. They are extorting a lot of money from so many people among the public and it has reached an alarming stage. Some people have lost as much as US $1,000 to this group. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.40
MR AVITUS TIBARIMBASA (Ndwora County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking guidance about the immunity Members of Parliament have when they are talking to the public. This issue concerns hon. Otto whom I read in today’s New Vision, referring to the President of the Republic of Uganda as a fool.  

Secondly, on Wednesday he was quoted on Radio One as having said, “The President of the Republic of Uganda was a homosexual; how can he be loved by most men in Parliament?” [Mrs Okurut: “My God!”] Madam Speaker, we must develop a culture of respect for one another because in philosophy if respect is from one side, it does not hold water. We must refer to each other as “I” rather than “it”. We all come here from different constituencies and I do not think all of us came with 100 percent acceptance. Assuming that some of us have some people in our constituencies who never voted for us and whenever we go they are hindering our progress, I do not think it would augur well with the role of a Member of Parliament from any constituency.  

Some people can be referred to as those that were brought up, while others grow up. I do not know the state or the situation our hon. Odonga Otto is in. I do not know whether he was brought up, I do not know whether he grew up. Maybe if he were here he would be asked to give a view about that. Civilised people respect each other. Even if you do not agree politically, even if you have divergent political views, when you talk about a head of state you should talk about a head of state with humility.  

I want to conclude by saying that Odonga Otto may not be the only victim on this matter and I want you to guide this House and advise whether such utterances would not embarrass some Members of Parliament if the long hand of government would reach them and they are rounded up. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the privileges of this House protect you when you are on the Floor of this House or in the committee, on Parliament work.  As long as you are doing your own things you are subject to the law like anybody else. Privileges are only here and in the committee.

2.44
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Further to your Communication from the Chair regarding the forthcoming programme on Constitution Amendment, I am seeking your guidance or clarification on the proposed amendment when we come to Committee Stage, or the Third Reading.

I am told that only those proposals, which had been submitted to the Committee of Parliamentary and Legal Affairs, will be considered at the Committee Stage and no other. I am just wondering if there is any element of flexibility that other proposals can also come up and be incorporated subject to submission to your office prior to the sitting of the House? Is it airtight that we cannot bring in any new proposals except those, which have been submitted and probably rejected or passed by the Parliamentary Committee?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, tomorrow morning we shall issue comprehensive and detailed guidelines on how we are going to proceed with the Constitution Amendment Bill. I do not want to mix it up with other things. We shall have a comprehensive statement on it tomorrow.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 26 OF 2005 TO THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

2.44
MR LULE MAWIYA (Kalungu County East, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

“Could the Minister explain:
(i)	Why 33 Kyambogo University students were dismissed after staging a peaceful demonstration on the 13th June 2005 over their unpaid leaving out allowances?
(ii)	Why students could not be given an opportunity to defend themselves in accordance with the principles of natural justices?
(i)	What is government’s stand on such action and what does the future hold for those students?”

2.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE, HIGHER EDUCATION (Mr Simon Mayende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, I would like to thank my colleague for raising this issue but I begin with some corrections.

One, in the Ministry of Education we are not aware of any peaceful demonstration that occurred on the 13 of June this year. However, we are aware that there was one that occurred, not really a peaceful demonstration, but there is a demonstration that occurred on the 1st of April 2005. I do not know whether that is the one he is referring to but if it is, I want to respond as follows:

The Vice-Chancellor has indicated that there was a demonstration on the premises of Kyambogo University on the 1st of April 2005, and subsequently a committee was set up that looked at the happenings of the day, and they have come out with a report. They indicate that the actual number of people who are recommended to be suspended are 34 and not 33, and they are supposed to be suspended because they did not only demonstrate but locked up members of the management in the administration building from 2.00 p.m. to 5.00 p.m. It is only until after Police from Naguru Police Station were called and broke doors that management staff that had been locked in that building were freed. 

The students did not have the right to lock up members of staff. The committee did interview the rioters individually and in their testimonies to the various interviews they accept that they locked up staff in the main building. I want to point out that they have not yet been dismissed. What the member could have heard was a recommendation from the student’s welfare committee to the University Council that is expected to take a decision on the 7th of July. It is only after that that the suspensions can be confirmed or -(Interruption)- it is only then, after the council has considered this matter that the decision can be upheld or altered as will be found appropriate.

The next question is, “why should the students should not be given an opportunity to defend themselves in accordance with principles of natural justice?” I want to begin by saying that the students were actually given a chance to defend themselves in accordance with the principles of natural justice. Kyambogo University Council, which constituted the committee, is composed of several members who met from the 9th to 12th May and then 22nd May and 23rd June. In their meetings, each of the students affected was invited, interviewed and they gave a personal presentation on the demonstration, which is recorded. 

Each of the rioters was asked to defend themselves. They were given that option. Some admitted to having thrown stones, for instance, others to having attacked members of staff physically, and using unbecoming language during that time. So, it is not true that they were not given a chance to defend themselves.

On what the Government stand on such action and what the future holds for those students, we are concerned in the ministry. We are all aware that each society is covered by rules and regulations. I am sure as hon. Members of Parliament we do not want to have a situation where there is anarchy. We are here to make laws that govern our society for the peaceful living and environment for everybody. 

Therefore, the Government of Uganda through the relevant sectors and departments strives to develop good citizenship and good citizens. In order to achieve its vision and mission for national development, there should be order in all institutions of learning, including universities. Students of Kyambogo University should be managed according to the university regulations. 

Indeed the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act section 111(f) states that; “The University Council shall provide for the welfare and discipline of the students.”  I want to say, council is yet to meet and when they meet the final decision will be taken and it is only then that we can know the fate of these students. Thank you Madam Speaker, and honourable members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is a question, and ordinarily we would start with the supplementary but in this House we have a Member of the University Council of Kyambogo. I would like him to say something before we would go to the supplementaries.

2.51
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I happen to be a member of Kyambogo University Council and I would like to confirm that the council is due to meet on Thursday, 7 July 2005 to discuss this matter in great detail. 

Having said that, the root cause of these problems is actually from the Government and the Ministry of Education. It is true that we do not have money; we always tell universities that we are going to sponsor so many people as Government, but the money does not come in time and these public universities, as the Chancellor of Makerere University would also like to confirm - I think he will confirm - the money that government is supposed to be sending to students as their allowances does not come on time and these universities have resorted to running institutions on money, which is provided by the private students.  

Actually, if the private students were not there, these universities would collapse because the Government is not able to remit money on time for the allowances and so on and so forth. So, we must take steps to ensure that money, which is supposed to come from government for students on public sponsorship, should come on time so that we do not have these types of strikes. Kyambogo University has behaved very remarkably. I want to confirm this because we have handled many issues which have not come out in the press and if we are given time we will handle this matter as maturely as we can.

My last point is that the minister also knows that as of now, money for capitation grants to secondary schools has been drastically reducing and there has not been a sufficient explanation to these schools as well. So we are having problems even in running government secondary schools with reduced capitation grants and the question is, where has this money gone? Let the minister come out and explain this. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.55
MR LULE MAWIYA (Kalungu County East, Masaka): Thank you very much. I would like to thank the minister for his response. I would say right from the onset that I do not condone any indiscipline in higher institutions of learning. However, there should be honesty on the part of the minister because he should have got the facts very well.  

My first supplementary question is, is the minister aware that the Vice-Chancellor took a one man’s decision when on the day these students were supposed to start sitting for their exams he summarily dismissed 34 of them, and they all missed their exams? These students were not taken to be a threat to the university and they were very calm, so I would like an answer to that.

Is the minister aware that the Police locked up everybody who was there, including the Dean? Is the minister aware that among the arrested were eighty private students, meaning that the Police did not even know who was involved in the riot as it is said, or in the demonstration, and all of them had to be sorted out from the police cells? I would also like him to explain that.

Another one, is the minister aware that the Vice-Chancellor was one of the causes of these students demanding for an explanation from the administration because he owns a hostel nearby? Actually he had just sent out the students when they also thought that it would be prudent on themselves to come and inquire about their delayed living out allowances. So, that also prompted that simple and so-called demonstration, which actually just wanted an explanation as to how far their living out allowances had gone. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am beginning to be a little uncomfortable about this matter because we have heard from the minister and the board member has confirmed that there are processes, which are on-going. I think if we continue with this debate we are going to prejudice the meeting of 7 July 2005. I would rather we left this until the hearing is completed, because I do not know what else the members are going to come out with. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I think it would be quite unfair for us not to comment on this important issue because it is not only taking place in Kyambogo. I was in my constituency over the weekend and UPE funds have never got there. They last received the funds in March and the complaint is still the Ministry of Education. So we do not know where the problem lies. If these young boys and girls knew their rights maybe they would also have gone on strike. Therefore, you give us an opportunity to comment on this important matter.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I totally agree with your guidance. As you know I was on the brink of standing up. Many of you are parents, who should not be a cause of problems. What I suggest is that we let the processes of natural justice proceed without being interfered with. There will be an occasion after that process is over when you can raise any question regarding any public university, or even private universities. I would like to appeal to hon. Members of Parliament to accept the wise advise of the Speaker. Thank you.

DR OKULO EPAK: I am seeking your guidance and help. The question I want to raise is not exactly related to the matter –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not related to Kyambogo?

DR OKULO EPAK: Not Kyambogo but it is also education and it is very urgent. I was in my constituency over the weekend and I learnt that Aduku Secondary School has been closed. When the parents were called to the school they were not satisfied with the explanation given by the school administration, but the school remains closed up to now.  

Aduku Secondary School is one of those reasonable schools in the Lango sub-region where we occasionally get good passes. I really beseech the ministry to investigate and find out so that this closure is not prolonged, causing suffering to the students whose results we normally want to rely on. I want to thank you for giving me the chance and I wish the minister could respond whether they are going to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is okay to talk about the capitation grant, but let us solve this matter of the university. The meeting is two days away and I will give you time, immediately we finish those other amendments, to come back to this issue.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I do not wish in any way to disagree with your guidance. I whole-heartedly agree but in situations where the input of deliberations of Parliament can form an input for the people who are going to deliberate on this issue, why should a decision elsewhere prevent the House from making deliberations on an issue that has been competently put before us?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether you have not understood the subjudice rule. The reason we have it in our Rules of Procedure is so that we do not interfere with other organs or influence their decisions. You might influence a board member to do things they would not have otherwise done. Why don’t we wait? It is only two days away. I have said I will give you time. They will have to come back and report the outcome of the meeting of 7 July 2005. Thank you. 

Honourable minister, address the general issue of capitation raised by hon. Byabagambi and hon. Epak on Aduku Secondary School.

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE, HIGHER EDUCATION (Mr Simon Mayende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In response to what hon. Byabagambi and indeed hon. Nabwiso raised, it is true that capitation has been slashed. We are also trying to get an explanation from the Minister of Finance and I am sure as soon as we get it we shall come and give it to colleagues, Members of Parliament.

The UPE funds face the same problem but we do hope that the matter will not be prolonged because we have been promised that the Ministry of Finance is sorting out the problem that occurred.

On Aduku Secondary School, I am just learning about it that it has been closed and we have noted it. We are going to investigate and find out why, and I am sure Aduku Secondary School will be reopened in the shortest time possible.  Thank you.

MR WESONGA KAMANA: I want clarification from the Minister of Education regarding the capitation grant having been slashed. Do schools receive direct payments from the Ministry of Finance or they route payments through the Ministry of Education?

MR LOLEM MICAH: Madam Speaker, mine is a bit different from but still under the Ministry of Education. You know in some districts there are no A’ Level secondary schools. I want to know the criteria of choosing students under the quota system because I got very clear guidance that where there are no A’ Level schools students can go and study elsewhere. 

I come from Nakapiripirit District where there are no A’ Level schools. Students go and study in the neighbouring districts of Mbale, Tororo and Moroto. I only saw 9 students from Nakapiripirit but in my constituency I have got 4 boys two of whom got 16, one got 13 and one got 12 points respectively but they are not registered anywhere in Uganda; neither in Kyambogo nor in Makerere. I want to know, what was the criterion of choosing? Was from the Ministry of Education, Makerere or at the districts, and if it is from the district then I smell a rat. There are some problems, which I know.  There are ethnic problems. 

I want clearance from the Minister of Education, what was the criterion of leaving out my four students? I have got their names and points, two of them studied in Tororo Progressive Academy. Their names are: Moteria who got 13 points, and Lokiru who got 16 points. What was the criterion used in the quota system? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I have received queries from three other members on this matter of districts, which do not have A Level schools and the students have to take the exams from somewhere else and they are not satisfied with the numbers and would like to get their quota of 16. A number of members have come with that complaint. So, I do not know whether you are in position to explain it today or to come back to us.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I would like the minister to tell this House when he came to know that UPE funds were slashed. I am asking this because since December UPE funds take three months without being remitted. So, I would like to know when it came to his knowledge, as a minister. When was it slashed?

MS TUBWITA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  There are some students whose names appeared both on the first admission lists of the university, and in the quota system, which made the districts lose out some positions. Could the minister clarify on that because we needed more intake than reducing the numbers? Thank you.

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, I am requesting the minister in charge of secondary schools to clarify –(Interjections)- to this House whether he intends to complete the work, which was started by hon. Wabudeya about government arranging financial loans from banks to needy students in the university and secondary schools. It is a very desperate situation as I heard from what hon. Nabwiso said, and this clarification would do a lot in lowering the problems of strikes and the issue of money for these students. 

I am sure many Members of Parliament are being approached for financial assistance in their areas. We are not at all capable of helping university and secondary school students and yet we were promised by hon. Wabudeya that the policy was going to be worked on quickly and sold to the students. I would like to be clarified whether this is in the pipeline.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, since the question now is about education, I want to seek clarification from the Minister of Education. There has been a major policy shift about sponsorship of students at the university and a lot of focus is now put on the science subjects. There are so many secondary schools in Uganda, which do not even have a single science teacher, not a single laboratory and yet these are government-sponsored schools. Government has further put a seal on recruitment of teachers. 

What advice would you give to such schools and what is the measure that would mitigate the loss that these students would face in the circumstances that they do not have science teachers? They do not have science facilities yet there has been a major government shift out of which these students would also have loved to benefit. Thank you very much.

MR MAYENDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In response to hon. Wesonga Kamana, yes, we do have an arrangement where funds are remitted directly to schools. It eases the work. So, we get to know how much is to go, and it goes directly to the schools.  

Hon. Lolem, on the quota system, if it is the case that we have been discussing with hon. Lolem, I already have the names that he is asking about and I have asked our technical persons to find out why.  

I was, however, also told that the quota system has another baseline. In other words, it is not automatic that whoever comes from a district and did senior six qualifies to go for a course or a university of his or her choice. You have to meet the minimum standards for that particular course, and the individual choices therefore matter. If somebody got 12 points and yet the course for which he or she applied requires 20 points, you do not go because it is quota system. But for those particular individuals, we are investigating to find out why they were not taken and I will definitely give hon. Lolem the answers. I will also come back to report to Parliament because my colleague has raised it on the Floor of Parliament  –(Interruptions)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Minister, I remember very well that when you are applying to Makerere University you fill about three choices. [Mr Tibarimbasa: “Four choices.”] The first preference, the second and third, so that in case you do not qualify for the first, you are given the second and if you do not qualify for the second, you go to the third. If you did not qualify for the third then the university could put you where you fit. In fact I am being corrected by hon. Tibarimbasa who was a University Secretary and is saying that there were four choices. So, how come that you are talking of only one choice that if you do not qualify for the first choice then you are considered not eligible?

MR MAYENDE: Thank you, hon. Okupa. When I talk about qualification, I mean the minimum qualification including that for the third choice. Indeed I am suggesting that the cases you have talked about where people have complained should be more particular because we are now dealing with individual cases and not generalities. I would request that the particular cases coming up be submitted to the ministry so that we can deal with the merits and demerits of each case because generalities may not help us on this Floor of Parliament.

Hon. Byabagambi, yes, releases from the Ministry of Finance are mostly in three monthly quarter releases and sometimes funds for the previous quarter are not released in the next quarter. So, we knew about UPE being slashed in April and we have been pursuing the matter ever since.

Hon. Tubwita, I did not understand what you actually meant because she talked of first admission and second admission. I hope she is not referring to what the Observer put out. But if you are referring to what we call meritorious admission, where students have been admitted purely on merit for the courses they applied for, then there is no way that those very individuals will turn round and be in the quota system.

MS TUBWITA: Thank you very much, Mr Minister but in Nakasongola District there are two names, which appeared in the first admission on merit for the courses they applied for, and then when it came to the quota system, their names appeared again. Yet we had other students who performed well and could have got the opportunity of appearing in the quota system. So, they were admitted twice in the –(Interruptions)- yes, maybe I will come to your office because this is true and even the students are there.  

MR MAYENDE: Thank you, hon. Tubwita. That is what we should have done so that we handle this matter directly. But I will definitely crosscheck and report back to Parliament.  

Hon. Gagawala has reminded us of a programme that was started during hon. Wabudeya’s time. Yes, we are continuing with this programme but it needs meticulous discussions and negotiations. Probably it will come to a conclusion when I am still Minister for Higher Education.  

Hon. Dombo, yes, there is a major policy shift, which was vehemently supported by the Members of Parliament. We are supporting more science students than arts students. The question is, what are we doing about it when we do not have enough laboratories out there? I want to say government has not sat back. In anticipation that we are having this major policy shift we have concurrently started constructing laboratories at various schools. 

Indeed as we were carrying out faster voting for the Constitution Amendments Bill, the Ministers of Education were upcountry on this particular exercise. We were ground breaking for the science laboratories that were being constructed in various girls’ schools across the country. In addition to that we were also providing libraries for the various schools and negotiating for additional money through ADB III so that we can have additional laboratories and libraries in various schools across the country.  

I want to correct the impression that hon. Dombo gave that there is a government seal on recruitment. No, Sir. It was lifted and currently teachers are being recruited with emphasis on science teachers and very soon over a thousand teachers will be put on the payroll and we do hope, believe and trust that this exercise will continue henceforth. Thank you. 

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence. This is very important for the minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you did not stand up the other time and I asked the minister to respond. We cannot go back and forth.

MR ANANG-ODUR: I just want to give information. I do not want any response from him. He has an assignment to come back to report to Parliament. This will help in that particular respect.  

I have just come back from home and the problem we have got in Aduku goes beyond the Ministry of Education, which is why I want to raise it. When I went home I found that there has not been electricity for the last three months. The Headmaster of Aduku Secondary School, the Principal of Aduku Uganda College of Commerce (UCC) and myself have written several times to the company and the line minister. We had to resort to going to the office of the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) of Apac to see how government could help. This is very important because there are a number of schools: we have got two secondary schools in Aduku, we have got the UCC and a number of primary schools.  

Lack of power is making administration of the schools very difficult, especially at night, and as the minister goes to Aduku, let him consult his colleague. Of course UMEME took over power so that we could get better services but it looks like it is going to be the reverse and unless this matter is solved, the situation is going to persist. We request government to take immediate action to help the schools, businesspersons and residents of Aduku Township. Madam Speaker, I am sorry I had to take you back but I thought this was very important as the minister carries out his work.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that information is very important but I would encourage the backbenchers to interact with the colleagues on the frontbench. You just walk down and in five minutes you are at the Ministry of Education Headquarters. You can solve some things in the office without having to come here - because now the minister has no answer.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION
OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR CECILIA ACHADU OTIM

3.24
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Dr Cecilia Achadu Otim. 
“WHEREAS Dr Cecilia Achadu Otim was the first woman cardiologist in Uganda; 
AND RECOGNISING that the late Dr Cecilia Achadu Otim has served her country with distinction, first as a physician and later as a cardiologist at the Uganda Heart Institute; 
NOTING with shock and grief that the late Dr Cecilia Achadu Otim passed away at the tender age of 34 in Mulago Hospital on 2 July 2005, an hour after undergoing surgery to deliver a baby girl;

NOW THEREFORE this House resolves to:
1.	Collectively recognise the distinguished services rendered by the late Dr Cecilia Achadu Otim to this country during the short period she has lived.
2.	Convey its sincere condolences to Mr Otim, the bereaved family, the staff of the Uganda Heart Institute, and indeed the patients of the late Dr Cecilia Achadu Otim.
3.	Urge government to commit more resources in terms of specialised training and equipment to the Uganda Heart Institute in recognition of the cause for which the late Dr Cecilia Achadu Otim lived.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

MS MARY AMAJO: Seconded.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is not very easy to talk about Dr Cecilia Achadu Otim. 

Dr Cecilia Achadu Otim was born in 1971. She hails from Okoboi village, Ngora County, Kumi District in the Teso region. She has, therefore, lived a very short but very fruitful life of only 34 years. Mr Amojong Amuge, a single parent, brought her up. 

Dr Cecilia Achadu Otim started her education in Arusha, where she attended nursery school in 1974. She later on joined Madera Girls’ Primary School, where she sat for her Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE). But being a very brilliant girl she did not even study primary five for a complete term; they made her skip it. Later on she joined Mt St Mary’s College, Namagunga from 1983 to 1988, and Makerere University where she undertook a Bachelors degree in Human Medicine, finally graduating in 1994. 

We want to state for the record that Dr Cecilia Achadu Otim was a very bright girl. While at school Dr Cecilia Achadu Otim was also a very disciplined, very organised and very hardworking girl. She was very friendly to all those around her. At the Complex Hall, then CCE, so many friends always flocked her room because she was a very friendly person.

Her medical career: before graduation she did her internship at Rubaga hospital, and then got her first posting to Kitagata Hospital in 1995. She finally came back to Mulago Hospital in 1999. In the year 2000 Dr Cecilia Achadu Otim did her Masters in Public Health and later on pursued other specialised training in Japan, Germany and South Africa. From 2003 Dr Cecilia Achadu Otim has been working at the Uganda Heart Institute and until the time of her death, she was a Cardiology, Senior Registrar, at the Uganda Heart Institute.

Dr Cecilia Achadu Otim was among the only four cardiologists Uganda has. She was also the first Ugandan woman to venture into cardiology, and has been the only woman serving in that field in Uganda. By the time of her death the Uganda Heart Institute had earmarked her for further training in India in preparation for a start-up process on open-heart surgeries when the equipment will become available. 

The other thing about Dr Cecilia Achadu was that Cecilia was a very committed and God-fearing Christian woman. Her life was principle centred; she honoured God and served humanity very diligently. 

She was not only very beautiful but Cecilia was also a very kind woman. In they year 2000 Dr Cecilia Achadu got married to Mr Alex Otim and she has had a very flourishing and fulfilling family life.

On Saturday the 2nd of July 2005, at 5.00 p.m. Dr Achadu underwent an operation, which helped her deliver a baby girl. Unfortunately, an hour later, at 6.00 p.m. she passed away and as we talk now her burial is going on in Pallisa. But it is unfortunate that the post mortem report has not yet been availed to the family so the cause of her death has not been established.

I want to conclude by saying that Cecilia, as she was fondly referred to, leaves behind a four day old baby named Cecilia Achadu. She also leaves behind a husband, an old mother and a host of many other dependants. In Teso, Madam Speaker, we would ordinarily say, “Abwanga amoti okek” meaning that somebody went to fetch water and when she was about to enter the house the pot broke. But I want to say that in Teso, we also bless our love to others and when we want to bless them we say, “emuria kolya” that it is the grass that creeps that lets it prosper. In that case it is my prayer that the legacy, the commitment, the love that Dr Cecilia Achadu portrayed and offered to this country will leave beyond this dark hour. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.32
MS MARY AMAJO (Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to second the motion to pay tribute to Dr Achadu Otim Cecilia, the first woman cardiologist in this country. I second this motion with a lot of attachment because first of all this is a woman. 

Secondly, we are old girls of Mt St Mary’s Namagunga, the fruits that service this country very diligently.

Thirdly, I am a Woman Member of Parliament and we hope that when we sit here and legislate the fruits of our legislation go a long way into supporting more women to reach the kind of positions that Dr Cecilia Achadu has reached.

I know more about Dr Cecilia Achadu than knowing her physically because a lot of people appreciated her and the excellence that she showed in whatever she did be it as a woman in society or as a professional woman, as a doctor.  Her death is a great loss to the country, to the people of Teso, to her family; a family, which has struggled to see her where she is and we hope that the good Lord will help the family - the mother especially - to go through her loss.

Everyday women die, people die, but this one deserves what is happening now in Parliament because she was special. Especially knowing that she came from an area of the country, which is now socio-economically going downwards. Once upon a time Teso was in the limelight, people were rich, and they were many. Now it is very difficult to send a child from Teso to school, especially the girl child. You can imagine how many more Cecilias would emerge if the trend of poverty prevailing in Teso were not there. 

We regret, we mourn; we really look back at those days when we could afford school fees very easily. The plight of people in Teso and especially the women in poverty is something that we need to address so that we get more children in school. I would like, nonetheless, to appreciate the efforts of government, especially in poverty eradication and in terms of supporting women by encouraging them to go to antenatal clinics. 

This morning as we were talking in UWOPA I extended special thanks to government for the scheme that it has started in providing mosquito nets to expectant mothers. That intervention has gone a long way in making sure that women who had abandoned hospitals and clinics are now going back. So, I would like to thank government and as a Woman Member of Parliament we pushed for it, the women have responded and it is yielding a lot of good results. I was told in my District of Kaberamaido that some women go for antenatal before they have reached the prescribed three months because they are so anxious to get mosquito nets. That way you capture women into getting antenatal care in the clinics and, therefore, reducing on the infant mortality rate and death during delivery. 

But improving on the health sector alone is not enough. We have to be more serious on poverty, making sure that the people have the tools to fight poverty. So, in paying tribute to Dr Cecilia Achadu, I would like to once again say she was the first woman cardiologist and she died of a cause, which could have been prevented. May we all be more committed to making sure that whatever is supposed to be in place, whether it is in health or in any other sector, is in place? 

Well, we do not have the post mortem report yet but everybody knows that childbirth is a natural process and usually when something happens we tend to assume that it is due to something missing in the process. I would like once again to say, may her soul rest in peace and may her family have the courage to bear this loss.

3.34
MR BERNARD MULENGANI (Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise up to support the motion. As we have heard from the motion, Dr Achadu was the only woman cardiologist, among the four, that existed in Uganda. She died at a tender age of 34. This is very painful not only to the family and the nation but to the age-cohort that she belonged. We shall indeed miss her expertise.

The Heart Institute at the moment is trying to expand and this, therefore, is a great loss to the nation and the staff as it is not easy to get highly trained people in specialized disciplines like the one she had. It may take this country another decade to replace the expertise of the late Dr Cecilia Achadu Otim. The Heart Institute today has engaged in a mission to deal with preventive and curative methods: education, rehabilitation and research of cardiac diseases, of which I believe, she has been a resource in ensuring that this mission is attained. 

We keep on reading of people seeking assistance in the newspapers due to heart problems. We believe that if she had been given an opportunity to live she would have assisted Uganda to alleviate such problems of people seeking money to fly out of the country for medication. Madam Speaker, Dr Achadu died at Mulago Hospital an hour after undergoing surgery to deliver a baby girl. To me this is among the many maternal mortality occurrences happening elsewhere in this country. 

According to the 2000/2001 Uganda Demographic and Health Survey, child bearing poses many risks in Uganda with an estimated 500 women dying of child birth related complications for every 100,000 live births. Common causes of maternal mortality are postpartum haemorrhage, lack of the most important medicaments in obstetrics and at times negligence by staff in hospitals, lack of communication, transport and basically, general health services rendered.

I am aware, Madam Speaker, that the Government through the Rural Extended Services and Care for Ultimate Emergency Relief Rescue, has provided for traditional birth attendants. This programme was launched in March 1996 on a pilot basis in Iganga to reduce the high mortality rate. It is true that Africa has the highest maternal mortality rates in the world. Experts in reproductive health have warned that situations could worsen in the next decade if no immediate remedial actions are taken by African Governments and development partners. The exodus of medical personnel to overseas destinations worsens the situation. 

Lastly, maternal mortality is not simply fatal but often a cruel and harsh lived experience for Ugandan women. May her soul rest in eternal peace. I support the motion.    

3.44
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, I support the motion and on behalf of the Government, would like to convey our condolences to the bereaved. One day I was not feeling well and so I went for a check up. The late Dr Rutakingirwa told me that I could not go back home. I was admitted at Mulago Hospital but the problem was that they did not have a machine to check the state of my arteries. Eventually I went to South Africa where the state of my arteries was established and the problems I was suffering from were largely cured. 

It became very clear to me that we have a challenge because there are many people who cannot access these facilities abroad. We have to bring those machines to this country so that other people can access them. Unfortunately, Dr Rutakingirwa, the cardiologist who accompanied me to South Africa died. When I was suffering from these complications I came to know that many of these cardiologists are extremely diligent and very hard working, including Cecilia who has died. 

There are many people who go to the Heart Institute because problems of the heart appear to be increasing. Unfortunately, one time someone died of a heart attack in my village and the neighbours thought that the person was bewitched. They started having quarrels until I explained to them that this person was not bewitched and that it had been established that the person had died of a heart attack. So, there are many problems confronting us. There are problems of ignorance and problems of irrelevant equipment and facilities. We have a lot of challenges to grapple with and we have to work together to ensure that we solve them. 

On behalf of the Government I would like to convey our sympathies to the bereaved. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

3.47
MRS RUTH KAVUMA (Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and look at this as a great loss first of all as a member of the Board of the Uganda Heart Institute, and at the same time a patient of the same. I am one of those patients Cecilia has left behind. I feel this loss is very big and difficult for us to express. 

The Uganda Heart Institute has depended on a lot of donations by well wishers. We at the Uganda Heart Institute have always felt that the Government has not given enough help, especially in terms of encouraging doctors and purchasing equipment. We may have the specialists but without equipment, and they find it very difficult to do their work.  

Several times at the weekend, I have gone in and certain things cannot be done simply because they do not have enough equipment. I feel that this needs to be looked into very seriously. On the other hand as a promoter of girls’ education, one of the things we have discovered that actually helps girls stay in school are role models like us, and Cecilia was one of our role models. They knew that she was there and all of them wanted to identify with her. When we lose a role model like this one, it is a big set back in our struggle to try and encourage more girls and parents to participate in what is a human right, education, which is still very lacking in Africa and Uganda in particular. 

To the family, I hope the message will go that we all feel the same or at least feel for them and pray that the Lord will bless them and that all the patients she has left behind will live a little longer to see the situation in the hospitals improved. Thank you.

3.51
MRS MASIKO KABAKUMBA (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Dr Cecilia Achadu Otim. These days many people, especially of the calibre of Cecilia, opt to go outside Uganda to deliver their babies but I believe Dr Cecilia had faith in the medical system of our country and that is why she opted to deliver at Mulago. Unfortunately, maybe something went wrong somewhere, somehow and the inevitable happened and she passed away leaving behind a very young baby.

It is very unfortunate and sad when I read in the papers that a post mortem has been done but the results have not been released. That is why people become suspicious even when the situation could not have been avoided. I call upon the Government to release the results of the post mortem so that relatives and friends of Cecilia know exactly what happened.

As you are aware, many women are dying in the villages as a result of childbirth. The figures have been mentioned by hon. Bernard Mulengani and it is unfortunate that this death adds on to the maternal mortality rate. If Cecilia could die in Mulago, imagine how many women are dying helplessly, without any help and assistance, in our villages. I appreciate government’s efforts but I think more needs to be done to salvage the situation of mothers.

Cecilia has been a role model of many. I think affirmative action should be taken to identify girls with special talents so that they are channelled to such professional areas. In other countries such talents are identified and supported specifically for the women. I think it is important that government starts this straight away. Cecilia was our only representative in this field and she is gone. Without affirmative action, we are not sure that we shall have another woman in the next so many years. Therefore, I would like members and the Government to appreciate the extra burden that women have to bear for this country and this world. 

I would also want to put it to this Government to help the girl child. Research has shown that many girls are dropping out of school due to lack of sanitary towels and the stigma attached to a girl growing up and starting her monthly periods. Let us use this opportunity and not lose out on young girls who can turn out to be like Dr Cecilia in future. This is because Cecilia came up by chance all the way from Kumi, but the girls of Bujenje might not have this opportunity. They may be very clever but they lack resources and support.

Lastly, if it is okay, I request that on to this motion we add a No. 4 on to the resolutions, and urge the Government to establish a fund for the education of the girl child in higher institutions of learning especially for those who have special talents like Dr Cecilia Achadu. This way they will be supported and in future they can become very useful and help in the development of our country. I beg to support the motion.

3.56
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South Kyenjojo): Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity and I support the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Dr Cecilia Achadu Otim. 

When I read the headlines of Monitor newspaper yesterday, my day was turned into a very sad one. I shared my feelings with the person I met after reading the newspaper and this was hon. Aggrey Awori and I am glad that hon. Alice Alaso has moved this motion. Madam Speaker, I would like to mention a few issues that came to my mind as I read the story. The first issue that came to my mind was that of maternal mortality, which most people have mentioned. 

I also remembered our Article 33(3) of the Constitution, which obliges the state to take measures to ensure that women, especially those who are giving birth, are protected. Madam Speaker, after thinking about these areas I also thought about my own experience and the trust I have in Mulago as a person and remembered the words of a Poet, I think he is called Dune, who said, “Do not send to know for whom the bells tolls, it tolls for thee”. We are talking about Dr Cecelia Achadu Otim who has rested but this bell also tolls for us as women of this country, for our daughters who may want to give birth, for our sisters, our brothers who are husbands left behind as widowers and our children who are orphaned at a very early age. This is a very sad moment for Uganda to lose a very distinguished, and the first and only woman cardiologist in Uganda.

When you look at the issue of maternal mortality and quantify it in real numbers, 506 per 100,000 live births may not make the kind of impact that we would like to relay to the nation and the Government. These in effect are 6,000 women dead per year. If you line up 6,000 women and they die per year because of maternal mortality this will give you an indication of how grave this issue is. If you divide 6,000 by 14, like in a 14-seater bus usually known as Kamunye, this comes to about 428 kamunyes crashing every year, that are full of women because only women give birth. 

This is unacceptable and more so because for the last 15 years we have had this maternal mortality rate stagnating. It has stagnated in the range of 500 and now it is 506 per 100,000 live births. We can no longer stand by and watch as our women die.  

Today when a woman gets pregnant it is like a death sentence because she does not know whether she will live to see the baby, bring up her other children and also be a productive member of our society. It is very sad! Some of the causes of maternal mortality have been mentioned and we are talking about this because if Dr Cecelia Achadu Otim had not gone into hospital to give birth, maybe she would have been alive. But her death within one hour of giving birth defiantly links it to the issue of childbirth.  

Some of these causes are prolonged bleeding, obstructed labour, and some of our women have to walk long distances before they can access health. I want to thank the Government for establishing health centres, which have so far assisted women. However, I would like to urge government to make sure that these health centres are functioning fully so that the women do not walk into empty rooms. Another cause known to all of us but which no one wants to talk about is abortion. Young girls are dying, most of them under 18 years, because of obstructed labour. So when we talk about laws like the Domestic Relations Bill, we are very serious because this also contributes to maternal mortality in cases of under age marriage.  

The other issue of course is domestic violence. We have heard of women being kicked after childbirth or during pregnancy, and they die. Madam speaker, these are issues we talk about daily and when we have a case of this nature in our midst, it only goes to show how much more needs to be done on this issue. I know people may think that we are turning the death Dr Cecilia Achadu Otim into other issues, but the fact is that she should not die in vain.  

I would like to ask and if possible add to the motion that we need to hear from our Movement Government, which has secured very many successes in areas such as HIV/AIDS, tell us what steps and efforts are being made to eradicate maternal mortality in this country. We need to realize that this is unacceptable, and the minister will sit down and present to us a comprehensive statement on how the Government is fighting maternal mortality.  

I would like to support hon. Kabakumba’s amendment, if this is acceptable to the movers, for the establishment of a fund for the girl child in higher institutions of learning especially those of the calibre of Dr Cecelia Achadu Otim. 

I would also like to propose that when government implements universal secondary education, it should start with affirmative action for the girl child so that they do not pay school fees. This is not new or strange to us because affirmative action has hitherto been applied in the education sector and I would like to believe that the Movement Government will embrace this wholly.

I conclude by expressing my sincere sympathies to the husband of Dr Cecelia Achadu Otim, to her family and the entire medical fraternity. In particular I would like to pray that her family finds fortitude and is empowered to look after the young orphan. I thank you.

4.05
MR DAVID KIBAALE WAMBI (Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the rest of the colleagues in supporting this motion moved to pay tribute to late Dr Cecelia Achadu Otim. As a country we have lost an expert and for the gender sensitive people, I think the women have lost more than the men. 

As people who come from the same area, that is the East of Uganda, we have been unfortunate in the last year or so. Less than a year ago we lost Dr Kiryabwire who was also a specialist surgeon and before a year has gone by we have lost Cecilia Achadu. For a country, in terms of human resource, it is expensive because to train people the calibre of Cecilia Achadu costs the country a lot of money.  

My worry, because I know that death occurs to everybody, is the way in which it occurred, under the specialized hands of the highest institution of health care, which is Mulago Hospital! I do not know and if an ordinary person were to ask me, I would not be able to explain this. The only explanation that I can give to my people or that we can give to this country is for the Government and Mulago hospital to release the post mortem results. How long does a post-mortem take, especially for a person like the late Cecilia? I do not think it can take that long. 

As a government and a country, we cause unnecessary questions about ourselves. Why should that happen? Because we do not act in time. The people, the relatives and us citizens deserve a better explanation and the post mortem to be released in time.  

If Cecilia had died in one of the local places such as Buwabwala where people have not been trained to operate -(Interjections)- somebody is saying it is the Bagisu who operate in a crude manner. In one of the local newspapers there was a story of a local surgeon who was busy operating people, I think of hernia, and he was of the calibre of those in Buwabwala. He has never gone to school and the people were not aware of this. 

The Government could also have been aware because we have systems all over the place. But you wonder how could they leave such a character to continue doing such work? Anyway, if Cecilia had died in Buwabwala I would not have minded a lot but then even in Mulago, London and elsewhere people die. It is the way all this happened that is surprising all of us. This is not to blame anybody because it has happened.

Madam Speaker, the Government has done its best. As hon. Byamukama has stated, infrastructure has been established all over the country including health centre IIs and IIIs, up to constituency level. However, there are no drugs in these health centres. So if in Mulago Hospital these things can happen then we can expect the people of Budadiri East, especially the women who stay in the mountains and find it very difficult to access maternal care facilities, to die like chicken which have got Cococidiosis -(Interjections)- of course, I stand to be corrected by the senior Members of Parliament who studied veterinary medicine.

My problem is that we have established infrastructure like at the Heart Institute in Mulago Hospital but we do not have the machinery. We have always fundraised and there was even a time when hon. Kagimu tried to move that the Government allocates money for the heart machine. As you have been seeing in the papers everyday we are the ones contributing to people with heart problems. We urge the Government to use the available resources, be it donor funds or other methods of borrowing within our own Government, to purchase machinery for the Heart Institute.  

Lastly, I sympathize with the family of the late Achadu and the country at large for having lost such a brilliant lady. I also demand, on behalf of the people of Budadiri of Eastern Uganda where she came from, that the post mortem results be released immediately to allay unnecessary speculations. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.12
DR SAM LYOMOKI (Workers’ Representative): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I stand to support the motion. The most frustrating experience for a medical professional is to have your colleague pass away in the hospital. When I interacted with the medical workers working on sixth floor, they were so de-motivated because Dr Achadu had recovered normally and even made some telephone calls. It was as if everything was okay, only for her to collapse and pass away. This situation is so perturbing because nothing of that nature was anticipated.

Colleagues have called upon the quick release of the post mortem report, implying that there could be suspicion. I want to reassert that when medical workers are handling a case of this nature, especially of a fellow doctor, they try to use everything possible and actually in such circumstances, negligence would be the last thing to happen. 

I spoke to the President of the Medical Association a few hours ago and there is a unanimous call on the medical profession; we have a very big workload in the hospitals to the extent that there are few nurses and doctors for the many patients. Because of this, tracking down a patient or a matter of this nature is difficult. 

If it were in the developed countries you would find that at every moment there would be a nursing officer or a doctor around. But in Uganda when someone has recovered and everything appears to be okay, because there is another person in a worse situation and few medical people, they will rush out. Because of this there is no one to monitor and find out if there is anything that might need quick intervention.

Therefore, Parliament and the Government would do well to work in a manner that increases the number of medical personnel of various categories in the hospitals and also in the lower units. I interacted with the late doctor and when she was in medical school I was their leader. I know the zeal that this young doctor had and how quickly she rose up. That is why you see that she had attained a high level at such a tender age, which is not usual. Things are not as simple as they might appear and it is very difficult for someone to move up as quickly. 

I know that this country has lost a very energetic young person, who if she had been allowed to deliver her full potential would have been very useful to this nation, but it was not possible. I join her family, the medical profession and the medical fraternity in this sad moment. 

The President of the Medical Association requested me to call upon you to assist the Heart Institute. I had personally discussed with Dr Omagino, the Director and even Dr Achadu, before this situation, and the medical people at the Heart Institute. They are all trying everything possible to make sure that this institute becomes an institute that is modern so that we stop people from going outside this nation for cases that could be handled in the institute. 

However, the response from us politicians has been so bad. There have been promises that have not been fulfilled and there has been a lot of anxiety and tension from the people at the Heart Institute, who want to do something but are not being supported. Therefore, the President of the Medical Association requested me to call upon you to assist the Heart Institute and also to assist in improving the motivation of the medical personnel so that they stop going outside the country after being trained in Uganda.

There are several possibilities as to why Dr Achadu’s death occurred, which I do not want to speculate on because I know we are going to have a post mortem report, but what is more important here is that the medical profession is sad to have lost their own while in their hands, because she had not left the hospital. They also call upon you to stand by their side as they grieve. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lyomoki, sometimes we speak in generalities. You have said that the Heart Institute has asked that we assist them but you have not told us exactly how they should be assisted. Perhaps at some stage you will concretise on what you want us to do so that we can move on it. Otherwise, if you just say assist and you stop there, we do not know what you mean.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very happy that they have a full-fledged document of the analysis of what exactly must be done and I was trying to avoid going into details because we are grieving. I am happy that you have recognized this and I will try to bring it up at an appropriate time. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to make a small adjustment. Let us hear from Pallisa, from the Minister for Industry and then the Minister of Health.

4.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INDUSTRY AND TECHNOLOGY (Ms Jennipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Alaso for coming up with this motion and I also thank all colleagues who have supported the motion. I find it very hard to speak today because Dr Cecilia is married to one of our sons in Pallisa and we mourn bitterly. Yesterday I was not feeling well. I had an asthma attack at night and as I was going to Mulago to consult my doctor when I read in the newspaper that a doctor, who is a heart specialist, had died. I felt very sorry. 

When I got to Mulago I was curious to know who this doctor was, only to discover that it was our sister who had passed away after giving birth to her child. I was so touched that even after getting medication my depression continued and I had to get bed rest in Mulago. 

Madam Speaker, it is not long ago that the people of Pallisa lost Dr Kiryabwire, a neurosurgeon. We believed that when we have people in such high positions, it is a motivating factor to our children. Dr Cecilia, being a woman in this profession, was a role model to many of the girls and many of us as politicians. These are the women we would refer to when encouraging girls to read hard. It is very absurd indeed that she has passed away.  

Personally, I have gone through Mulago twice for caesarean birth and I have a lot of trust in the doctors of Mulago because of the way I was handled. It has also been the same for other women. They are very quick and act responsibly. Therefore, I want to believe that Cecilia’s time had come. This is because she had regained consciousness and asked the doctor who was attending to her about the condition of her baby. She had even made a request that one of the doctors should come and review her baby. She was talking, but all of a sudden she passed away. 

She was a very enterprising woman, very hardworking and very committed to her profession. We shall miss her indeed. I thank all of you but also reiterate or echo what has been said by many of my colleagues that it is high time we came up with some kind of fund to encourage especially the girls to join such professions. 

The issue of mortality rate for women should not be overlooked. Sometimes when I go to my district, you are called in the neighbourhood that a woman is dying. There is a time when I had to rush one of the ladies to Mbale Hospital. She had given birth to one child and the other was still in the womb. They had to operate her but by the time they removed the child, it was already dead. It is high time we looked into this and found a way to support the women. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

4.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, PRIMARY HEALTHCARE (Dr Alex Kamugisha): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to speak on this motion and straightaway I want to say that I support the motion in respect to the late Dr Cecilia Achadu Otim who passed away a few days ago. I want to thank hon. Alice Alaso for moving this motion and hon. Mary Amajo for supporting it, and indeed all those who have spoken in support of the motion. It is a very noble motion and I think this Parliament is on record for recognizing from time to time the contributions of Ugandans who have passed away and who have left behind a mark. It is befitting that Dr Cecilia Achadu Otim gets her share of this recognition.

I knew Dr Cecilia Achadu Otim when she was already grown as a doctor at the Uganda Heart Institute, which institute, like a number of you whom I meet there in the corridor, I visit from time to time. We tell many people, even if they are not sick and even if they do not have any problem, that they should go there and be checked. So it is a very popular area and I have also been a regular visitor there. This is where I met this lady and I agree with most of you that she has been very hardworking, a very fantastic doctor who knew what to do and did her work to the letter.  

As Minister of Health, we are saddened by the death of this young doctor who passed away at a tender age of 34. By this time she was already training as a cardiologist, and you can imagine what was lying ahead of her if she had more time to live. I would like to convey my deepest condolences to her family, the medical fraternity, and all of you who knew her in all respects.

Having heard this news I also undertook to find out what it was that could have taken this girl’s life. I was able to establish, like most of you have said, that she was pregnant and she had been booked in for a caesarean section on Monday this week. That is when she was supposed to go for an elective caesarean section - elective caesarean section means it had been programmed and scheduled. She went into labour two days before that and as soon as she was in labour the doctor took her for the caesarean section. 

I must say that I am very confident of the senior doctor who attended her. She is a senior consultant obstetrician of very good repute and a fantastic obstetrician in this country. I have no doubt that she knew what she was doing, she has handled so many of these cases and also considering that a caesarean section is one of those operations, which are not regarded as very complicated, unless there has been a previous problem that would make it a little bit complicated. More often than not it is straightforward and that is why young doctors even during internship are able to do it. So straightaway, the question of competence is undoubted, because the obstetrician was a senior consultant.

The other information I have is that other procedures, like anaesthesia and other inputs into that operation, were all available. The operation was done and it was successful. The patient and the baby were taken to the ward and I am glad that some of you have information that she was actually recovering and had started talking. Suddenly, it was realized that she was not breathing and this is something that puzzled all the medical experts who handled this patient. This is because normally in a situation like this, there is a whole list of causes that you can look into to try and find out which is responsible but none of them has been incriminated so far. 

The commonest cause of deaths after operation tends to be bleeding but in her case she was not bleeding either externally or internally. This was established when a post mortem was done, and it is still going on. There was no bleeding, which could be incriminated as the cause of death. 

Obviously, there are other things that sometimes cause death immediately after surgery, for example, there is what they call an embolism. This is something that can go into the blood system either as a blood clot or air and cause a problem. However, nobody has been able to establish whether any of these was the cause.  

Some colleagues have talked about the post mortem. Provisional results are already out and there is no clear cause of death as I speak now, but I know the pathologists are pursuing further studies, histological examination of other organs to see whether there could have been something else underlying. When they finally come up with a full report, we may get a clue. 

As of now, the provisional results of the post mortem have not incriminated anything as the cause of death. Therefore, the cause is still unknown and I assure and you have heard me appeal to our colleagues and staff to pull up their socks and work hard, that there was no element of negligence and this has been ruled out. We still have to find out the cause of death of this girl and it will be made known as soon as the results are out. 

I agree with those who have spoken about what is happening in the system generally. Hon. Byamukama and others have spoken about the alarming high maternal mortality rate and it is unacceptably high. Actually, this is one of the biggest problems in this continent. In Uganda, the figure we have now is 506 for every 100,000 live births and Dora Byamukama has put it in figures. Of course we have countries where it is as high as 1,000 and double ours. I am not saying that I am proud of what we have, and our struggle has been to reduce it. 

In our Sector Strategic Plan No. 1 of 2000/2005, our target was to bring the maternal mortality rate to 355 and the second plan would bring it even lower. We shall wait for the next census of the household and demographic survey to give us the last figures but I assure you that reducing maternal mortality is one of our biggest objectives in the sector, the whole country and in the Government. The causes of maternal mortality cut across the entire economy including but not limited to the Ministries of Health, Gender, Social Development, Education, Water, Sanitation and Local Government. It cuts across all of us and we must all play a part, including this House, as many of you have been doing in your constituencies. 

I assure you that we shall continue to put in place measures that will contribute to reduction of maternal mortality. Hon. Wambi has mentioned our plan to expand the health system through health centre IIs, IIIs, and IV. That is an effort to bring services closer to the population and top on our agenda is to reduce maternal mortality. 

You must have heard us talking about emergency obstetric care and that is why the Government has tried to put a theatre in each of your constituencies. For many of them construction is complete and some have been equipped, commissioned and are operating. Others are in the process of being equipped and installation is an on going exercise. I want to assure those whose health centres are not yet operational that we are still working. We are going to operationalize them and our target is to reduce obstetric emergencies and reduce the maternal mortality rate. 

I have heard the comments about the Heart Institute and those of you who have been there will know that it is doing a very good job. It has minimum equipment but I would not like to say that it is not equipped. It is not to our satisfaction but there is some equipment that can assess the performance level of your heart. Also, the cardiologists there can reasonably tell you what your status is, they can measure your ECG and carry out other essential tests. Government will continue upgrading this centre to ensure it does a better job so that we can reduce our reliance on external centres.

In summary, I also pay my tribute to this lady and I want to extend my condolences to the family of the late Dr Cecilia Achadu, the medical fraternity, the people of Pallisa, her patients and all those who knew her and who may have benefited from her services in one way or another. May her soul rest in eternal peace. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am aware that many members associated with this doctor either as her patients, friends or relatives of her patients. However, we have already spent one and a-half hours on this particular motion and I would like to bring it to a close. There were some proposals for amendments and I have not had any objections. If there are no objections -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I want to say there is no objection to both proposals for amendment. I want to take this opportunity to thank my colleagues for the support towards this motion and to request you that at an appropriate time you will put a substantive question and request the hon. Minister of Health to give us the concrete steps he is taking towards curtailing the maternal mortality rate in this country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that this House do pay tribute to the first lady cardiologist in Uganda, Dr Cecilia Achadu Otim and thank God for the services rendered in her short life.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA TEA AUTHORITY DECREE (REPEAL) BILL, 2002

4.41
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Uganda Tea Authority Decree (Repeal) Bill, 2002 be read the Second Time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I have been reminded by the Chairman of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries that this Bill was thoroughly debated and my colleague, the Minister, hon. Kisamba Mugerwa, gave a lengthy statement, which appears in the Hansard. But what stopped the House from taking a decision was the Certificate of Financial Implications. I have traced the record and I have found the certificate and I want to lay it on the Table. I support the report of the committee, so I have nothing useful to add. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, we debated it. Mr Chairman, is there anything else you wish to say? 

4.43
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr John Odit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the minister indicated this Bill was laid on the Table here on 25 July 2002 and the committee handled its job and reported back to the House and the House debated it except for the Certificate of Financial Implications, which was later on presented to the House in July 2004. The Bill would have been disposed of a long time ago, so I do not, therefore, see any encumbrance in proceeding to the Committee Stage. Thank you.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA TEA AUTHORITY DECREE (REPEAL) BILL, 2002

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

The Title to the Bill, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.46
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.46
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Uganda Tea Authority Decree (Repeal) Bill, 2002” and passed it without amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE 
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.47
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE UGANDA TEA AUTHORITY DECREE (REPEAL) BILL, 2002

4.48
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Uganda Tea Authority Decree (Repeal) Bill, 2002 be read the Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE UGANDA TEA AUTHORITY
DECREE (REPEAL) ACT, 2005

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE
PRIVATISATION OF DAIRY
CORPORATION LTD

4.49
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Maj. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Madam Speaker, I am not sure whether copies of the report are ready. 

This august House mandated the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to investigate the matter of the privatisation of DCL after the committee raised the objection to the manner and method used to divest it to Malee Sampran PLC of Thailand. The committee now wishes to report the findings and recommendations.

Background: the Dairy Corporation Limited is a parastatal organization owned by the Government 100 percent. 

It is under Class II of the PERD Statute implying that the state should retain majority shareholding. This classification was as a result of the Dairy Master Plan (DMP) of 1993. The master plan recommended the following major actions:
 
1.	Develop the infrastructure of Dairy Corporation Limited, including a milk powder plant in Mbarara.
2.	Divestiture of DCL with an option to consider dairy farmers first.
3.	Liberalization of milk marketing.
4.	Formation of the Dairy Development Authority (DDA).

The first part of the Dairy Master Plan has not been implemented. However, the formation of Dairy Development Authority and liberalisation of the dairy sector have been implemented and what is remaining is the divestiture of the Dairy Corporation. 

The Dairy Master Plan further recommended that farmers should get organised and be prepared to purchase and take over DCL at the time of divestiture.  

In order to effect divestiture there was need to have a legal framework and, therefore, DCL was incorporated in August 2000 to facilitate its smooth divestiture. 

Methodology: the committee held meetings with most of the stakeholders in the dairy sector. These include:

1.	His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda.
2.	The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
3.	The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.
4.	The Management of the Board of DCL.
5.	The Management of DDA.
6.	The Uganda Dairy National Farmers Association.

The committee further studied/analysed the following documents:

1.	The draft agreement with Malee Sampran Company of Thailand
2.	The memorandum from Dairy Farmers Association
3.	The PERD Statute, 1993
4.	The 2004 Annual Report of DCL
5.	The audited accounts of DCL
6.	The due diligence report of Malee Sampran Public Company.

Madam Speaker, honourable members, the committee was also briefed by a delegation, which went to Thailand on a fact finding mission on Malee Sampran Public Company.

The current status of DCL:
The company currently carries out purely commercial functions and competes with other Dairy processing companies and the informal sector.

The DCL was performing badly because it was highly under-capitalised. However, after the Government injected in funds to the tune of Shs 1 billion in 2003, the performance has improved as shown by the following table:

1. Capacities
Employment	151 people
Management	8 people
Installed capacity	160,000 litters a day
Milk collecting centres	135
Capital investment required 	US $2.981
Working Capital	US $1 million

I will not go into the details but those are the figures after 2002. The difference between 2004 and the financial figures are in table III. The summary of the balance sheet shows that the total assets are about Shs 4.11 billion. Appended is the graphic presentation of how the Dairy Corporation Limited is performing. There is an appendix and you can see that after government injected in money the performance has been improving, but not adequately enough to take on the challenges.

Observations:
The corporation’s current assets to current liability ratio have improved from 1.1 in 2003 to 4.1 in 2004.  

The production capacity is growing although there is need for capitalization for expansion of UHT plant and possibly for the powdered milk that was originally planned to be located in Mbarara. This would act as a stopgap during the rainy season when we have a lot of milk, so that this milk can be dried and then during the dry season when we have shortage of milk we can keep this milk on sale for a long time and sell it to farmers, or export it, or sell it to schools. This will actually minimise the loss of milk that is currently the experience in the whole country.

Disbursement of funds to farmers has risen from Shs 3.7 billion in 2003 to Shs 5.2 billion in 2004, an increase of 40.5 percent.

Madam Speaker, this is a testimony that if actually the Government had provided infrastructure by expanding the UHT plant and provision of the powdered plant, the disbursement of funds to farmers could have risen almost twice as much.  

The privatisation of DCL: 

The PERD Statute 1993, which puts the DCL in Class II of this First Schedule, is the legal guideline for the privatisation process.

The Second Schedule of the Statute spells out how public enterprises shall be handled in the course of its divestiture. The following are some of the considerations:

1.	Private enterprises for sale, lease or contract management shall be advertised.
2.	All business enterprises intending to participate in either of the above forms shall provide details as to their business history, affiliations and future plans.
3.	Public bidding shall be the mode of attracting interested firms during the divestiture process.

Observations:

1.	The attempts to privatise DCL did not conform to the above guidelines.
2.	Government did due diligence on Malee Sampran Co. of Thailand, however, the lease agreement was between the Government of Uganda, DCL and Pan African Food Ltd, a company, which was not yet registered in Uganda - a non-existing company for that matter.

There was no business plan from Malee Sampran Company

3.	The due diligence report on Malee Sampran Company of Thailand was not positive.
4.	Government halted the competitive bidding process where a core investor was required.
5.	Government opted for a lease agreement, which was not subjected to the competitive bidding process as required by the PERD Statute of 1993.

Madam Speaker, the committee in its research discovered that there had been a study done on the Indian Model by the Ministry of Agriculture.

The Indian model: there is a National Dairy Development Board of India (NDDB), which is a farmers’ organisation involved in milk production, collection, processing and marketing. 

The milk producers of a village are organised in village milk cooperatives managed by their representatives. These go on the ladder via the district unions to the National Dairy Development Board of India.  

The system creates a vertically integrated cooperative structure, which in essence eliminates the middlemen who usually take big proportions of farmers’ income. There have been study trips by Ugandan farmers and the Government executives to understudy the NDDB model.  

It was reported to the committee that the NDDB board had expressed willingness to assist the Ugandan farmers in transition to managing the DCL themselves. 

The NDDB had also offered to set up a plant for powdered milk in Mbarara to minimise the wastage especially during the rainy season when milk is a lot.  

The NDDB needed commitment of the Government of Uganda in order to facilitate Ugandan farmers to take over DCL after the short period of transition under which the farmers would be trained.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the committed observed that: 

The NDDB model is reported to have been very successful in India especially with small-scale farmers. This would work well in Uganda.  

It is all-inclusive and beneficial to farmers by eliminating the middlemen who increase the prices but add on no value to the product.  

The vertical arrangement would benefit the farmers since they are already organised in cooperatives.

The model does not call for exclusively huge investments and it is, therefore, anticipated to be very efficient.

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the DDA analysed this model and recommended it for adoption for the dairy sector development in Uganda. Government, however, did not adopt the model.

The bidding process: the Privatisation Unit invited bids for pre-qualification for the 70 percent shares in DCL and the rest, the 30 percent, were to be sold to dairy farmers and the public.

The following firms submitted their bids:
•	Dairibord Zimbabwe Ltd (Zimbabwe)
•	A consortium comprising Spin Knit and Spin Knit Dairy Ltd (Kenya)
•	Brookside Dairy Ltd (Kenya)
•	A consortium comprising of FI Holdings Co. SA/Clover Holdings Ltd/Carnations Securities Ltd (Libya, Uganda and South Africa)

All the four bidders were pre-qualified to proceed to the final stage. It was at this point that the process was suspended.  

The committee was informed that the reason for the suspension was to incorporate the UPE feeding programme, which the Government is said to have adopted.  The UPE feeding programme by UHT would be provided by DCL.

Observations:

The disruption of the bidding process, in total disregard of the law, undermines the investor confidence. Madam Speaker, the abandoning of competitive bidding as required by the PERD Statute was seen as a very bad precedent and in future we may scare away investors.

The committee was informed that one of the reasons why the bidding process was suspended was to get an investor who could process both milk and fruits.

The preparation of bid documents cost money and time and, therefore, stopping such a process midway could lead to litigation and possibly cost a lot to government.

Government could have prepared fresh conditions for bidders to incorporate the new idea of UPE programme and fruit processing. This would be more transparent and acceptable. It would be in line with what the Government wanted to do. It would cost government a little effort and maybe save money that could be paid through courts by those who wasted their money and they had to be stopped midway.  

On the offer to Malee Sampran Co., the committee’s intervention was sparked off by government’s decision to stop the bidding process and lease assets of DCL to Malee Sampran Public Company Ltd. for three years at a fee of US $1.

Madam Speaker, Malee Sampran Company is fully registered on the Thailand stock. It produces canned vegetables, fruit juice and fruit. The Chairman is Mr Cahtachai Boonyarat. He is also an investor in the same company and is involved in dairy products in a separate company.

When the President visited Thailand in September 2004, he was impressed by the technology of the company to produce both fruits and milk concurrently. He invited Mr Cahtachai Boonyarat to come and invest in Uganda. 

The President informed the committee that this was the best opportunity for the rural poor to also engage in fruit growing, which is a high-income crop. He also noted that fruits grow abundantly nearly all over the country with very little care. 

The nominal fee of US $1 was to legalise the lease transaction.  

However, the delegation, which went to Thailand, informed the committee that milk and juice were not being processed in the same plant. Milk was being processed by a different company that the Chairman of Malee Sampran Co. owns shares in.

The idea of promoting high value crops using modern technology is highly welcome, but it should be done in a transparent manner involving all stakeholders. This is the right way to fight poverty at household levels. The committee recommends it.

On the draft agreement, the committee was availed a copy of the draft agreement but noted that the agreement was between Pan-African Foods, DCL, Uganda Government, and not Malee Sampran PLC where due diligence had been done.

Observations: 
The Privatisation Unit and the Ministry of Agriculture were neither consulted nor involved in the sourcing of Malee Sampran Company. 

Malee Sampran Co., the investor, had no business plan on which basis it would be evaluated as required by the bidding guidelines.

By anticipating registering another company here, the agreement was exonerating the main Malee Company from any liabilities in Uganda, which is a misrepresentation. Madam Speaker, whereas actually the President had directed that they deal with Malee Company because of their expertise, the committee observed that we are actually dealing with a different person, and this different person did not exist, and this was Pan African Food Limited.

Mr Cahtachai Boonyarat, the Chairman of Malee was negotiating with the Government in his individual capacity and not on behalf of his company.  

The Government had perpetrated a misrepresentation that DCL assets were being leased to Malee Sampran PCL when in actual fact they were being leased to Pan African Foods Ltd, an unregistered company in Uganda.

On the submission by dairy farmers, under the umbrella of Uganda National Dairy Farmers Association the farmers expressed the challenges facing the Dairy industry at production and marketing levels. The challenges included the following: 

•	High costs of inputs
•	Lack of agricultural credit

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform members that at the moment the credit offered by banks is not favourable to farmers because of high interest rates. Therefore, they cannot profitably borrow money for Dairy farming. 

•	Breeding problems like lack of artificial insemination 
•	Inadequate extension services, and 
•	Economic losses. Farmers cannot market and sell all Ugandan milk, which is about 80,000 litres poured away everyday.

The Dairy Corporation and all other private dairy factories we have here have no capacity to consume all the milk we produce. Therefore, an estimated 80,000 litres of milk are poured away everyday. But if we had a UHT plant, which is big enough to take all this milk so that it can be processed and put on the shelf for six months, then this milk would not be poured.

The marketing problems include: 

•	Inadequate facility to keep milk on the shelf for a long period, since the powdered milk plant was frustrated by bureaucrats and the Government has not found a solution to preserve milk for local and international market.
•	Lack of infrastructure for marketing the product is also a very big problem.
•	Losses at post harvest problems are still prevalent.
•	Lack of credit facilities, and high interest rates.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the farmers informed the committee that they are ready and able to buy this DCL. The following are some of the comparative advantages they put forward:   

They are already organised at the national level into a proposed Dairy co-operative union. 

Farmers produce and own milk, which is the major raw material, hence, part of the working capital of this DCL. I would like to inform members that actually this DCL does not pay for milk everyday so every month farmers loan them: they give them milk for free and they pay every after 14 days, 15 days or 30 days.  

The Dairy Master Plan of 1993 recommended that the Dairy farmers be given a chance or high priority in the acquisition of this DCL.

Many development partners are willing to help farmers to acquire this DCL. The Danish fund through DANIDA proposed to covert a US $3 million loan into a grant if the privatisation of this DCL gave priority to farmers. There was a loan from DANIDA and it is through such money that studies were carried out, and DANIDA was ready to turn this loan into a grant so that farmers can own it if this DCL was privatised to farmers. Therefore, the Government had an option to sell it to the public and pay the loan or to privatise it to farmers and do not pay anything.

General observations: 
There is need to ensure transparency and adherence to the law during the privatisation process.

The suspension of competitive bidding could adversely affect Uganda’s reputation to attract investors from abroad.

The draft agreement is between the Government of Uganda and Pan African Food Limited, an unregistered company, which is unfortunate. 

If government wishes to enter into a management contract to attract expertise, it should be done transparently and within the law.

Madam Speaker, I want to inform you that we have learnt that the Government is trying to hire out expertise to manage the Dairy Corporation so that they can turn it around the way they did to Kinyara. It is our belief and hope that this will be done properly by PU without losing the objective of the Government.

General recommendations:
Government should respect the laws and adhere to the provision of PERD Statute, 1993.  

As earlier noted, if government wishes to attract expertise through a management contract, it should be through competitive bidding.

The process of privatising this DCL should be expedited to avoid further losses, and the national farmers should be given priority.  

His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda should always consult technical officers and relevant departments when attracting investors. What the committee observed here is that when the President gets a good idea, sometimes the technocrats do not actually do it properly and it backfires. It is like you telling the driver to go to Gayaza. It does not mean that that driver should disregard the traffic laws. It is against this background that actually whether it is bureaucrats or whoever is concerned should observe the law to avoid some embarrassment.  

In conclusion, the country has gone through unpleasant experiences in the privatisation process, which attract foreign investors in these privatised enterprises.

The following should be a learning example in the privatisation process: 

1.	Westmont from Malaysia during the UCB privatisation;
2.	Tahar Fuorati of Tunisia (Nile Hotel); 
3.	Midroc from Ethiopia (Sheraton Hotel); 
4.	The Apparels Tri-star from Sri-Lanka; 
5.	Nyanza Textiles; and 
6.	the abandoned lease agreement between Malee Sampran Co. from Thailand.

In all the above cases, there were allegations of lack of transparency and Government lost money in the process.  The process should therefore be adhered to carefully and transparently.  

I would also like to voice a concern that the divestiture of DCL should therefore be done in accordance with the Public Enterprise Reform and Divestiture Act, CAP 98 of PERD Statute and the Dairy Industry Act CAP 85.  The committee wishes to thank all who submitted to the committee, orally and in writing, information on the matter.  

The committee begs the House to adopt the report and the recommendations therein. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was just establishing the number of signatures to qualify the report for debate. I note that you are more than one third, so the matter can be debated.  

MR YIGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  This is a very important report which we are handling this afternoon. I can see on the frontbench we do not have any minister from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  Should we proceed on this matter when we do not have any substantive minister on the subject matter? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have a fully-fledged Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business here.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Madam Speaker, since I am disaster prepared, I noted that problem and hon. Dr Kiyonga, a former Minister of Finance is taking charge.  I thank you.  We are ready to answer any question.

5.22
MR WAGONDA-MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  First of all, I would like to thank the Chairman of the Committee for a job well done.  I think he has done a lot to unearth what we have been reading in Newspapers about the privatisation of Uganda Dairy Corporation.  

I would also like to state from the beginning that actually the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should be exonerated from the on-goings, because I remember that transferring Dairy Corporation from the control of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries was effected as far back as 1997.  

It is a pity that after all that period we are still getting blunders in the process of trying to privatise the Dairy Corporation.  Indeed I must confirm that farmers have made various presentations to Government demonstrating that they actually have the capacity to run Uganda Dairy Corporation.  It is a pity that Government could have found it fitting to purport to lease it to an individual for a mere US$1, which cannot even buy a bottle of beer in Sheraton.  

I wish that the chairman of the committee and his committee had gone ahead to unveil this so-called Pan African Foods Limited.  Because a lot of Ugandans have tried to use high-sounding foreign names when actually the people who are siphoning the wealth of the taxpayers are local persons in Uganda, but who have very high connections with those in high authority.

MR SSENGO: Madam Speaker, I thank you and I thank my colleague for having given way.  It was not possible to unveil the people behind that non-existing company because it was nowhere in the register. So, how could you unveil the owners of the company?  As stated already in our report, we have learnt that the company was non-existence.  So, there was no way one could come round and say, the people behind the company are x, y, z; it was not possible because the company was not there.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Thank you very much for that report.  I am aware that even before a company is registered, a company must have promoters.  If there were no promoters to this company, Madam Speaker, then that is very serious fraud which the committee should have taken interest in.  

How could Government be fraudulent?  Is that possible?  I do not want to believe that my Government was dealing fraudulently with perpetuators of crime.  Such a matter should have been handed over to the CID for investigation.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker.  I wish to inform the House that Mr Cahtachai Boonyarat, the Chairman of Malee Sampran Public Company, he is said to have been a promoter of this company.  But we did not find evidence in the registrar as Hon.Kalule indicated that there were local people who had even booked the name.  But when we met him, I happened to have been on the delegation that went to Thailand.  

He said, he anticipated to open a company here, different from Malee Sampran PLC to be the one to be leased to Dairy Corporation. So the committee having failed to get a substantive local connection and the fact that the other man did not deny that he wanted to register a company here different from Malee Sampran Public Company, we did not take it very far because in the first place the man had not denied.  So, we looked at the technical issue that actually it was fraud. 

When you go to hon. Kiyonga’s family and you take your son to engage Diana, hon. Kiyonga’s daughter, when it comes to the wedding it must be Diana and not Alice. The committee had to recommend that the thing be halted, and fortunately enough Government stopped it.

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  We have seen many cases, which the committee has cited. Cases where companies have come in purported to be from successful operations in foreign countries, and when they come here they change names.  

We had a case of AES, which was supposed to be a reputable company in the United States of America coming to construct Bujagali dam, which my people are still waiting for.  It turned out that it was actually Nile Independent Power Company being peddled by local investors here.  

Besides that, Madam Speaker, is it not high time Government reviewed its policy on privatisation?  The idea was to get rid of companies of non-profit making companies.  Surprisingly enough, Madam Speaker, we have found that some of those divested enterprises are being taken over by parastatals of other countries. For example, we were busy dismantling Uganda Electricity Board (UEB) only to sell it to a parastatal in South Africa. 

 World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) have told us that it is inappropriate for Uganda to operate parastatals. How come we are divesting our enterprises to parastatals of other countries?  Does it make sense, Madam Speaker?  Is it not high time we looked at our policy and made interventions that would preserve some of what we still hold?  Is it still possible that we dismantled UDC, which was spearheading the industrialization of this country?  Although we have had a very high record of enterprises registering as investors, how many of those have actually taken off and have created jobs for our people?

MR OGWEL: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to inform my colleague that when he says Government should review its policy, and yet Government has put a policy down but it has failed to follow it.  If you look at page 5, on the observation of the committee, the last bullet. It says: “Government opted for the a lease agreement, which was not subjected to the complete bidding process as required by that statute, 1993.”  So, there is already a law but then the Government opted for other options, which are not included in the law.

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Madam Speaker, this is my concern: If the Government is going to break its own law, who is to save us from such blatant infringement of the law of the land?  In fact apart from the PERD Statute, we recently even passed a law on public assets and procurement. So it is not only the Statute law, which was being breached.  This, Madam Speaker, may be attributable to officials in Government who do not feel confident enough to tender the right advice to His Excellency, the President, without fear or favour.  

I know my colleague talked about political manhood being scarce these days and it caused a furore.  But if officials who were responsible for giving advice to the President had played their role, then you would not be embarrassing the President now with this report.  It is the officials who have failed the President, because I think they think that if they tell the President what he does not want to hear they will lose their jobs.  This is the surest way of such officials losing their jobs. The Minister in charge of privatisation should apologise to this country or else history will judge him very harshly.  

Finally, bidding and procurement are specialised fields.  If you want people to bid for providing services in processing milk and processing fruits, these should be contained in the initial document, which all bidders pay for and then make their presentation.  

It is both illegal and immoral to change the rules of the game mid-play.  I was saddened that they changed the bids to include fruit processing when the other bidders had already presented bids for milk processing.  This was giving the Malaysian undue advantage over other competitors.  

It, therefore, follows that any future advertisements for the acquisition of Uganda Dairy Corporation must give full information to all potential bidders to avoid instances of this kind.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.35
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank the honourable colleagues on this committee for this wonderful report.  

This report is a charge sheet. Somebody has got to be brought before the court of Parliament or the ordinary courts of law.  With due respect to your office, your chair and my honourable colleagues, the 7th Parliament seems to have become toothless in comparison to the 6th Parliament.  

I am a party to it, and as I said with due respect to my honourable colleague, I feel sorry for myself but I have become toothless in the last few years.  But I cannot resign because I am in a boat, which is sinking, and I am not going to jump; I will sink with it.

These may be harsh words, but at the same time we have been following very closely the chairman’s report whereby one a the legal mind can say definitely there is an element of fraud and fraud should not be tolerated at any stage in the operations of state management. 

It was made quite clear by the chairman when he was reading his report that one company which was never registered anywhere fraudulently posed as a party and negotiated with the Government and nobody bothered to take steps for investigation –(Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: I would like to rise on a point of order. I feel it is very unfair for my colleague, hon. Awori, to say that Parliament is sinking, whereas I know very well that we are not only floating but swimming.  The seventh Parliament has done a lot of work. We have passed several resolutions. We have passed the budgets on time and we are currently engaged in the constitutional amendment. We are moving on very well as far as I am concerned and our constituencies are very happy with us.  Is the hon. Aggrey Awori in order to impute that we are sinking when I can really feel that we are floating and swimming towards – Is he in order, Madam Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, I do not know whether you said the vote in which the Speaker is in charge of is the one, which is sinking, or something else?

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, it was a slip of the tongue. Essentially what I meant is the Executive branch, which is the principle head. The Executive branch, which is normally the leader of the Government assuming that the Government consists of three arms of the State -(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, madam Speaker. Is it in order for a respected colleague from Samia-Bugwe north who stated that he feels sorry that he is in that boat that is sinking when he is not a member of the frontbench to turn around and say it is the frontbench? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, unless you can prove that the Speaker’s boat is sinking, I think you will have to withdraw that statement. I do not thinking I am sinking. I am very firm here.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, the seat in the office of the Speaker is very much floating and way above the sinking level. I cannot assume at any given moment that the leadership of this august House can be associated with certain activities being conducted by the Executive branch of the state. 

I mean that this matter has been brought before you and the august House for further examination. The Executive branch has never at any given moment when this matter was brought to Parliament said, “no, hold it.  Pan African Food Stuffs we are investigating, we have found that this company does not exist.” Therefore, whoever is fronting it is committing fraud. 

Two, there has been a consistent and deliberate violation of PERD Statute and other laws of this country by a ministry which should be mindful of the statute. By that I am referring to the Ministry of Finance.  The Ministry of Finance is fully conscious of the terms of privatising a company and have deliberately ignored the terms of reference and the laws of this country and gone outside to attract people who they know have not done the due diligence to establish whether they have got a capacity to engage in business with this Government. 

It is very clear that in the process we have lost a lot of money. I am glad the Chairman of the committee has pointed out areas where we have lost money. Westmont lost $5 million because that particular fraudulent investor was sourced by State House.  Those of us who were members of the Sixth Parliament went to a great depth to establish that this was a fraud right from day one to the day we went to London to settle it out of court.  We settled it out of court because we were embarrassed.  

Two, the other day again we also got into a fraudulent deal, which cost us money. I suspect now Tahar Furat a company again which was sourced by the State House fraudulently broke an agreement with Nile Hotel Management and Uganda Government. In the end they are suing us for $3 million, which this committee has disputed. But now the Ministry of Finance and Attorney General are negotiating behind the committee’s back to settle it out of court. 

As I speak now the Ministry of Finance is preparing a huge cheque to compensate Tahar Furat when the committee of Parliament has said, “no, no, no, this is a fraud”. 

Madam Speaker, when I say the Government is totally obloquy of the laws of this country and is committing a crime, I am challenged. That is why I say the Executive branch either in their minds or legally they must be sinking.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam speaker. I just want to inform hon. Aggrey Awori that the Committee of Finance and Economic Planning, in the year 2003, did look into the issues about Furati and brought a report to this House and made recommendations to that effect.  So, for you to now come and say that the Committee of Finance did not do anything, I think it is - the committee did its work and this House approved the recommendations to that effect.  

MR AWORI: Thank you, honourable colleague. Your information is a little bit- maybe you did not get me right. I am simply saying the Ministry of Finance has ignored the –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I want to inform hon. Aggrey Awori that actually the records we have in the committee is not Tahar Furat, which fraudulently withdrew or frustrated the contract. 

They were two contracts: One, there was an investment contract between them and the Government of Uganda and there was a management contract. For some reasons the Government of Uganda and the officials decided that they will not do it with Furat.  They compensated them for the joint venture, but they did not settle the management contract. The case he is referring to is related to the management contract for which we shall report to this House. 

MR AWORI: Thank you my honourable colleague. I am glad you said they forgot.  How can Government forget, with all its lawyers? How do you sign an agreement and not follow its Articles?  How do you forget one aspect and pay for the other? And the result is that now we must lose this money. Somebody must answer for this. Is this how you interpret the Government’s agreement?  When you authorise an agreement you as well advise the State on how to execute it.  

When it goes into dispute, you are very oblivious of other obligations and therefore you say let us settle it out of court because we forgot to see the second part of the contract. One wonders whether we really have a state Attorney General. I am embarrassed that he is also an Attorney General for this august House.

Madam Speaker, this is not the only incident.  We gave the contract to an Ethiopian investor.  The conditions of that contract have never been fulfilled to date. The Sheraton is 12 months behind its renovation schedule. The new owner is using the profits out of the hotel on a daily basis for renovation, instead of investing the money, which we badly need. Because of the construction, it does not attract enough clientele, so the returns are low and therefore renovations are slow. These are issues not necessarily related to Dairy Corporation but to the management of state affairs by individual ministries. 

As a matter of fact, it will come to the notice of this august House that the Dairy Corporation, which we have denied the so called Thai investor, is now quietly negotiating the possibility of him taking over management.  The same person we found incompetent to buy it will soon be competent to manage it. This matter we have investigated will come to this Floor.  

Madam Speaker, why does Government privatise parastatal bodies without consulting relevant ministries? When the ministers get to know about it, their opinion is totally ignored. Why are we so taken up by this investor from Thailand whose due diligence has never been known to anybody?  Is this how we shall continue to run Government?

Madam Speaker, most of us here from certain parts of Uganda are dairy farmers. I am glad the Chairperson has said dairy farmers who produce over 80,000 litres of milk lose it for lack of processing facilities. Soon we shall start hoodwinking the farmers by telling them to grow more mangoes, simply because this investor intends to process your fruit. How do you grow mangoes when you have failed to get profit from cattle produce?  How on earth are we going to make dairy farming profitable?  No dairy farmer can borrow money from a commercial bank and survive and yet it is a serious business.

Madam Speaker, there is even a bigger scandal on this matter which we have not looked into.  WFP had donated US$ 15 million for the distribution of milk to UPE schools.  We interfered with this programme, and earned ourselves a bad international reputation. We have taken away that contract from WFP and plans are under way to give it back to Dairy Corporation, which we want to sell off.  Why should we get money from another source and give it to this incompetent man to run it on our behalf?  This is a big case of fraud.

Madam Speaker, last but not least. We have a Constitution, which defines our functions and how we can be removed from office, and what may bring this about. Article 107(2)(c) deals with misuse of public resources. When you lose Government property because of omission in executing your duty, you should be penalised. In case of a President, he should be impeached. In case of a minister, he should be censured.  In case of a public officer, he should refund the money.  Are we doing anything about it?  We seem to be more interested in only Article 105, which we consider more important.

Madam Speaker, for how long are we going to breed the ordinary peasants in this country who want to rule all the days of their life? I do not want to go through all the items of this report because it is clear. We should be examining only the principles included and implied in it. Why should somebody commit a crime and get away with it? People deliberately abuse public offices well knowing they will have no questions to answer. When we have reason to politically impeach a president, we ignore it. 

MRS MWESIGYE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Hon. Awori has quoted Article 107 for impeaching the President, indeed the Constitution is clear. Hon. Awori has the power to influence at least one third of the Members of Parliament to impeach the President if he is successful.  Is he in order therefore to abdicate the duty conferred upon him by the Constitution and start lamenting? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately the member began by calling this team here toothless, so maybe that is part of the toothlessness, the inability to move the one third.  

MR AWORI:  Madam Speaker, you are right.  I go by your ruling. I feel so helpless in this matter. When it comes to pointing out omissions and commissions on the part of a certain officer in our public service, we are very timid.  Yet, when it comes to giving him more powers to stay longer and exploit the peasant, we act very fast.  We shall do our best to mobilise everybody. There is no secret in this august House.  When it comes to pointing out problems, oh no, there will be so many empty spaces and hon. Awori will be intimidated so that to mobilise even three people to endorse his motion is very impossible.  Where can I get Shs 5 million per person in this august House –(Laughter)- I wish I had that money. I would invest in an aircraft instead of –

Finally, I urge my honourable colleague to rest this matter here. It is a serious omission on our part as the watchdog, to authorise money every year for the management of the state and for the benefit of the peasants of this country. It is regrettable that when subjected to abuse, we look on one side because we want to safeguard our seats in the august House or in the Cabinet. I call upon your manhood and womanhood, your courage and capacity to stand up and say, “enough is enough.”

5.46
MRS  MASIKO KABAKUMBA (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for this report but I feel saddened because we have lost yet another opportunity.  In Bujenje County where I come from, the children are going without milk, yet we are told in Uganda 88,000 litres of milk are poured everyday.  I believe if the privatisation of Uganda Dairy Corporation was handled properly, by now the children of Bujenje would be able to access this wasted milk. People think Ugandans are not good investors even when there are reports to that effect, even when there are studies that have shown that we can be good investors if supported. 

We have been crying for loans to improve our agriculture for many years. The Sixth Parliament always reminded Government about this. Government thinks it is not worthwhile to support farmers. The master plan, which has been referred to, indicated that the dairy farmers should be priority when considering who might buy the Dairy Corporation.  But Government has ignored this, even when there is a commitment by DANIDA to provide funds.  

Madam Speaker, I am not surprised because I have had a similar experience in my Constituency. There are some losses, which have not been put in this report.  a lot of money is spent during the preparation in the privatisation of  such companies. For Kinyara, a study on how to privatise Kinyara Sugar Works Limited was commissioned to the tune of over Shs 5 billion. Many proposals and recommendations were made and submitted to Government. Floating the company was considered the best option.  The Government dumped this report and along with it, Shs 5 billion.

I am afraid that if we do not do something extraordinary about the privatisation of Kinyara, it might be added on the list on page 12 of the report, God forbid. The people of Bujenje – (Interruption)

MR AWORI:  Information.

MRS MASIKO:  I know what you are going to say.  The people of Bujenje and those of Uganda are watching. When I stand up to talk, people think I am localising this issue, but Kinyara is a national asset.  On Friday, we were celebrating the sweet success of Kinyara. They have managed to expand from about 52,000 to 60,000 tons of sugar using their own resources. They have embarked on a plan of expanding it further to 100,000 tons using their generated resources.
 
Madam Speaker, if we are not careful with this whole process, we shall lose a lot of Ugandan money.  If we consider the balance of Dairy Corporation, it is clear that the losses are increasing.  The losses will definitely increase if you continue dilly-dallying on whether and how to privatise. 

What can we do to fasten the privatisation process and disposal of public assets in a transparent manner? I appreciate that the President was excited about the fruit processing industry, but we have our own, hon. Pacutho, struggling on her own to process mangoes.  If she was to get this money - by the way she produces very nice mango juice. It is in the Parliamentary canteen and maybe Madam Speaker and Rt hon. Nsibambi would to taste and interest Government to support such local investors, other than contracting people whose background and existence we do not even know. The Pan African Food Ltd is not registered anywhere.  

However, when we point out some of these things, Government does not give us any attention. I would like to call upon the Movement Government, which I know has done and is going to continue doing many things, to style up and work hard.  They need to prove to the world that they are worthy of the offices they hold in this country. 

6.03
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (Buhweju County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the Committee for this very good revealing report, which has given us a very definite picture.  Mistakes of this nature cost us a lot of money if not properly handled from the beginning. There is a tendency to believe that the majority of the foreign people or investors are genuine.  However, I want to remind Government that there are international crooks, who can pedal around and influence us to trust them. 

During my career, I used to work with some so-called technical experts, but on scrutiny, some of the expertise was not even a fraction of mine. I think that exemplifies what I am saying. The agricultural potential of this country is second to none –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I thank my colleague for giving way.  I would like to know from you whether this was a mistake or a calculated move. Let us distinguish between the two. You mentioned, “this kind of mistake.” Please clarify whether it was a mistake or an intended move. 

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Madam Speaker, I will refer my colleague to paragraph 8, where the Committee Chairperson listed the examples, which are the mistakes to which I referred.  

Madam Speaker, the agricultural potential of this country is second to none. I can prove to you that it is cheaper to produce agricultural produce in this country than it is elsewhere. It takes about nine months to produce wheat. I was amazed over the weekend to learn that our millers have set up wheat milling machines as far as Russia, Argentina, Australia and Canada to make it possible for us to eat bread.

I cannot understand that we cannot – only the other day I was in Uchumi and they were offloading oranges for sale in this country from Egypt and Israel. If you were told how much you need to buy just one orange, you would not believe it. We need to do something.

Madam Speaker, the dairy industry in Uganda is in the hands of the individual private farmers, and most of the input comes from them. As a country, we need to promote it. I can prove to you that the milk market within the country is not exhausted. How can it be exhausted when we have foreign milk on the shelves?  I think the problem in this country is the management, and not anything else.  

In order not to discourage our farmers who put in a lot of effort, and enable them to fight poverty, we need to hire the management contract as in the case of Kinyara.  Kinyara is a success story because of the management contract, which was put in place. I was impressed when I visited this sugar estate. I recommend that the good –(Interruption)

MRS SSENTONGO: The information I want to give in as far as Kinyara industry is concerned is that the workers are ready to buy shares and own this industry together with the farmers.  Therefore, the only problem is the Government. All they should do is change the privatisation guidelines of such enterprises, since workers are ready to buy the Corporation.

MR AWORI: I would like to inform my honourable colleague that successful as Kinyara may be, we tried to negotiate with the Libyan Government to give away up to 39 percent of the shares in return of a loan we incurred a long time ago. This is only two weeks ago. Until the Libyans went there themselves last week, they considered it and apparently thought we were going to take over. They met the Booker and Tete Ltd Co.and got more convinced that we wanted to take over. They were told what was obtaining on the ground and said, “Give us something else.”  This shows the kind of fraud we are committing. Instead of selling shares to people in Bunyoro, we wanted to give the shares of Banyoro to Libyans in compensation for the money we owe them.  

MS. KIRASO: On the issue of management, I am also a member of this Committee. I want to draw the attention of my colleague to the statistics on page 3, which says, “DCL was performing badly because it was highly undercapitalised.” and we show the difference between the production in litres and percentage increase when the Government injected Shs 1 billion without changing management. Their management did not change, but the Government put in money and capitalised the dairy industry. The improvement is evident and clear.  

I wish this man or woman or this company that we are going to privatise to had promised to come with US $ 20 billion to inject into this and revamp it. Here is somebody coming without evidence of any money. 

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you, honourable colleagues for all the information given, but overall it indicates that if an enterprise is very well managed, it will attract and help the farmers. In Kinyara, you will see that there are very many contract growers around the estate, which makes me proud. It is empowering our people, who end up benefitting greatly.

In short, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that we have a very good agricultural potential, which if properly exploited, can develop this country and can empower Ugandans. All we need to do is help our people, especially when they have reached a level of producing like the dairy farmers whom I do not think the Government gives any help.

Government should put proper mechanisms, good polices and good management in place in order to encourage small scale processors in this industry, since milk processing is not such a very big deal.  These processors would also be empowered to produce, to enable the industry to flourish.  We should work out a mechanism of making sure that the dairy industry is promoted for the benefit of our Nation. 

6.15
MR SAMMY OGWEL LOOTE (Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to appreciate the work done by the Committee.  The report shows us where things went wrong and where the Corporation succeeded.  We thank all the members of this Committee for being responsible citizens and seeing the farmers’ plight.  

I would like to seek clarification from the Minister of Finance, Agriculture or the Prime Minister who is in charge of Government Business. Page 6 of the report gives a number of observations. What the Committee observed is all-inclusive and beneficial to the farmers. The middleman who increases the prices, but does not contribute to the product is eliminated. 

When we are pursuing the philosophy of eradicating poverty, we consider the means and ways of empowering our people in the rural areas. The farmers have both the resources and the ability; moreover, it is now their organisation, which is currently running the Corporation. There is all evidence that our people will benefit. Why should we opt for a private foreign investor who may not even come with any additional resources?  

We must also develop our human resource to enable Ugandans be economically empowered so that we are not manipulated by investors who just come here to play around with us, on the poor advice of our technical staff in respective ministries. People who advise the President mislead him, and he ends up marketing Uganda to the intended investors. Unfortunately, what he shops is not standard. There are Presidential advisors for almost all the ministries who should always research on and review the proposals for investors. They should then advise the President basing on the analysis of what is involved whenever an investment is to be made. 

I am tempted to think that persons meant to advise the President have individual interests. They might want to charge VAT, 10 percent of which is personal Value Added Tax. The individual interests override the farmers’ and State interests. 

I would like to ask the Premier why we cannot take the option of giving the farmers this Corporation. This will help us fight corruption and will go along way to eradicate poverty and educate people on how to manage their own economy. We shall soon need votes from the peasants and this not be the only reason we support them. 

We should let them have the Corporation and empower them. We should help them acquire the funds so that their organisations can easily run it economically and that way, fight poverty. We should not just go to them when we need their votes. The farmers have already requested for the Corporation and there is no reason we should not give it to them.    

By now, we should have learnt from some of the mentioned failing companies.  We must always first scrutinise all those who come to bid and give Ugandans priority. Otherwise, I am worried that one these days we may even bid our own bedrooms. We need to analyse which companies we should privatise. Privatisation brings efficiency, proper management and high production, but that does not mean that we privatise everything. I strongly feel that we should leave this Corporation in the farmers’ control. This will help us to fight corruption, and our farmers will benefit from it.

If it means Government putting up a plant for powdered milk production, let us do it and empower our people.  

6.20
MR JOHN ROBERTS AACHIILA (Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson and the Committee for this report.  

On page 2 of the report, the Committee was briefed by a delegation, which went to Thailand on a fact-finding mission on Malee Company. I would like to know from the Committee; before they left for Thailand, what facts had they found out here in Uganda in relation to Malee Company? What was the guiding information that you found out? Did the Thailand Committee study the necessary documents, which were going to commit Government into the agreement with Malee Sampran Company before they went to Thailand? 

Is it a usual precedence that before Government involves a business client into agreement, there must be a Committee to go and visit the performance of that client in their foreign country? Before the Committee left for Thailand, where was the Pan African Food Ltd Company? Had it become fraudulent, or it only went fraudulent when you came back from Thailand?  

Madam Speaker, on page 3, the record of the current status of the DCL and its daily sales indicated a promising net present value, which showed that the company was improving after getting a boom of Shs 1 billion. What happened to the daily sales, where there seems to have been a reduction? I need guidance on this so that I am able to understand the Committee report.

Madam Speaker, there are general observations on page 5. In reference to the recommendations that the Committee gives, I wonder why the Committee did not make specific recommendations on such an occurrence, like the fraud in bullet two, bullet three of the same page. You seem to have forgotten that you started a problem. There is already fraud, but in your recommendations, you just kept quiet and yet this is a matter, which all the members of the House appreciate. Immediately you saw it, you should have done something unless you are also part of the problem.  I do not want to say that you are not, anyway.  However, it is better to find out. When you discovered this fraudulent situation, -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Aachilla, I have not yet understood the tone of your contribution.  You were in this House when the matter was raised and before the Committee proceeded to follow it up. You are now asking them, “Why did you go there?” “Did you read any literature before you went?”  I do not know where you are driving the debate.  

MR AACHILLA: Madam Speaker, if you follow the sequence of this report and the clarification I am seeking, you will notice that they drive towards what I am just about to mention. It is already clear from the Committee that we already had an incident of fraud, which the Committee, before they left for Thailand, should have realised. The agreement was discovered to be that of Pan African Food Ltd, which did not exist. The papers were put on Table and this is when we expected these people to react, since the Chairman has just mentioned that he was part of the team that went to Thailand.  I was trying to follow that logical way of reasoning to arrive at a conclusion on this matter.

Madam Speaker, in the same sequence of reasoning, I would like to find out how far the Minister was from being fraudulent, during the course of discovering that this was fraud. This was an agreement between the Government of Uganda and a company that did not exist.  I was driving at this logic.

Lastly, on page 10, I would like to uphold the observation of the Committee on realising that our farmers had taken an initiative to come together and buy shares in DCL.  This was good of them and it was a good gesture in moving towards economic power for the local producers of this country. Government should continue to support proposals of this nature.  

On the last page, the Committee recommends that the President should always consult technical officials and relevant departments whenever he is looking for prospective investors.  If I understand this very well, do you mean to say that the President sometimes errs? Does he operate without advice? What did he tell you in relation to his daily practice in attracting investors? (Interruption)

MR AWORI: I would like to inform my honourable Colleague that generally the President advises his advisors.  

MR AACHILLA: That is a reverse of the bureaucratic system of running States, which I do not agree with.

I would like the Chairperson of the Committee to elaborate on the statement that the President errs whenever he is attracting and generating investors for this country. This will go in the Hansard and needs to be substantiated. 

6.29
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I also want to add my voice to my colleagues’ in thanking the Committee for doing a good job. I would like to make a clarification for hon. Bikwasizehi, who appears not to have understood me. I am not opposed to privatisation. Other countries, which privatised their companies of late, are doing very well. However, for us privatisation seems to benefit only a few individuals.  Leasing DCL was not a mistake, as some people want us to believe.  It was a well-coordinated move by some patriotic Ugandans to earn large sums of money easily at the expense of Ugandan farmers.  

The driving force behind all the chaos is $ 15 million, which the Uganda Government borrowed, as usual, and wanted to feed the UPE children, especially those in Northern Uganda. The whole saga is because of just $ 15 million. This money was given to World Food Programme, after which they signed a contract with the Government.  As they were about to start the distribution of milk, Malee Sampran Company came in. The Government cancelled the contract immediately.  This money was then returned to the Ministry of Education and Sports, at a cost, because there was a breach of contract.  At that cost, the Ugandan Government definitely lost some money.  It is this $ 15 million, which they were targeting.  

Madam Speaker, World Food Programme was supposed to buy milk from local producers. There are GBK and Highland Creamers in Mbarara; Ramilk and another company closed because of the poor market.  

After realising that they could easily earn this money, they went ahead to negotiate with Malee Sampran Company. When he reached here, he was given the factory at $ 1, as if he was the supplier-to-be. He discovered that the Ministry of Education and Sports had no capacity to distribute that milk, because they had no vehicles and no stores. They immediately decided to form another company, Pan African Foods Ltd, which was not registered.  This company was to take over the business immediately.  

Madam Speaker, it is a shame that a clique of people thought of as respectable can fail the Government programmes to this extent. A few Government officials frustrate well-intended Government programmes. They are aware that we know them.  

Madam Speaker, I like this Government but I have to warn them that I know we are going for multiparty politics; they will not stop me from criticising my own Government. I will continue to talk.  We normally lose in elections because of such things. I want to go out there with my NRM and get 99 percent, but the so-called “we love Movement more than other people” are the ones destroying our Government. I am sure the Committee knows all this very well, but they chose to write a report in a diplomatic language.  

MR YIGA: Madam Speaker, I have been trying to listen attentively to my colleague who seems to have some good information about the subject matter.  He is talking of patriotic Ugandans who have failed privatisation, specifically DCL. Could the honourable colleague assist us so that we are able to know whom these patriotic Ugandans are, those that have caused us these losses? I visited the camps in Northern Uganda where the children are malnourished and going through a lot of suffering.  If we could afford $ 15 million to give them milk through a project that backfired, we must know who these people are so that the whole Nation knows. It is good to know and put on record the individuals who let down this country.  Could you tell us who those people are? 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I mentioned World Food Programme and how it was money, which was later withdrawn.  Do I need to give more detail than that?  They are in the Government and could easily be found out. I am sure the Committee knows these individuals.

Finally, Madam Speaker, if we do not help our poor farmers and instead continue promoting the interests of a few individuals, then this country will have no future. They are in the countryside toiling while a few Government officials are mismanaging their resources and their would-be capital.  I hope that this report will be implemented and the Government will take it very seriously.  

6.35
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Every time we have a matter regarding agriculture, we are always reminded that it is the backbone of this country; and as a professional in the field of veterinary medicine, I feel greatly embarrassed that a venture, which was set up in good faith to promote the farmers’ economic welfare, is ending this way.  Members have indicated how the report is very emphatic especially on page 12. They have enumerated some of the ventures, which have badly failed. I am very embarrassed that this venture, which I thought was a success, is also fake.

Can’t we for once correct some of the mistakes that are being made?  Why don’t we be brave and say, “Let us stop this anomaly;” As hon. Byabagambi indicated, we do not seem to care what individuals do, if it embarrasses the overall organization. We should develop the practice of holding individuals responsible for organisations’ failures instead of saying, “After all he came as an individual” when we realise a mistake. 

Members have talked about obscure personalities; I do not think these are mere mistakes. The organisations of Sheraton, Nile Hotel, Tri-Star are not small things and we should not take them lightly. 

I want to thank Parliament because it has slowed the speed of privatising Kinyara Sugar Works, otherwise as hon. Kabakumba said, it would have been on the list. I once said on this Floor that Kinyara Sugar Works would go at a very big cost and hon. Kiyingi said, “Hon. Kasirivu, you are dreaming.”  This has now become the reality and I had even told the President that for Kinyara Sugar Works to go there would be a big cost involved.  

We want to privatise but should we do it for the sake of doing it?  The answer is, “No.”  I do not think it is late for us to re-examine some of these issues. Let us save ourselves from harsh judgement in future. 

As hon. Awori said, the Seventh Parliament has not done very well. We all remember how we censured minister after minister in the Sixth Parliament; we did very well. With the seventh Parliament, 5 years have passed without any casualty and yet, there are glaring issues, including this one, where a minister should have been dealt with. 

Madam Speaker, I said, I am getting embarrassed as a veterinary doctor. Livestock farmers should have been helped to increase production so that the industry gets a big boost. One time, we had proposed that the Ministry of Agriculture be split into Ministry of Animal Industry and Fisheries alone; it has not been done. The livestock sector is crippling and will soon be outdated.  Anybody can stand up to challenge me, but he will not succeed because I am sure of what I am saying.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Madam Speaker, I am here as a dairy farmer. We started by importing a lot of milk in the past, but now we are exporting it. Is this an indication of decadency? I challenge hon. Dr Kasirivu to substantiate his statement.

DR. KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, if a livestock farmer increases his milk production, is it evidence enough when this incidence is increasing.  He is even lucky that disease has not visited his farm. If it did, he would come here crying. You need to ask livestock farmers who have serious cases of disease on their farms. You are very lucky, Mr Prime Minister, because this has not occurred to you. Therefore, you do not think that because you have not had cases of disease therefore, your livestock are lucky. (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY & FISHERIES (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Madam Speaker, I just want to give hon. Kasirivu, information. I was in my constituency yesterday. I was surprised to learn that Government had distributed spray pumps and drugs to the farmers at parish level. But, when I appeared before the Committee, I was under the impression –(Interjection)- yes, I am just barely two months in the Ministry and everybody should appreciate that. If you are asking me about the Constitution –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, members.

MRS MUKWAYA: If you were to ask me about the Constitution I would give you details without any reference. However, I am barely two months old in the ministry. So, when I appeared before the Committee, our concern was that, we needed to do more especially on the Cattle Corridor, which Mukono was not part of. 

The Prime Minister is a rich farmer who does not require pool resources, but in my village, I found out that force spray pumps and pesticide are distributed freely to the farmers. 

MS ALASO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to know from the Minister if she established whether that distribution of pumps was countrywide. We in Soroti have not yet received ours, if it was for the whole nation.

6.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Ms Mary Mugyenyi): Madam Speaker, I just want to make a clarification in addition to what the Minister said. The programme where spray pumps and pesticides are distributed is called Farming under Testeflies Controlled Areas. (FTCA)  This project does not cover all the areas of Uganda. Therefore, parts of Teso should be coming aboard or under this financial year, since we presented it in this Parliament.  FTCA is expanding to areas of Teso because there was an invasion of testeflies, but that does not mean that this programme is everywhere in the country.  The Government policy is that tick borne diseases are the farmer’s responsibility. It is only under epidemic diseases that Government comes in to save the situation, otherwise ordinarily if it was not for testeflies we would not be providing spray pumps and pesticides.  

MRS MUKWAYA: I wanted to come in as a Member of Parliament because the Minister had sat there, which gave an impression that Government was not doing anything.  I just came in as an MP to say that I saw this in one of my parishes. In fact, when I went to Soroti I leant that common spray race had been built there.  So, I was just trying to tell my colleague that something is being done.  In addition to that, there is another programme for the cattle corridor, which is not yet everywhere, but will be soon, for we are not just sitting and watching. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us concentrate on the Dairy Corporation Ltd.

DR. KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the ministers and the Prime Minister for their courage. I do not normally speak for the sake of speaking. I have been on this Committee since 1986 and I know much more than they know about this sector. I am the Vice Chairman and above all a Veterinary doctor. When we talk of the livestock sector, Madam Speaker, you were in the Sixth Parliament and you saw what happened when members talked about water for the livestock that was dying. 

The other day, we were talking about tsetse flies.  Tsetse flies are expanding to the extent that they are almost covering the entire country and someone says that it is okay.  

Yes, you can say you are trying, I do not dispute that, but I am saying the sector is going.  I wish someone would say, “Could we sit and see how we can salvage the sector.”  I would be very happy.  But coming continuously to defend yourselves agitates.  

Madam Speaker –(Mrs Mugyenyi rose_)- well, you can give the information and I will see what –(Interruption)

MRS MARY MUGYENYI: Thank you, hon. colleague.  Madam Speaker, it is not true that the sector is dying and nothing being done.  As a matter of fact, it is because this government has done a lot that the production of milk has increased.  Just look at the statistics; over time we have had an increment of milk.  Now, the problem we are having is the processing level; processing and marketing, which I agree we need to address. 

 Dairy Corporation being the major processing industry in this country, yes, we have had hiccups because the process of privatising Dairy Corporation has been very protracted and long.  But short of that, production of the dairy sector has increased tremendously.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let me ask you hon. Members; you know this evaluation of the sectors, you can do it in the State of the Nation Address and in the budget, but for the moment, please let us concentrate on this report. Hon. Atwooki please wind up.  

DR. KASIRIVU:  Madam Speaker, I seem to have created a lot of agitation but at least I have made my point.  

6:45
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I must thank the Committee for the work well done.  Hon. Speaker, I am a bit disappointed even if we have the Acting Minister of Finance.  We have five ministers of finance but we are not seeing any one of them here.  It is a disappointment to me and in fact I pity the Prime Minister because this is not the first time such a hot issue on privatisation is coming to this House.  

I was also wondering what the Minister of Ethics and Integrity has to offer on these issues because this is not the first time to come to this House.  We had expected the Minister of Ethics and Integrity to have taken some action on the past incidences where we have found ethics and integrity were lacking.  

Nevertheless, I have a few questions to ask the Acting Finance Minister, hon. Chrispus Kiyonga, the NPC.

The Committee said in this report that the Privatisation Unit was not consulted and the Ministry of Agriculture was left out; why did it happen?  Why were these key institutions left out?  I want you to allay my fears that this was a calculated move to rob this country of large sums of money.

The Committee says, that due diligence was done and it was found that this company was lacking.  Why did the Government of Uganda decide to go ahead after all the financial ratios indicated that this company was on the verge of collapsing?  The acid test ratios, the liquid ratios, the capital ratios, name all these financial ratios, did show a negative response.  Why did you go ahead to do it?  All this is available in the Thailand stock exchange.  They are all listed; you can get all this information from there.

We have the economic advisers, the presidential economic advisers; we have the minister for Economic Monitoring.  What did they do?  How did this happen amidst all this?

We have kept lamenting about these fraudulent acts by some members of Government who transact business especially in privatisation.  Members here have named Tristar. We had the Nsimbe project and a report is soon to be debated.  We had the Stanbic issue and there is one now, for which we must take a stand; another one is coming.  Let us not stop at lamenting.  National Housing and Construction Company is going away.  That is why the Condominium Law is not being implemented.  In fact, I must warn the people who are going to buy these houses that you will lose.  You will be evicted, you will be just tenants.  The Libyans are going to take up these houses.  

MR AWORI:  As we speak, I am sure Rt hon. Prime Minister will confirm to the House that hon. Kasenene, the Minister in charge of Privatisation is in Libya negotiating to give away more parastatal companies in exchange for the money we owe to the Libyans, this is contrary to the provisions of the PERD Statute.

MR OKUPA:  So members, you have heard.  This is a warning; do not hurry for these goodwill flats.  You are bound to lose.  We must first seek the political will to fight corruption in this country. And I think that is why the Vice President though he retracted his statements, said that there is a mafia in Cabinet. We should not take it lightly.  We call upon Government to take this matter seriously and Parliament should take a very stern action in dealing with the culprits.  Hon. Eng. Byabagambi came closer to naming some of the members –

MRS. MUKWAYA:  Madam Speaker, is it in order for a Colleague to continue asserting that the Vice President said that there is a mafia when the Vice President has withdrawn the statement?  He said he did not say it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, I saw the Vice President at a Press Conference where he said something different from what he had said before.  So, I think he said there was no mafia.

MR OKUPA:  Madam Speaker, that is why I said that even if the Vice President retracted the statement, I go by your ruling, Madam Speaker.  I believe all this is happening and members here have come closer to naming it and I think some day, those who know these people, will name them. Because, as hon. Dr. Atwooki said, as we go into organisations, the individuals should be isolated and we shall be able to deal with them seriously.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7:00
DR CHRISPUS KIYONGA:  Thank you Madam Speaker.  I also want to thank the Committee for providing the agenda for our discussion this afternoon.  Madam Speaker, I would like to start by under scoring the need for us, honourable members in the House. Whenever we debate issues, even if there are errors to discuss, bearing in mind that they are issues of common good. 

We have this government today, but tomorrow there will be another government, but the country must go on.  So, we must speak in such a way that we protect the country.  Therefore, I find difficulties with some statements made by some colleagues, particularly my good friend, hon. Aggrey Awori, who acts in a way that throws the baby away with the water.  

I think hon. Bikwasizehi has made the case for our discussion this afternoon; that the principle, the procedure of privatisation is justified; for us to have made a decision as a country that we privatise our economy, was a correct policy decision and we should all the time speak in a way that supports that framework. 

We should not give the impression that privatisation has fully failed in this country.  The Committee has quoted enterprises that had problems in privatisation and I agree with them. Some had problems; these problems were corrected on the way.  But I could quote dozens of enterprises, which have been privatised, and they are successful; for example, the Cement industry in this country, the Brewery industry, Pepsi Cola industry and the Soap producing industry.  These are success stories there.  

So, my first point, Madam Speaker, is that the policy has some faults, but it is succeeding overall and we should discuss to maintain that framework.

Madam Speaker, the Rt hon. Prime Minister has just negotiated with me here to stand in for my colleague, the Minister of Finance, and I am going to make these comments, not to prejudice the need for my hon. colleague to return to the House and substantively reply to the issues that have been raised on the Floor.

Madam Speaker, my third point is to give witness to this House.  I have worked with His Excellency the President since this government came into power in 1986 and I want to assure members of the House, that there is no single economic initiative that the President has taken on his own and ordered for things be done.  He has always briefed Cabinet; called in experts and sectors that are concerned on a case-by-case basis. 

So, anybody who may have doubts that the President gets an idea and then goes abroad and gets investors and comes tomorrow to direct the minister or sector to take on an enterprise without discussion, is not truth.  Of course, it is true that there are weaknesses in the system like anywhere else.

MR OKUPA:  Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister has said that the President always consults before he makes a decision and those who are saying he does not do so are not telling the truth.  It is very clear in this report by the Committee that the minister of Agriculture and Privatisation unit were not consulted.  Is he in order to imply that the Committee is not telling the truth?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the difficulty I have is that I did not appear before the Committee, I do not participate in their deliberations.  So, I do not know what they discussed with President and those other institutions.  So, I find it difficult to – 

MRS MUGYENYI:  Madam Speaker, it is not true that the President has not consulted the minister of Agriculture and the ministry in charge of Privatisation.  As a matter of fact, the ministry in charge of Privatisation is totally in charge of the process.  Recently, there was a sub committee of cabinet that was tasked, chaired by the President to look into the issue.  The report should be the responsibility of the ministry of Finance, because Dairy Corporation is under Ministry of Finance, but there is a government position and so, we have consulted the government.  Thank you.

MR AWORI:  Madam Speaker, while I may agree to a certain extent that probably the minister was in the loop as far as the information was concerned, let me know what your reaction was!  Did you agree, consent, confirm, to go along with the President on his initiative and proposal or did you give contrary information and advice?  If you were consulted, what did you do?

DR KIYONGA:  Madam Speaker, I think we are at the end of the debate today. So hon. Awori should hold his fire.  Now, the report talks about transparency and all of us must support transparency. In my view, the fact that we are able to quote three, four, five things where we have faults and these faults have not been found after the secret investigations of Parliament- the minister comes here, he or she makes a presentation and hon. Members of Parliament say, “no, that is faulty, take it to the Committee.”  I think that if we are serious, we can see a fault from here and go after it.  

But what worries me sometimes is that with due respect to the committee and other colleagues, sometimes our search is incomplete, because like hon. Aachilla has just made excellent points.  He has said that, you the committee, you had this problem, you were sent abroad, what preliminary work did you do before you went abroad; so that you are able to fix issues and come back with specific issues?  

Another hon. Member has just said that the Committee in making recommendations for them, but he does not appear to be firm.  That is on the Back Bench.  You said that you found a fault, please be thorough and go to the heart of the problem.

Madam Speaker, there are a number of colleagues here, several Members of Parliament in this House that I have had private discussions with; we sit here, and a member speaks, he gives you an impression that if you are with him privately he will give you the nitty-gritty evidence of where corruption is.  But when I go to them and ask them for corruption offenders, they say –(Mr Awori rose_).

MR AWORI:  Madam Speaker, I do respect my honourable colleague, the NPC, among the other positions that he occupies in the Government.  But when my honourable colleague, whom I respect stands up and indulges in rumour mongering allegations, which he cannot substantiate- is he in order to say that “some people come to me privately”. I am not one of them, who are these people you are talking about; are you implying him and her?  

Could you tell us, who are these people who come to you privately; they agree with you and when they come here, they stand up and say to the contrary?  Why are you insinuating?  Are you in order to insinuate that some of us are double-faced?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, perhaps you could let us know what issues have come to your attention and that the members fizzle out when you are outside.

DR KIYONGA: For example, Madam Speaker, you know that I have not said that cases fizzle out; members come and speak on the Floor. They give a direction and you think that this member has some good evidence; you follow the member and you really do not get the substance.  I could for example give you two or three examples; some of them are here, some of them are not here. (Laughter)

For example, during the debate on UCB, I heard a private discussion with honourable Guma Gumisiriza.  I said to him, just as I have spoken here, that my comrade, “it appears that you know something; really, even us who are in the executive want to fight corruption, assist me.”  I did not get a response.  

Now, if I come closer to home, for example this afternoon, honourable Aggrey Awori stood here and said that we stopped a deal here, Parliament said “do not pay, go to the committee.”  He stood here and said that he is aware that a cheque is being prepared to make the same payment on this Floor, today. if that is a malpractice, honourable Aggrey Awori should have come here with evidence and laid it on the table and said, here is the three million dollars being paid when we actually stopped the payment.

MR OKOT OGONG:  Madam Speaker, one time, honourable Aggrey Awori stood here, on the Floor of Parliament and alleged that many of our children have already been taken to Iraq.  He alleged that he had information from Entebbe, they were already in Dubai and that they had flown to Iraq.  But when we investigated, we did not find any members ferried to Iraq- and this is the truth.

MR AWORI:  Madam Speaker, permit me first of all to remove that inaccurate information from the mind of my honourable colleague.  You are totally misinformed. 

And secondly, if you are indeed in the cabinet and consulting regularly with the intelligence sources, you should know how many Ugandans have departed through the airport and other exit points for destinations yet unknown to you.  If you are in charge of a government, you should be knowledgeable on matters of security and matters of intelligence.

On the matter of substantiating, the onus of security in this country is on the government in the first place.  As a free citizen, I can offer general information; it is up to the government, which has got the investigative machinery to follow up a clue.  If they expect me to start working as a CID, ISO, ESO then you are failing in your duty; you are offloading your responsibility on me a person who is not charged with the responsibility of running an institution called government.  If you are in charge, show it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, I think I appreciate the minister’s position and he has substantiated; and I could also inform you that when we were in the NRC, I suffered the same frustration that the minister is talking about.  We had a very famous inquiry on the Minister of Defence and Bank paribus, but the member, now unfortunately deceased, who made the allegations refused to appear before the committee to substantiate.  

So, honourable members, I think on issues of corruption, we really need to help one another.  If you have information, pass it on; if they do not act, then we can know.  So the minister is in order.

DR KIYONGA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I am really making these comments in the spirit that the Speaker has just articulated.  I am not faultfinding when I say that you people you are saying that there is corruption, there is nothing.  

What I am saying is that let us work together.  That there is corruption in the country is a fact; nobody has hidden that, even the President has talked about it.   That was point number 7 in the Ten Point Programme that we are coming to fight corruption.  So, for us to succeed, we really must work together.  

When a person like honourable Aggrey Awori makes such a statement, people believe him, because of his past experience. So, it is more helpful for honourable Aggrey Awori, who has some skills- once he is following a thread, he should not just put up his hands and say, “I have mentioned something, go after it.”  This lets down our Parliament.

MR AWORI:  Just to satiate your appetite for information, I would like to refer you to the office of the Attorney General, the Ministry of Finance; they are in the process of negotiating with the law firm, which represents Furat on a matter of settlement outside court. 

On the second aspect of the agreement, pertaining to the management of Nile and the lawyer for Furat has asked for point eight of a billion shillings.

MRS MUKWAYA:  We cannot waste our time here being informed of what we already know.  Madam Speaker, the chairman of the committee, stood here to inform my learned friend honourable Aggrey Awori, that there were two issues, one was sorted out; another one is being sorted out.  And if honourable Aggrey Awori thinks that the Attorney General is incompetent, the court is not here, the court is elsewhere.  

So, is he in order to continue saying that these people are paying, they are paying – the chairman is saying that there were two issues, one is sorted out, the other one is about to be sorted out. Unless he substantiates that what the Attorney General is doing is fraud, without that, is he in order to say that crime is about to be committed?   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Awori, is the second payment an additional payment or they are fulfilling the contract?

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I remember accurately what I said in the first presentation that I was doubting the competence of the Attorney General representing the institutions of Government where by there is an agreement entered into between a private party and the Government, and this agreement had two portions: one portion was on part ownership and the other one was management. 

The ownership part of it, we seem to have sorted it out, but the second part, which was referred to by my hon. colleague, the chairman of the committee, somehow the Attorney General seems to have been oblivious of it.  That is why I was saying that I couldn’t have that kind person to represent –(Maj. Rwamirama rose_)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I did inform hon. Awori that the committee will come with a report very soon.  But since there is a sort of misinformation, the first settlement did not consider the management contract; the Attorney General was not involved in the sorting out of the management contract and he advised Government - these records are there and hon. Aggrey Awori is a regular member of my committee. He has these documents.  I think let us wait until we dispose of this matter but otherwise do not mix the two.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  To finish my point, I think my hon. chairman has put it very accurately, let us wait for the report; you will see what I am saying.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are in breach of Rule 60, hon. Member. 

DR KIYONGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Now, as far as this matter of Dairy Corporation is concerned, I would like to inform Parliament that the President came to Cabinet and gave an extensive brief on this matter.  He did indicate that the information available to him at that time- if what he had been told would work; we were going to have double benefit.  Number one, the dairy industry would be better off in the sense that processing of milk was anticipated to be better.  Two, we were also going to have the capacity to start processing fruits to a significant level.  So although Government was aware that it was possible, we should help our farmers, at least to add some value to them, if we are to take on this particular investor.
The brief to Cabinet was not a fait accompli, it was not concluded. This was a brief that we should study, and if we find that we are going to benefit by taking on this particular offer, then we should go forward.

So, I think it is good that Parliament found out that things were not going well, they have taken up the investigation and I think before we conclude this debate; we should focus on this issue and prove the issue.  

We are discussing dairy, people are coming up with Kinyara and UCB. We cannot concentrate and make a conclusion on a particular issue if we do not keep our minds focused.

I also want to repeat what the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister said, that when the Movement had just come here, and for the subsequent three or four years, this country was being fed on imported powder milk. It took the initiative of the present Government to make specific investment in dairy. That is why today we are not only satisfying the demand in Kampala and other towns but, unfortunately because of lack of market, some of the milk is being poured.  

So, I do not need to be a vet like my friend hon. Kasirivu, to say that because he is a vet, therefore he is the only one with monopoly of information to inform us that the sector is going down.  That is absolutely wrong.  

If you take Buganda for instance, the whole of Buganda suffered during the liberation war.  All the dairy farms in Buganda had collapsed, but now, what do you see; even industries are being set up at farms like at Mulwana’s.  So, let us not mislead our country; definitely the industry is recovering and of course it can do better.

Finally, on the issue of fighting corruption- if there is an area where we are going to suffer by going multi party that is in this fight against corruption.  The history of this country clearly shows that it is only during the Movement system that there was no protectionism. If a minister in this Government was thought to be corrupt, he was censured in this Parliament.  Once we go to the multi party, it is protectionism- “this one is ours, do not talk about him”. So, unless there is a strong – (Mr Awori rose_)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Obviously my hon. colleague is campaigning against multipartism, however, my main concern is that is he in order to imply that under multipartism, there is protection of Ministers, when we know very well that under multi party system you cannot risk to have a rotten minister in your Cabinet otherwise you are risking the whole Party and the Government in the House.  That is how multipartism operates.  

I can sympathise with my hon. colleague, he was not in the industry of politics at the time of multi party politics, and so he was just reading about it in the media. But for those of us who are familiar with it, let us inform him, before I call him to order that under multipartism, you have to be on your toes all the time.  

I recall, for his information, in the 1960s, one Minister of regular administration was alleged to have taken money on a plot next to Nile Hotel. He was brought here, and was thoroughly grilled. Instead of sacrificing the Government, he was asked to leave.  So under multipartism, where we are going, be prepared to lose your job in case you are corrupt.  

Is he in order to mislead the august House that under multipartism there is a danger that we might entrench corruption?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I do not think he said it would be entrenched. He was saying that it is likely that people will vote along party lines and each might protect their own. That is what he was saying.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I raise on a point of order.  The Rules of Parliament provide that Members of Parliament must behave with decorum - must use parliamentary language.  When hon. Aggrey Awori was on the Floor, he talked of rotten Ministers. 

Is hon. Aggrey Awori in order to use un-parliamentary language by referring to Ministers as ”rotten Ministers”?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I have no rotten Ministers in this House, so you are out of order.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Actually, the assertion I was making, is that there is a Professor Casifa who has been studying Parliaments in Africa and has found that the Parliament under the Movement system, is rather interesting, in terms of holding Government accountable.

But let me conclude by assuring Colleagues that in my view, the report is good.  If our colleagues – I assume this was a summary, -(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Point of information.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  What the National Political Commissar has said is a fact, and Professor Casifa was my colleague in the department of political science; he is now staying in the guesthouse at Makerere University. You can go there and verify with him; what he has said is correct.   Prof. Nelson Casifa has come back to do some more research and he is available in the guesthouse at Makerere University. I have been in touch with him. You can go there and verify what he has said.

MR AWORI:  For your information, he was here for four hours yesterday.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Right Hon. Prime Minister.  So, to close, I want to assure the chairman of the committee that patriots in this country are not only those on the Back Bench. There are also patriots on the Front Bench; we would also like to fight corruption. 

What we are asking for, is that let us be specific; let us be pointed, and I challenge the chairman and the committee to let us concentrate on this case and prove the assertions we are making.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, minister.

7:28
MAJ. RWAMIRAMA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, and members for your contributions.  Let me start by responding to a few Members who raised issues that need my comment.

Madam Speaker, hon. Wagonda Muguli raised a very important issue of the review on the privatisation policy.  There is a perception that investors must necessarily be foreigners.  I want to inform this House that this country did not hire mercenaries to liberate Ugandans. We did it ourselves; and if we have to turn this economy around, we must think of Ugandan investors.  

Madam Speaker, privatisation as a policy is very good, but there are three questions that must be answered correctly. That is, “what should we privatise; when should we privatise; and to whom do we privatise?”  
Madam Speaker, once you get the answers for these questions, and do it within the law then you are there. 

The other issue is liberalization. We adopted the policy of liberalization. Yes. But when you liberalize, it means you are going to compete.  Let me use an analogy of dairy cattle since we are dealing with the dairy industry.  If you have big cows and they are going to the water trough and they have got young ones competing for water, you must stand there and try to push the big ones away so that the young ones can also drink.  

So it is with the economy. If you open your economy with the tigers, you cannot compete with them. The infant industry agents should never be lost in the third world and that is what it means; the weak ones must be protected until they get strength.  In the customs union, we had to ask extension of five years so that the Mulwana group can also try and use this time and be- (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY Speaker: Hon. Aggrey Awori, I answered you.

Maj. (RTD) Rwamirama: Hon Kabakumba, Ugandan farmers should be given a chance, they should not go the Kinyara way, and I want to inform you that Government did not go ahead with the privatisation in the lease arrangement as it was earlier indicated.  I want to inform you also that leasing a company – I mean a management contract does not mean ownership. So, at an appropriate time, when a company takes off, Government can still sell it to farmers.

Madam Speaker, I will not go into the Kinyara saga, because we do not have any reports that indicate otherwise.  But let me make a correction.  According to hon. Kabakumba, we invested in dairy and it continued to make losses.  That is not true, because since we injected in the money- when Government put in $1 million- if you look at the tables on page 3- but let me run very quickly and tell you about the losses.

If you look at the net operational loss, in 2003, it was Shs 0.97 billion. In 2004 it was Shs 0.47 billion and in the subsequent year, it was the same; they were making loss but at a decreasing rate, which means that if Government, for instance injected in money for UHT plant, which this investor wanted to install, it was going to take off and take care of the farmers’ concerns.

MR Bikwasizehi: I agree with you, that is the position of the committee.

MRS MUGYENYI:  Thank you, Colleague, for giving way.  It should be noted that the improvement that was registered in 2003/2004 was partly because the farmers took up the management of the collection centres around the country through their cooperatives.  So, let us not give so much credit to the management of Dairy Corporation as if that management is perfect, and that there is no need to change it. There is need to change the management. If it were not for the intervention of the dairy farmers, we would not have registered that success even though Government was injecting in money.  Thank you.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Madam Speaker, profits are a function of how much capital the company has.  It is a reflection of the efficiency of management.  It is a reflection of the efficiency of management, so it should not be attributed to how much capital was invested.  So, I am happy with the Minister.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I do not want to challenge my colleague here.  But for people who have done business, know that sometimes it is necessary for you to go back in order to run fast and that means putting in money.  You cannot improve the UHT Plant with just efficiency; you must bring in capital.  That is what we are talking about.  

Now, I agree with honourable Mary Mugyenyi, the Minister of Agriculture, but I also want to remind her that Dairy Corporation was manning those milk-collecting centres.  So, whereas we must appreciate Government commitments for the revival of the corporation, which is actually the engineer now, you cannot totally blame the current management for the failure of the Dairy Sector.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Loote of Moroto, had the same view with the hon. Kabakumba, but on the revival of the cooperatives; I want to inform you that the farmers are organized and they are ready to take up those milk-collecting centres if Government can allow them.  

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: And that is where I have a bit of a problem, Madam Speaker.  Our Committees are not prosecuting organs.  We investigate and report to this House, and this House either takes our recommendations with amendments or debate and passes resolutions.  

But let me ask and answer a few questions that I think are eminent. “Did we hear facts before we went?  Yes, we had a due diligence report.  Did you have facts before you went?  Yes, we had a draft contract.  Did you have facts before you went?  Yes, we knew what Government initially wanted; we knew the bidders and what competence they had.  So, when we went there, what did we do?  Madam Speaker, the team was facilitated by Government to go and see the concept of how the Thai people use fruits and milk as raw products in almost similar plants, and in one of the plants, they have two lines; one small line for milk and a big line for fruits. 

We were told that the purpose of Government was that we should take a decision, from an informed position. So went for a tour and we came and reported to Government and Government cooperated. Some of the facts we came with were actually very useful and they abandoned the original process of the privatisation by lease.  

We identified that there was somebody who had floated a company, Pan African Food Company.  So, my brother, hon. Aachilla, what did you expect the Committee to do?  There was no record of booking in the register of company.  Two, this was a draft agreement that was not signed.

Three is that, when we met His Excellency, he directed that only the company- and I want to repeat here, that only the company on which due diligence was done, wiould be the company that Government would deal with.  

So against that background, what should the Committee have done?  We have put the facts together and I think we are on the right course.  

Then, what have you specifically recommended?  What else do you want?  We have noted the anomaly and have quoted the law to be followed.  We are telling you to do it as PERD Statute.  Do not invite the investors and abandon them mid-way, be transparent so that you do not inhibit investment in the country.  

What else do you want the Committee to do?  Should we get guns and shoot the people who do not see? Madam Speaker, there was a paragraph that was reduced to a small sentence that I would like to clarify.  When I was making the presentation, I did clarify it to the President; I did say and I hope I was recorded in the Hansard, that when you have a driver and you tell him to go to Gayaza, it does not mean that on the way to Gayaza, he should not follow the traffic regulations and rules.  

Madam Speaker, when Government or His Excellency had a vision to go and source out a company, which produces both milk and fruits, it should not imply that the technocrats should ignore the procedures that are followed in the privatisation process. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, the Committee of Finance –(Interruption)

DR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, hon. Rwamirama was guiding us very well on Page 11, Paragraph 7, of the last bullet. What is written here is that the President should always consult the technical officials under all relevant departments when attracting investors.  Are we deleting this?  Let us be clear.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I think what I read was actually an editorial of this; but at that time, this report had already been sent to Mr Muchope.  Actually, what I was reading, I checked with hon. Nasasira, and I found that this sentence was reduced wrongly.  I think he should take what I wrote down and what I said.  

Madam Speaker, Ministry of Agriculture was not involved.  The Minister of Agriculture is here.  Whereas privatisation is a function of Ministry of Finance, It is necessary that the sector Minister or the sector ministry be brought aboard in the process of privatisation, because the result, impact of the end result can adversely affect the ministry.  

It is against this background that the Committee thought it relevant for this House to understand it and perhaps for the Executive to pronounce its position on this matter so that we can move in harmony.  It is on record, when we were talking about tsetse flies.  We had two contradictory statements.  One from the Ministry of Agriculture, saying that we want to eradicate tsetse flies and the other one was about conservation.  

Madam Speaker, when we are privatising a parastatal like Dairy Corporation- Dairy Corporation was initially responsible for three functions: the regulatory function, the commercial function and the development function of the dairy industry.  It is so entrenched in the dairy sector that when you are dealing with it, you must provide the necessary legal framework so that the industry does not collapse in a day because the price of milk here in Kampala is not the same as in Mbarara. When you are getting milk from Mbarara you have to put in an element of transport to the market.  That is why Buganda region is now the highest producer of milk for the market here, and much of the milk that is being poured is from Kisoro, Kabale, Mbarara, and those other areas.  

Madam Speaker, hon. Kasirivu said that the sector is going down.  I want to recognize the input of Government because we were importing powdered milk and no Ugandan milk was being processed. We had an informal sector. But we are now taxing milk producers and milk vendors.  There is Dairy Development Authority; true we have challenges, but we are moving forward.  Let us criticize only where it is necessary, and give credit where it is due.  

However I want to agree with him on the point that the animal sub-sector has not received adequate attention.  We have a water problem and a disease problem.  

My senior colleague, hon. Kiyonga, said that when the committee makes a statement they must be firm on it.  Let me reiterate my commitment and firmness on what I have said and I am doing so in the spirit of the entire committee because we are all committed that: One, the divestiture of any parastatal should be done in accordance with PERD Statute. Also for this particular case, the Dairy Industry Act, Cap 85 must be followed.  I also want to tell you that a competitive bidding process must be followed and abandoning it is going to frustrate investment and our employment and ultimately discredit the reputation, which we have built for some time.  

Finally, on behalf of the entire committee, I want to inform the entire House that we support the policy of privatisation.  We are, however, not very comfortable with the way we are going about it.  Hon. Kiyonga, said that we have only mentioned those, which have gone sour; we have not mentioned those, which are successful.  As an oversight arm of Government, we are supposed to put our fingers where the wrong surfaces are, not where there is success.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Chairperson, and thank you very much Members of the Government.  Honourable members, this report has received overwhelming support and the Government has indicated that they will use the information herein to follow up what may not have gone right.  

So, taking into consideration the corrections made by the Chairperson, I want to put the question that this House do adopt the Report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on Privatisation of the Dairy Corporation Limited.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am sorry for keeping you for very long, but I thought we should finish this matter.  We reconvene at 10.00 O’clock tomorrow morning.

(The House rose at 7.47 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 6 July 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)



