Thursday, 12 July 2012

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good afternoon, honourable members. Welcome to this sitting today. Again, we have a long Order Paper. We need to see how to finish it. I will make an alteration on the Order Paper under rule 22 of our Rules of Procedure. Item eight on the presentations, “Consideration and Adoption of the Report of the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters on the Challenges against the HIV/AIDS Pandemic in Selected Districts” was supposed to be received today as the last item. I have just been informed that they have recordings to present. Normally, this is looked at before it is brought to the House. It has not been done. So, I defer this presentation to next week on Tuesday.

Secondly, regarding the statements and questions, I have only seen four statements which were supposed to be presented in the past and another new statement from the Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness. There are questions which are still pending. We had agreed that we would finish with all the questions and all the statements today. I do not know what has happened. I am sure the Leader of Government Business will be able to explain. We should have finished with these matters. 

Thirdly and finally, we need to know the status of business in the committees. I am going to ask all the chairpersons of the committees that the first one hour of Tuesday will be for presenting in a short time the status of matters which are before the committees so that we all know what is before the committee and how far they have gone with them. We need the status reports on Tuesday. As we start Parliament at 2 O’clock, we shall start with those so that we know how many committees have gone beyond the 45-day rule on particular items. They should formally ask for extensions so that we are on record about what we have allowed to go beyond the 45-day rule. This goes to chairpersons, vice-chairpersons and the clerks of the different committees. Thank you, Members.     

2.35
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. This is something to do –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, just hold on a bit. There is a matter I have forgotten. I am also requesting the whips of the different parties to meet in my board room tomorrow at 10 O’clock so that we can agree on how we are going to handle the debate on the State of the Nation Address and the Budget. We want to handle it in a thematic way rather than the normal way we have been handling it with all the repetitions and so forth. We want to agree on how we are going to handle the debate thematically as the different sides of the House. Please come to the Deputy Speaker’s board room tomorrow at 10 O’clock. We shall have this meeting and agree on how best to handle the debate, save time and also add substance to our debate. Okay, hon. Baryomunsi.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance. This is something to do with the emergence of veterinary diseases in some parts of western Uganda. We have received reports that in communities which depend on cattle, especially the Ankole area, but also parts of Toro, there are three main veterinary diseases which are hitting hard the cattle and other animals in the area namely: Foot and Mouth disease, the lumpy skin disease and tick-borne disease. 

Although the Foot and Mouth disease seems to be limited to a few sub-counties within Kiruhuura District, the lumpy skin disease, which causes high mobility and mortality among cattle, is finishing off the cattle in Ankole and is spreading down to Ntungamo and also to Kamwenge and Kyegegwa. The farmers and cattle keepers are complaining that there is little or no response from Government in terms of assisting them.  People who are keeping cattle are failing to control these diseases because the vaccines are extremely expensive. A dose, I am told, is about Shs 2,000 which is very high for an ordinary farmer in the area. Also, the farmers are not well mobilised to vaccinate their cattle. As you know, the economy and the livelihood of the people in that area depend on cattle keeping. (Mr Ssekikubo rose_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi, I normally do not allow information in the course of you presenting the urgent matter. I allow debate. Please, let him finish then you can debate. You can give the information after. The Member raising the matter of urgent public importance must have all the information. Please, proceed; he will contribute. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: The Speaker has allowed that after my submission, you will go. Hon. Ssekikubo is a serious cattle keeper. 

The questions which I want to put to the minister responsible for agriculture and livestock management are: One, in the health sector for the human beings, we have institutions like National Drug Authority which is responsible for quality control of the drugs for human consumption which come into this country. Also, we have the National Medical Stores which does the procurement and distribution of drugs for human consumption. But in the veterinary sector, there seems to be no such arrangement. The regulation and the control seem to be weak to the extent that anybody can bring in any medicines and drugs on the market. One of the challenges the farmers are complaining about is that most of the medicines and acaricides which they are using are not effective. Also, the vaccines they are using are not effective. It seems unscrupulous people are bringing in products which are not effective. So, I want to know from the minister what arrangements there are to ensure that we receive effective drugs and medicines in the veterinary sector. More urgently, is the minister aware of the outbreak of these diseases in western Uganda and what measures is he putting in place and what assurances is he giving to the affected communities in western Uganda? 

My colleague from Karamoja also says that they seem to have a problem there. So I want to know what the minister is doing to address that challenge in western Uganda because the cattle are dying at a high rate and there seems to be little or no response from the Government side in assisting the people in the affected communities. I thank you very much and I can now take the information from hon. Ssekikubo. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, you can just stick on the matter now. It is not about information –

2.41
MR THEODRE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): I thank you. The matter that he has raised is very grave indeed - Lwemiyaga neighours Nyabushozi, Kazo, Mawogola and Kabula. The outbreak of the Foot and Mouth disease has occurred and the only response so far has been imposing quarantine. Quarantine is meant to disallow the travelling and movement of animals but it isn’t a solution in itself because the herds are being affected.

It is true that we have been using our own methods, but it is unfortunate that nowadays, apparently the disease is more resistant to our conventional treatment methods and I must inform this House that virtually, people in those districts and areas who had been encouraged to engage in modern farming in dairy production, have had all their herds down. 

We are experiencing some drought in this month of July and this exacerbates the transmission of the disease because we are faced with water scarcity and yet people have to move their herds and in a way this aggravates the scourge and outbreak of the disease.

Mr Speaker, may I demand from Government what measures they have taken in the areas of Kabula, Sembabule, Kazo, Nyabushozi and Lwemiyaga specifically, because that is where the outbreak is? Is Government aware that as a result of that, people have been impoverished and have no other economic alternative in response to this? What measure is Government putting in place to ensure that the acaricides and the injectables that are imported into this country - because there is information that fake drugs and acaricides are being imported and as people use them to spray the animals, they are not effective in combating the tick leaving our animals susceptible to such a disease. I beg that the minister and Government answer this as a matter of national importance because as I speak here, people are in a dire situation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you. Do we want to – let us finish with this honourable. Do you want to speak on this? Do you know the 15 minute rule? One minute each.

2.44
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): I come from Mbarara Municipality, but I have farms in Kashari that borders Nyabushozi and so, I am now talking as a farmer. On behalf of the farmers of Mbarara District where I come from, when there is a problem of Foot and Mouth disease in Nyabushozi or Kiruhura, trust me that Mbarara cannot be spared. 

But from a medical point of view, this disease is caused by a virus and in most cases, viruses do not have treatment. The drugs we are giving are for treatment of symptoms and secondary infections. But the way to go as far as Foot and Mouth disease is concerned is to give these animals vaccines so that we prevent the sickness. 

Remember that the moment you see cows getting sick in Nyabushozi, Kiruhura, Mbarara and Uganda at large, it means people will not earn a living at all because some people depend entirely on milk and other animal products. I am of the view that the Minister for Agriculture and Animal Industry gives a statement and by the way, a statement with action that tells me when Mbarara District is getting the vaccine so that I can go on the radio and tell my people. There is a problem; we are going to give speeches here and the cows are going to fall sick and die. I thank you.

2.46
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Baryomunsi so much for raising this important matter and in relation to that, I would pray that you allow me to say this. I would like to thank the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries because recently, in Kanungu, we had a problem and I actually hear that it reached Kabale - the pigs were dying of diseases we did not understand. They came in and helped us to curb the death and the problem has reduced and the pigs are not dying so much.

However, I think it is better for the ministry to plan for us because they are saying that some of the reasons as to why the pigs were falling sick and dying just like that were perhaps poor breeds that we had there. The ministry should maybe think about it and see whether they can help our people to improve the breeds so that we curb that one in Kigezi completely. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Odonga Otto. 

2.47
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, this is just a question to the minister in relation to the Foot and Mouth disease. It seems most of the beef supplied all over Uganda is from parts of western Uganda. Would it be prudent for you to advise the country right now whether it is safe to continue eating beef from such areas and whether there is no need to put a quarantine in relation to such? Otherwise, we may continue enjoying our meals as usual and yet the problem is bigger than what we are seeing? I thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable minister.

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSRTY AND FISHERIES (Animal Industry) (Lt. Col. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, the issue raised by hon. Baryomunsi is true. We have an outbreak of Foot and Mouth disease which started in the Kagera Basin and several districts are affected. It is also true that we have lumpy skin disease, and it is also true that we are meeting a challenge of tick-borne diseases arising out of resistance of the acaricides being used by different farmers in different zones. 

Let me start with FMD. When we had an outbreak of Foot and Mouth disease, we had doses of vaccines and we reacted immediately and responded to affected and high risk areas. What is true is that we do not have an adequate budget to cover the entire herd in the affected area, but it is not true that we have not responded. We have taken appropriate measures by slumping quarantines in those areas. In last week’s local dailies, you saw our commissioner in Rakai prosecuting somebody who imported these sick animals from one of our neighbouring countries in a region that was affected. We have a serious problem of people taking cattle from one place to another, especially the route to South Sudan. We have now put people on our borders and employed veterinary scouts to monitor the movements. 

Government has initiated a process of procuring more vaccines to deal with the affected areas and high risk areas. What hon. Bitekyerezo has said is also true. Foot and mouth disease is a viral disease and it affects mostly hoofed animals and the only remedy is vaccination.

We have initiated the process of procuring vaccines, but in the meantime the affected areas have received doses. We now want to deal with risky areas and other areas that we traditionally know are transit routes for livestock.

The issue of lumpy skin is also viral, but unfortunately – by the way FMD is a notifiable disease, and the vaccine is free and compulsory. We can prosecute you if you resist having your animals vaccinated –(Interruption) 

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you, hon. Rwamirama, for giving way. The information I want to give is that much as they have tried to put restrictions at the borders, it might not work if you don’t talk to the neighbouring countries, for example, Tanzania which neighbours your district and Rwanda among others. 

We get problems of Foot and Muth disease mainly from Tanzania and Rwanda. Most as our people buy drugs and take precaution to secure these drugs from Kenya – because the drugs we have here are fake, they buy and vaccinate at their own cost. Our neighbours from Tanzania and Rwanda do not vaccinate. Since we are in the East African Community, why don’t you take it up and talk to them so that they put some measures to curb foot and mouth disease? Thank you.

MR OKUMU: Thank you for giving me this opportunity, Mr Speaker. I thank my brother, hon. Bright for accepting this information. My information is that when you talk to veterinary officers you realise that corruption has become extremely rampant. Some of these animal check points – the route to Sudan now, which is in our area – first of all the veterinary officers are poorly facilitated and they are prone to be corrupted. Therefore, this kind of thing will continue. They may even write a wrong district; a veterinary officer of another district may even approve the movement of animals.

So, what measures are you trying to put in place to counter this? Because some of us have approached the veterinary officers in some districts in the North and they tell you plainly that apart from us giving advice, the ministry’s role with regard to the animals is private and you have to find your own way out. 

Sometimes I question myself, if it is private now, why do we have veterinary officers in the districts? What do they do? If they are not helping the population, I do not see their usefulness? I have raised this because the North is restocking after this long war and we want the animals to be safe. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up, honourable minister.

LT COL.(RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, honourable members, for that information. Before I lose track of that, in the interest of time, let me clarify on the information given by hon. Naome Kabasharira.

It is not true that we are not working with these countries. It is true that we are working with Rwanda and sharing information. We are also trying to work with Tanzania but the problem is policy. For us, Foot and Mouth disease vaccination is free and compulsory, but on the other side, it is not. That is where we have a problem in the Kagera Basin. 

We have taken it up with hon. Kategaya; we had discussed it before but we believe we are now going to tackle it as a region. We are working together with our neighbours and have harmonised policies except with that one. Otherwise, with Kenya and Tanzania, it is okay. 

Hon. Reagan – it is true that some vets are poorly facilitated but we have cured this. Cabinet took a decision to recentralise regulatory services. So, we have put a budget in place to recall the function to the centre. The issue of disease control needs one chain of command. The one thing you have not mentioned – actually what makes them vulnerable is that they are torn between two; their local masters - the local, governments which want revenue from the markets, and behaving professionally. In fact, two of them have been wrongly sacked and we are trying to find a remedy. 

For lumpy skin disease, this is privatised; we have allowed the private sector to import the vaccine and it is available. We have asked several companies to do it but they are not doing it adequately. So, we are now going back to the drawing board to have a revolving fund where we can pass on these vaccines to the farmers at affordable prices without causing delays because these delays eventually causes unnecessary spreading of the disease. 

Hon. Baryomunsi raised a very important question which we have to clarify –(Interruption) 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, honourable minister, for accepting this clarification. I thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter the minister is attempting to handle is spreading so fast, particularly in this dry weather, and he knows about this. He is a farmer himself. The way he is buying time – we have contacted some private companies to import vaccines – this gives us a very big time lag and the situation we are having and why it was raised as a matter of national importance is because it needs immediate or urgent attention.

Is the minister really proceeding well to gloss over a matter that is of such magnitude? He knows that the spreading of the disease is so rapid that even as I speak now, I have received reports that it has even reached Lwemiyaga. Is the honourable minister in order to proceed as if he is not interested in his post; as if he is dilly-dallying; as if he does not take into account the plight of the people?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable member, the honourable minister has not finished. You don’t know what he is going to say next. Let’s give the minister a chance. If he does not cover it, then you raise it. Now you are on notice, honourable minister, on that matter.

LT COL.(RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me also talk about the issue raised by hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi that there is a drug authority for human medicine, but that he doesn’t see any for the veterinary services. I would like to inform him that we used to have an agency in the ministry for both crop resources and livestock, but we are now moving to merge with Ministry of Health. This is because most of these drugs have to be controlled centrally. That is why we are moving. These drugs were becoming uninspected by Uganda National Drug Authority. What this means is that the same drug authority also inspects drugs for livestock. The authority is working with veterinarians on this issue.

On the measures taken – because there seems to be a feeling that Government isn’t doing much – but I have already indicated that we have vaccinated animals in the affected areas. We have also requisitioned funds for vaccines to take care of high risk areas and transit routes. So, it is not true, hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, that I am glossing over the matter. Much as I am a responsible minister, I am also a farmer. So, I react very quickly to these issues.

Let me also inform the House that we have had discussions with the Minister of Finance together with the suppliers of these drugs to find drugs to stop the current spread. However, what is most important is the fact that we slammed a quarantine over those affected areas. We are only asking for the cooperation of the respective Members of Parliament in the enforcement of this quarantine.

Finally –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I am just making further clarification. I want to agree with hon. Theodore Ssekikubo on the matter that much as you are assuring us, the problem is much bigger than what you are handling. If I can use the statistics from, for example, Kiruhura District, which has about 570,000 head of cattle, for Foot and Mouth disease, only about 60,000 head of cattle have been vaccinated. And for the other skin diseases, out of the 570,000 heads of cattle, only 20,000 have been vaccinated.

But you will recall that in disease control, there is need to vaccinate up to 80 percent in order to contain any disease outbreaks. Therefore, the effort you have put amounts to nothing in terms of controlling the disease. So, you need to tell us when the vaccines you are importing will be available to the farmers. You can see that even in Foot and Mouth disease where vaccination is compulsory, a very small percentage of the cattle has been vaccinated. That is why I am saying that the problem is much bigger.

In that regard, Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the minister brings a comprehensive written statement to tell us those action points and progress that his ministry has made. We don’t want to make the issue very simplistic; it is grossly affecting the economy and the livelihood of the affected communities.

LT COL. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi for the concerns. However, I would like to assure you that the control of Foot and Mouth disease is actually being done scientifically and very effectively. We are only waiting for the vaccines because they are very expensive. I also hope that you are aware that we are trying to create export zones to ensure that we are free of diseases.

But what is true, Mr Speaker, is that the matters are much involving. I will bring a comprehensive statement maybe next week on either Tuesday or Wednesday to inform the Members of the affected areas and the disease situation in the whole country.

However, I would also like to assure hon. Odonga Otto, that people can peacefully eat beef. The beef that is on the market is from non-affected areas. But let me also inform the House that the virus dies when exposed to either cold or highly-heated conditions. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, when are you bringing the statement?

LT. COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I have just realised that next week I won’t be in station. However, I will ensure that the statement is delivered on Tuesday. In fact, I already have a disease status report. If we were sitting tomorrow, I would even present it here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. And on that note, please join me in welcoming members and the executive of the Uganda Scouts Association who are in the Public Gallery. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. 

Also, in the Public Gallery are pupils and teachers of Soroti Demonstration Primary School, who are represented by hon. Angelline Osegge, the Woman Representative for that district. They have also come to observe the proceedings of Parliament.

In the same spirit, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Friends Academy Katende, represented by hon. Amelia Kyambadde, Member of Parliament for Mawokota North. (Applause) 

We have pupils and teachers of Church on the Rock Primary School, represented by hon. Sempala Mbuga, Member of Parliament for Nakaseke. You are all very welcome. 

And finally, in the Public Gallery, we have teachers and pupils of Matumbu Secondary School, represented by Rt hon. Rebecca Kadaga together with hon. Martin Muzaale Mugabi. Please join me in welcoming them as well.

Let me at this point allow the honourable Member for Busongora North to present something. Thereafter, the Opposition Chief Whip will make some announcements on the changes regarding membership of committees. 

3.08
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance in respect to the security of the people of the Rwenzori region and the Rwenzururu Kingdom in particular.

The events that took place last week in the Rwenzururu Kingdom are highly regrettable and condemned, especially when they are engineered by some leaders in this country. Following the celebrations of the 50 years of the Rwenzururu Freedom Day that took place on 30 June 2012 in Bundibugyo, blessed by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister Amama Mbabazi, representing His Excellence the President of the Republic of Uganda, clashes ensued between the Bakonjo and the Bamba in those two districts. Other social disturbances in Kasese were caused by pronouncements made by the cultural leader of the Basongora, for the total ban of expressing and exercising the Rwenzururu culture in 20 sub- counties of Kasese.

Mr Speaker, the Rwenzuru Kingdom, commonly referred to as the Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu, is a cultural institution in Uganda recognised by the NRM Government –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is the urgent matter that you want us to address?

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I am still building the basis –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, then give us the urgent matter because that is how you came in.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, the matter of urgency is premised on the fact that there are clashes now in Kasese for the last two weeks, which we think that if not addressed, can cause the death of many people like it happened in 2006. Can the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister for Gender look into this matter? But first, can Government recognise the causes of such clashes and give a position on the relationship between the Bakonjo and the Basongora vis-à-vis the Bamba and the Bakonjo, and explain why the government is not responding in legally recognising the kingdom and its subjects?

Finally, I wish to inform this honourable House that the officials of the Rwenzururu Kingdom are compiling a comprehensive report for submission to Government in respect to the above. There is a coincidence that the Bakonjo in the Rwenzori region are being attacked from all sides. Right now, as I speak, there are actually clashes in Bundibugyo and Kasese, and there is a war in the DR Congo, and the Minister of Internal Affairs has not come out clearly to explain why the Bakonjo are being hit from all sides. Can you explain to this House what the position of Government is in respect to the kingdom of the Rwenzururu?

3.11
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Hillary Onek): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As far as I know, the Police are heavily deployed in Kasese sub-region to make sure that those clashes don’t take place and I will propose to the leadership of Kasese to come on board and preach peace and unity in that district. If you don’t preach peace and unity in that district, those clashes will continue.  

When I was Minister for Agriculture, I happened to be chairman of the committee that evaluated the problems between the Bakonjo and the pastoralists, the Basongora. The Basongora have been thoroughly displaced from their land and as Government, we decided tthat since the cultivators - the Bakonjo - have replaced the Basongora and taken away their land, we do not want them to go back –(Interruption)– give me the opportunity to explain. You will talk at length. I do not want the House to be misinformed. 

We decided to give the refugee land that exists in Kasese, the prisons land and the Ministry of Agriculture land to the Basongora, but even then, they have still been disturbed on that land. 

So, we want the leadership of the Bakonjo to be tolerant and accept that there are other cultural groups that they should co-exist with in Kasese. That is the statement I can briefly make now, but I may have to prepare the details of what is happening on the ground. I will prepare a statement later and bring it to this House. Thank you. 

3.12
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue that hon. Nzoghu raised is very important and those clashes have not just begun. Those clashes have been there for over 20 years now and when the Basongora came up with a decision of installing their king and cultural leader, it was a protest against the Rwenzururu Kingdom, according to the terms they had set to see that only the Bakonjo belong to the Rwenzori region and not recognising other communities. 

With me here is a letter which was written by the Rwenzururu freedom fighters. These are the Rwenzururu Veterans Association, provoking the Basongora, calling them Banyarwanda, Bakiga, - it is here. It was written to the President and was signed. This is a memorandum from the Rwenzururu freedom fighters on a proposal for Busongora District, when they said that the Basongora should not claim for a district –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I want to bring it to the attention of this House that the document my colleague is laying on Table is a document which was written after the clashes had started and it was meant to bring peace between the Bakonjo and the Basongora. Is he, therefore, in order to incite the people of Kasese at this point in time when people are actually under the threat of death?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you raised this as a matter of urgent public importance and I allowed you to. Busongora has three constituencies; there is the North, the East and the South. You have raised a matter as a member from Busongora North and the honourable member is responding, also making a contribution and he has also stated the very same thing that there have been clashes. The Member is from Busongora South. Is he in order to do it? I don’t know about misinformation because I am not privy to information that is going on there. I don’t have the information. I cannot rule on whether the information is correct or false. But that he has a right to raise it, because the matter is on the Floor, is perfectly in order. We are trying to find a way of moving forward from this and the minister has made his statement. The honourable member has also requested to make a statement. Please conclude and we see how to move. 

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the wise ruling. This petition to the President was written by the Rwenzururu veterans. They were provoking the Basongora, according to the statement - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What date is it?

MR KAFUDA: This was 26 July 2011. I have said these conflicts have not started now. The letter says that, “The immigrants came from various areas in fear of internal and external conflicts and after having been given refugee status in areas of Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu, they later called themselves Basongora, yet according to their cultural identity and traditions, they are Banyarwanda and others are Banyankole.

We have heard with dismay that the above have reached in your higher offices up to the President. In your higher offices of Uganda’s central Government, demanding for a district status of their own, separate from Kasese District, which they want to name after the Busongora prince.” 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order, to fundamentally state that we are guided by the supreme law of the land which is the Constitution. In accordance with schedule III of the Constitution, the Banyarwanda are registered as a natural tribe in Uganda. Is he in order to allege that by mentioning Banyarwanda, they are foreign?

MR KAFUDA: All this is a provocation of the Basongora community. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please wind up.

MR KAFUDA: Like hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi has said, Article 17 of the Constitution on the duties of a citizen, requires all to respect the rights and freedoms of others. I am wondering why the honoursble member of Parliament representing Busongora, where the Basongora exist, is becoming tribalistic like that. I do not know whether he is helping my people. 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, the scenario that I brought in was not tribalistic as such. The scenario that I want to put forward now is not tribal in nature. I want to bring it to the attention of this House that the Basongora constitute one percent of the population of Kasese. They are not more than 7,000 people. Hon. Kafuda represents a constituency which has more than 150,000 people. Is he, therefore, in order to insinuate that I am being tribalistic when majority of the Bakonjo are the ones who voted him into this House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Member who raised this issue, raised the issue of tribal clashes between the Basongora and the Bakonjo. The indication the honourable member gave is that there are tribal issues and it seems that one tribe is being supported by one Member and the other is being supported by the other Member. Both Members, unfortunately, are being tribalistic. To raise it in that context and in that tone, you are both being tribalistic. Both of you should be discussing this matter in a national spirit on how we can build unity among communities. So, both of you are out of order on this. Please conclude.

MR KAFUDA: Mr Speaker, I think you can now see how politics has divided our people because the Basongora and the Bakonjo have stayed together in peace. I want to lay on Table all the injustices and the violations that have been committed in Kasese District discriminating those people. This has been happening in Busongora North, Bukonjo East and Bukonjo West. I want to lay on Table a copy of the memorandum from Rwenzururu ex-freedom fighters on Busongora District proposal, dated 26 July 2011.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and please, you may resume your seat.

3.25
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for allowing me to make a comment on what has been discussed before us. I wish to say that I am aware and I have also heard that there are some clashes in Kasese. Recently, I heard that the Bakonjo people entered a house of a Musongora who had proclaimed himself a king, and they took some of the regalia that he had in the house.

I represent Kasese Municipality and I have both the Basongora and Bakonjo in my constituency. Entering somebody’s house without his consent is actually trespassing and it was wrong. But, equally, I would say the manner in which the purported king of the Basongora was put in place was provocative to the community of the Bakonjo.

Why do I say this? Because there was proclamation on the radios that even where the current palace of the Bakonjo is, they are going to put the palace of the king of the Basongora. I am aware that the Constitution provides that any culture which feels like having a cultural leader is free to do so, but the provocation that happened is what triggered the clashes between the two tribes.

We have lived with these communities in Kasese and there are three notable indigenous communities that have lived in harmony for quite long; the Bakonjo, Basongora and Banyabindi, although we have other tribes that have come in. They had lived in peace but today, there is some level of discontent on either side. I am even a bit sceptical and there is something peculiar on my mind. I am aware that when the kingdom of the Bakonjo was recognised, they established a parliament and hon. Boaz Kafuda is a member of parliament in that kingdom. I would, therefore, propose that much as it is true that there are ethnic clashes in Kasese between two different groups, and some level of discontent, let Government intervene in this matter because it getting out of control and the two groups may not be able to resolve these matters of ethnicity, which Government can. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. These issues are very involving and no amount of debate will change the status quo. We need better information on this matter. What I am proposing is that this matter should be referred to a committee of this House so that it is treated properly; they can even visit those places and come back to the House. Which would be the appropriate committee on this? 

HON. MEMBERS: Gender.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think since it is going to be a security matter, it is going to be the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to handle this matter expeditiously and the committee can co-opt members who can provide better guidance on these issues so that we can find a way of bringing harmony between the two communities. Wherever there is conflict, we as Parliament should show that we discourage it and support harmony between communities. It is so ordered. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am picking from your guidance as you concluded and I would like to thank you for referring the matter to a committee of the House. But don’t you think it would be better that you caused Government to ensure that there is adequate deployment so that there can be peace prevailing in the place. And also, can the minister bring us a report by Tuesday to ensure that heavy deployment has been done.
 
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Hillary Onek): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have heavily deployed in Kasese and Bundibugyo to ensure that the disharmony which has been created doesn’t degenerate into chaos. That is why I requested the political leaders to come on board to diffuse the political problem. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. In the Public Gallery, this afternoon, are pupils and teachers from Nakaloke Islamic Primary School represented by hon. Yahaya Gudoi, Member of Parliament for Bungokho South, who have come to observe the proceedings of the House. 

We also have pupils and teachers from Lowell Girls’ School represented by hon. Amelia Kyambadde, Member of Parliament for Mawokota. You are very welcome. Please join me in welcoming them.  

3.31
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Some time at the end of last month, names of members for different committees were read out, but we didn’t clean up ours then. So, we have done the clean-up and we have some few changes, which are as follows: 

We have hon. Odo Tayebwa who has been moved from the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to Health, and also, being a new person, we have assigned him to the Standing Committee of Local Government Accounts. Then, hon. Florence Ibi Ekwau, has been moved from the Committee on Presidential Affairs to the Natural Resources Committee. Hon. Muhammed Kawuma has been moved from the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Services. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We have noted the changes made by the Opposition in the membership of the committees. Those names are accordingly assigned as requested. Do we need to approve it? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the Members’ re-allocation to committees be approved as proposed by the Opposition Chief Whip. 

(Question put, and agreed to.)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure in relation to today’s Order Paper. Yesterday was 11 July; second anniversary after over 70 Ugandans lost their lives in the terrorist bomb blast at Rugby Club and in Kansanga. I was expecting a formal statement from Government because earlier on, last year, they committed themselves to follow up the victims and compensate them. Mr Speaker, if you can guide whether it wouldn’t be prudent for the Government to give a formal statement on what so far has happened to the victims of the 11th July 2010 bomb blasts to date. We cannot leave them to mourn those they have lost individually. I seek your indulgence, Sir.  

MR TINKASIMIIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like the honourable Minister to tell Ugandans how prepared they are, particularly in creating a buffer zone against the terrorists? Do we have sufficient security checks against those who were alleged to have entered the country aboard a Kalita bus after hitting Nairobi? Have they arrested this person? How far have they gone and for how long are Ugandans going to live in a state of fear? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Is Government going to make a comment on this?  

3.36
THE ACTING GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Otto for raising this very important matter. I know Government, through its security agencies, has been reaching out to the country in regard to issues of general preparedness in order to be in a position to ward off terrorists and minimise the likely negative effects and the attendant consequences of having terrorists within the confines of our country. I am going to bring this matter to the attention of the chairperson of the National Security Committee, who is also the Minister of Internal Affairs, so that the programme which they have been conducting through the media is formally brought to the attention of the House. Members can then be brought on board in regard to the measures that are being taken to ensure that we guarantee the peace and security of all Ugandans. I thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, probably the Government Chief Whip should make a commitment on when they will bring a statement, not only in relation to security but also compensation of the victims of the bomb blasts and the burial expenses which Government committed itself to meeting last year. We just want a follow-up.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, when I reach out to the Minister of Internal Affairs, I will make sure that that information is also sourced and provided to the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, let us move on, we have a lot of work.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very serious procedural question which I would like clarification over. Yesterday, I heard you very carefully stating that all pending questions which were to be answered by the ministers, and Government for that matter, were to be concluded today, and it is on record, Mr Speaker. With humility, about two months ago, I posed fundamental questions on issues which required reports to be produced regarding fires. Government spent taxpayers’ money to ensure that these inquiries were carried out, namely on the Kasubi Tombs, the Budo Junior School, Kanungu-Kibwetere and Kichwamba Technical College.

I also expressed concern about rumours going around that the Uganda National Museum was about to be sold out. Since I said that, Government has been quiet. Their failure to answer indicates that they are no longer in charge. (Laughter) Let them answer those questions. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matters that come to the Order Paper are matters that have come to the attention of the Clerk in relation to questions and ministerial statements. It is only those that have been brought to the Clerk’s Office that come on the Order Paper. I ordered, repeatedly, that these matters should be finished so that we begin on a clean slate. I see five statements today, with the sixth one which I have just seen a copy of; it was not on the Order Paper. I see no responses to questions posed by members. It is certainly a violation. 

You will recall that hon. Odonga Otto has only been polite to the Government because I had given him leave to move a motion to express displeasure at the way business has been conducted in a way that delays the operations of this House. But he has been polite and he has not brought that motion because we would have debated it today. However, be that as it may, we have business that we can handle today and may not even be able to finish. So, let us proceed and see how far we go. I will have the Minister of Tourism and Wildlife make a statement.

3.42
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. In the concluding statement made by hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, he made reference to a rumour about the museum being sold or demolished. In his words, it is a rumour. A rumour is a rumour and I want to dismiss that rumour. There is no truth in the rumour. (Interruption) 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank my friend. I am a little disturbed. You see, this is a country of 34 million people and any rumour which is manufactured and thrown among these people should be of concern to Government. This rumour, as the honourable minister and former UPC member claims it is, is something which has been in the national media. It has reached all parts of this country and beyond- (interjections) – Yes, in the state media. 

I would have ordinarily expected that if this was a rumour, it should have been refuted by the same Government the time it came out through the national media. That is when we would have believed them. But for you to wait until this thing has been absorbed by everybody and a concerned member now rises up to ask you and you say this thing is a rumour! Assuming hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi had not raised it, how would the ordinary person of Terego get to know that this, after all, was a rumour?

So really, Mr Minister, show seriousness in what you are saying. Otherwise, as of now, we do not even think you are serious. We even still believe that if you say it is a rumour, please make a formal statement to the whole country that this was a rumour. Otherwise, we take it very seriously. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, I know hon. Wadri sometimes works himself up and gets angry for absolutely no earthly reason and makes references about history without remembering that he is also a former DP youth winger -(Laughter)- but somehow he wants only to refer to - As a former DP, he is now a distinguished member of FDC and I have greatest respect for that. I hope the Leader of the Opposition will not dismiss you on the Floor of the House. 

Let me state categorically that actually, when this rumour was raised, there was even a statement from some distinguished members wanting to demonstrate naked. I responded to it in the press and I responded to it in this House. Why I said it was a rumour and dismissed it as a rumour is because the distinguished member, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, sometimes has a high propensity to trade in rumours. (Laughter) However, we have to continue answering these questions. But I want to answer categorically on the Floor of this House- (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, under Article 79 of the Constitution, the cardinal duty of a Member of Parliament is to represent his or her people and to deliberate. When I hear a rumour as mighty as that, which said that the national heritage of Uganda was about to be sold, as a responsible Ugandan Member of Parliament I had to report here and I reported here. Why did it take the minister so long to answer that rumour? 

Therefore, is he in order to allege that I trade in rumours when it is on record that I responsibly reported the matter on the Floor of the House, as a responsible legislator? What is he talking about? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to believe I heard correctly what hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi said at the beginning. He said he has asked a question about a rumour and he came with that rumour to this House. If he had not come with that rumour to this House, the House would not have known. So, he promoted this rumour. (Laughter)

The honourable member today confirms that he had brought a rumour, which he is repeating today as a rumour. I think for an ordinary person of ordinary understanding like me, I would come to the reasonable conclusion that the subject matter on which this debate is premised is actually a rumour. That makes the person who brought it somebody who brings rumours. (Laughter) We should defend ourselves. Can we now make progress on the Order Paper.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a procedural concern. I appreciate the jovial mood in the House, particularly in regard to the issue of a rumour or not a rumour, whatever it is. The concern I have is, when the Chair has directed that a particular minister comes here to make a ministerial statement, is it procedurally right for a minister to come here and just begin to dismiss the directive of the Chair by reducing it to a rumour and denying the House the opportunity to debate the rumour in form of a ministerial response? For me, this is important because next time the Chair will direct and another minister comes up and says, “This is just a rumour”. 

We have been waiting for him to tell us, “this is a rumour” in form of a ministerial statement for over three months. So, I would like to be guided whether this is the end of this debate or we should still expect a written statement as provided for in our rules in regard to these allegations, whether they are true, baseless rumours or whatever. Should we expect a more serious response than the one the minister has made?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if a matter has been brought to this House and the answer to it is “yes” or “no”- The question was, there was a rumour that the Uganda Museum was going to be sold and the reply then was that the rumour was false. Do you want a comprehensive statement to come with five paragraphs or 10 paragraphs and say, “In respect to this particular statement, it is a rumour”, and we put it on the Order Paper? Do we need to move on like this? 

If it is a rumour, then it is now up to the member who feels it is not a rumour to give us more information so that we understand that it is actually a rumour and the minister is playing games. Please, let us make progress.

MR KIWANDA: Mr Speaker, I know the honourable member must have diverted to the rumours but there was a substantial question about the fires. The Prime Minister stood here before we went for recess and promised that the Kasubi and Kanungu reports would be ready in two weeks. I know the honourable member might have diverted to the rumour but now, we want an answer as to when these reports are going to be here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have made a ruling here and I am going to make subsequent orders as to my rulings that have been defied. I had said that all the statements that were pending should be finished by today. Why don’t you wait for me to make my communication on these issues, please?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope it is not about questions because I have a directive on that already. Please, proceed.

DR BITEKYEREZO: No, the one I wanted to talk about was a question I posed to the Minister of Health-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, resume your seat. Can we go to the Order Paper now, please.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE FISHERIES FUND

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have seen a strange practice from the Executive. They come out with statements and they call them information papers to Parliament. I do not know where to put this in our rules. When we ask for a ministerial statement, it is a ministerial statement. I do not understand this new concept of information papers; it is not in the rules. 

So, please, bring things that the House understands. If it is a ministerial statement, bring a ministerial statement. If it is an information paper, take it to the committee because this House now has no avenue for receiving information papers. That one you can take to committees. This House receives ministerial statements, which are debated but for today, I will waive that and allow that information papers be orally amended to be ministerial statements.

3.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg for your indulgence. Last week, my senior colleague answered the question raised by hon. Badda, which was on how far we have gone in implementing the Fisheries Fund. I was told that there were supplementary questions that followed, which we did not answer. So, what I prepared are the supplementary questions including the detailed steps we have taken regarding the implementation of the Fisheries Fund. 

I also had a ministerial statement, which has been pending, arising from what hon. Dr Lulume and hon. Bakaluba Mukasa raised on the allegations of the sale of part of Lake Victoria and the lacustrine protected area. I want to beg for your indulgence that I be allowed - it is a very short statement - to inform Members of Parliament on what is happening in the lacustrine protected area on Lake Victoria and regarding the enforcement in that particular area because my two colleagues raised this important issue. 

Those are the copies. My technical people made a mistake and called them information papers instead of a ministerial statement. In essence, I would like the Order Paper to read, “A statement on lacustrine protected areas” instead of Fisheries Fund. Thereafter, I will give further information on the Fisheries Fund and the three other supplementary questions which are also at the end of that policy statement. When you look at the end of the policy statement, there are questions on the Fisheries Fund and on the licensing because members were not satisfied when we responded to hon. Badda’s question. I beg for your indulgence. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, you have guided and varied, which is within your powers. However, when it comes to questions, the Rules of Procedure also define how questions are answered so that the Hansard can capture them. That also impacts on the volume of work this House has handled. If you look at the page the minister is telling us about, we do not know which question this is. The record of Parliament will not show how many questions the House has handled; so, which question number is it? It should also be on the Order Paper so that it shows we are doing work. Otherwise, if we handle business like this, when we are being audited in future it will not be showing what type of business has been handled. I am seeking your guidance so that proper recording is done regarding this supplementary question. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this particular question, which the minister has decided to deal with in the manner we have seen, was answered. It was on the Order Paper last week. However, there were supplementary questions which were supposed to have been given orally to the House last week but the minister did not have information. So, it is up to the House; those were supplementary questions based on a question already responded to under the rules. It is up to the House to take these as supplementary answers to supplementary questions, which should have been oral. 

We will treat it separately. It cannot be combined with the ministerial statement. We will deal with the ministerial statement and we see at what time we can deal with the supplementary answers to the questions that were asked. 

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek your guidance. Categorically, when we are here, everything is put on the Hansard. What will be the heading of this paper on the Hansard? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I asked the minister to orally amend that she is presenting a ministerial statement because that is what is on item No. 3 on the Order Paper. That is what it is saying -the Fisheries Fund - (Interjections) - What is this one? No, honourable minister, the ministerial statement which we are expecting is on the Fisheries Fund. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you for your ruling and maybe trying to help the minister proceed. However, would it be procedurally right to allow an honourable minister who is not organised to proceed and present her statement when there are statements of ministers pending on the Order Paper and they are well organised? Why don’t we receive those ones who are organised and we leave her to first go and sort herself out? 

MR KATOTO: Mr Speaker, again, I would like to be guided. Is the minister speaking as a Member of Parliament or as a minister, because there is hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, MP Kiboga District? (Laughter) Is she presenting as a minister or a Member of Parliament? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the status of the statement is irreparably damaged. (Laughter) We need to find another time to deal with this statement. (Laughter) We were expecting a ministerial statement, for sure. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I take responsibility for the mess my technical people have put me into and I want to apologise for that. The copy I have reads, “ministerial statement” but the copies they prepared for the House read, “information paper”, which is unfortunate. I want to be on record for taking responsibility and apologising to the House and say that I will go back, organise and bring a ministerial statement on lacustrine protected areas and further information about the steps we have taken in the implementation of the Fisheries Fund. I thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. What I am going to provide is not an information paper but a statement to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda on the status of the National Population and Housing Census as presented by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. (Expunged)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this statement attracts a debate and we shall see how to regulate. This is a direct statement on this issue and so I am going to allow for 20 minutes of debate. Is that okay? Each of you will take two minutes.

4.15
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I reluctantly looked at this response by the minister. I appreciate that he is complaining about serious funding from Government, but this shows you the unseriousness of the administration that we are in. They are aware that every 10 years there will be a census; you would want to know how many Ugandans have been recreated after 10 years. For an administration that has been in power for the last 26 years and you cannot afford to plan long-term for 10 years, I find this disturbing. 

That said, we know the vital use of statistics in planning. I actually think that the major reason that the Museveni administration is failing is because you do not have the instruments to plan. You do not have the statistics. If you do not know how many human beings you are planning for, how then can you realise those plans? 

I immensely sympathise with the minister, and one question to ask is: in 10 years’ time, why would you think of a donor to help you count your people? It is such a disappointment and frustration. It tells you how incapacitated you are, first as a ministry and secondly, as a Government.

If you look at these figures, we are talking about Shs 112 billion. Let us now project this on how we have expended some monies in this country. How relevant are the choppers that you bought, for example, and how much money have you been borrowing for other purposes apart from looking for money to help Government plan better? This tells you how scandalous your administration is. If I were you, I would just resign because this is good enough a reason for you to resign, because how do you function in a vacuum?

Mr Speaker, last time I was here as shadow minister and I told the nation that for every Ugandan, we have a quarter of a cow but now – (Member timed out.)

4.17
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We would always anticipate a census 10 years after a current census is conducted. What this means is that by the year 2002, a country called Uganda knew they would have to conduct a census this year. If we were able to plan our resources, it would be easier to save over the years an amount of money that would cumulatively help us conduct a census. This, the NRM Government did not do.

The Minister of Finance has rightly observed that the census is important for planning purposes. How do you plan for this nation without knowing the population you have to serve? I would like to submit that NRM is operating like a blind person without a white cane. You should take responsibility. This is a national shame and heads need to roll. 

I would like to see Government apportioning responsibility for this particular failure. You cannot tell us you do not have money yet we pay taxes. Where do our taxes go? Have we failed in payment of our taxes? Every time we go to a shop, we pay taxes. The clothes we put on are not tax-free, but you come and tell us these stories. I think this paper is valueless. Put your priorities right. (Member timed out.)

4.19 
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you. We are all saddened with this statement, and I believe the minister must take the greatest blame and shame with this kind of information. 

Mr Speaker, when you look at page 3, the funding requirements of the census which were provided in the budget of 2008/2009 to 2010/2011, the minister comes here to boldly tell us that out of the Shs 5 billion which was planned and budgeted, he was able to provide only Shs 4 billion. A gap of Shs 1 billion is good enough to affect the whole exercise. Just imagine the person who had planned to spend the Shs 1 billion to prepare for the census this year. I am not surprised that he comes here to tell us that the census has been postponed to August 2013 and one of the reasons they are giving is that there is a lot of rain this year, making counting of people difficult. It is very shameful! 

In the whole of the East African Community region, it is Uganda that is failing to undertake obligations of knowing its citizens. If we were now to ask Kenya, Rwanda, Burundi, Tanzania, and soon South Sudan will also come and say they have their statistics and Uganda, which has been independent for the last 50 years, still does not have its information at its finger tips. (Member timed out.)

4.22
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): It is absurd, Mr Speaker, that we are not serious. That is how we come here at 2 O’clock, we have an Order Paper and we just waste a lot of time. 

Census is a vital exercise, which helps Government to plan for her people and to formulate good policies. For a Government to come and report to Parliament that they have no money, surely; if we look at what was put in the current budget, this exercise is regarded not as important. How are you going to manage and govern this country? How will this Government govern this country without knowing the population they have and other ingredients that are important for this country. It is absurd! Unless this Government has another trick to use whatever money had been earmarked to do other things, I request that they go back and ensure that this exercise is carried out. It is absurd. 

I think we should be calling upon the minister to resign. (Applause) A census of a country to be postponed and you say you have no money, yet in the budget we see so much just lavishly being budgeted for. Can’t Parliament now look at the budget and reallocate funds so that this exercise is carried out? (Member timed out)

4.24
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I associate myself with the submissions of the previous speakers. When you look at the statement, it has been deceitfully prepared because it does not mention, as a result of the postponement, how much money we are losing. It does not address that. 

Mr Speaker, you had ruled about the rumours but I am made to understand that as a result of this postponement, we are losing over Shs 35 billion. I am aware that an exercise of this nature involves contracts, and they are signed between the entity and Government. I know that the loss is on our part; since we intend to suspend, we shall be losing because we shall be in breach of the contracts. I implore honourable members to demand from the minister to educate us on how much is to be lost as a result of the postponement of this exercise. 

I have credible information, and it is not a rumour, that we are going to lose Shs 35 billion as a result of this. The question would be, if you are suspending to lose, shouldn’t we devise means of getting money to carry out this exercise? Ever since I joined this House, I have been seeing supplementaries being raised. State House has been getting Shs 100 billion and they raised a supplementary of Shs 100 billion. That is not the ordinary meaning of the word “supplementary”. You cannot again ask for more-or-less the same amount like the one you asked for in the budget. We have budget processes and I think this must have been captured. (Member timed out)

4.28
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think it is bad manners to come to Parliament and lie especially if you are a respected minister at that. I am looking at paragraph 11 of your statement, which details the amount of funds required for you to conduct this census come August 2013. I have also looked at the Budget Speech of the FY 2012/2013; how much has been earmarked for this process? You need to look at page 39. It is only Shs 7.2 billion. That is the money in the budget for UBOS, and it is to cater for both non-wage and wage vote, but the money required is Shs 76.3 billion. So, where are you going to get the other difference from? That is why I said we are being fed on lies. 

A country that cannot even have resources to count its own people – forget about National Planning Authority. What are they planning? They do not know how many people are in this country. They do not know how many women are in this country. The youth were complaining about money but we do not have any figures pertaining to their gender, how many are illiterate and how many are educated. Nothing! And we sit here saying we are planning for this country. You have an authority where people are paid salaries, but they have no data to plan from. 

The reasons given by the minister as to why other censuses would not be held are understandable. It was because there was a war and so you could not have planned. But now there has been no war, and for ten years you knew you were supposed to conduct this important exercise. Hon. Kajara, please, I did not expect that from you. I expected something better. I think the House should allow the debate to take off fully such that people get to know the gravity of the problem.

If we cannot plan for this population, we have no reason to get the salaries we do. You will also realise that the budget is just a mere speech or ceremony, because you do not know the number of people you are planning for. (Member timed out.)

4.30
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County, East, Kanungu): First of all, I doubt that the Minister of Finance appreciates the importance of a national census and the centrality of population issues in the planning process for the country. I am saying this because censuses are carried out after ten years for reasons. Yes, he says that in the past there were reasons for not holding censuses, but that cannot be a justification for not holding a census after every ten years. This is because when you distort the period, it becomes very difficult for the demographers to project the variables over time. So, from a technical point of view, you have no justification. 

Even when you argue that you have to conduct the census when the children are at school, that is just for convenience because it depends on the method you want to use, whether it is the jury or the factual method of doing it. I think I need to train the Minister of Finance on these matters. I used to work with the United Nations Population Fund, which the minister is referring to on page 14. I would like to inform him that I know the level of preparedness from the development partners in regard to holding a census. So, the government has really let Ugandans down as far as timely interventions vis-à-vis carrying out the census is concerned.

Just yesterday was World Population Day. I think it becomes a big challenge if we do not know the people that we have and the segmentations of the different variables in this country. In that regard, like hon. Katuntu said, my question is: have you now made enough allocations to carry out the required activities this financial year? Also, do you appreciate the fact that you have wasted and lost a lot of money because some of the activities you had carried out required that you continue in order to carry out the enumeration? If you postpone them, it means that they will have to be re-done, which will require you to spend more money on this census exercise. So, you need to assure us that you have put in adequate resources and that there will be no further postponement of this exercise. Otherwise, Ugandans are disappointed that you failed to conduct the census in ten years as is required. (Member timed out.)

4.33
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am beginning to believe what I have been hearing that in this Government, which I have served, we have enemies of the state within. On whose terms of reference is the Ministry of Finance allowed to postpone the census? Who gives the directive? Is it the Minister, the Permanent Secretary or a director? I thought that mandate is exclusive to Parliament. 

Actually, it is the minister responsible to come here and request for permission to postpone the census exercise and not to come to inform us that they have already postponed it; on whose terms of reference? This is a national issue. We are busy buying condoms, for example, but for which population? (Laughter) We are giving out the youth money, but how many of them are you prepared to give that money to? We should even stop debating this matter. 

Let us ask the minister to go back so that he comes back to ask for permission to postpone this census and not the other way round. This is the Parliament of Uganda and it has the supreme powers to make laws. (Applause) So, it is impossible, Mr Speaker, for the minister to come and just inform us that the census has been postponed. What shall we tell the people we represent, that the minister postponed it? I am sure even the Executive is hearing it for the first time. If this was by the PS, let him sign a document, no matter whether it will be a ministerial statement, and tell us all that.

Mr Speaker, I would like to suggest that the minister comes back to request us to permit him to postpone this census exercise and not to just come here and tell us that it has been postponed because he has no mandate to do that. That mandate is within our adjudication as Parliament. You know that it is constitutional that we have to hold a census after every ten years. The other side of the House is already wondering what we are planning. Hon. Katuntu already said that this issue featured in the Budget Speech. Please, stop embarrassing us. We are the ruling party and let us act as a ruling Government. (Member timed out)

4.35
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement as far as the census is concerned. Yesterday was the International Population Day and Uganda’s national celebrations were held in Hoima Town. One of the major concerns that featured in the speeches from all the speakers at the function was about the census. I would like to request the minister to clarify - if he has the budget - the contradictions and the funding gap in the FY 2012/2013 budget between Shs 76 billion and Shs 7.2 billion that my brother hon. Katuntu has indicated and as indicated in the Budget Speech.

The minister goes ahead to tell us that in August 2013, the census will be conducted. It means he is just saying that come the 2013/2014 budget, the funds will be allocated. Where is the rationale to say that we postpone to August? Where is the rationale to say that we postpone to August rather than holding it in December or January when we shall have holidays and everybody will be in the countryside, so that we hold a census within the budget period when you need the biggest resources to cater for the census? 

It is very important that we hold a census if we are to have our statistics right. It was stated yesterday that currently, the infant mortality rates have declined from 76 percent to 54 percent and the maternal mortality rates have declined from 435 to 310. Where is the basis and the statistics? Rather than having them based on mere estimates and projections of the UBOS department - (Member timed out)

4.38
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. At times I wonder what our priorities on planning are. We have been debating the IDs matter in the country and we do not have IDs. We have just mentioned here in the statement that animals are dying of Foot and Mouth Disease. The minister does not know how much drugs they should import. We are just living in - I do not even know how I can call it - and yet we have the National Planning Authority well set, and we assume that there are priorities for us.

Mr Speaker, we are soon celebrating 50 years since independence and in that budget, there is Shs 16 billion just for celebrations of 50 years. What are we really celebrating? We should be keeping that money if we cannot think of first counting the people that we have. 

The other day, the UNFPA gave a report that we are producing 1.5 million children every year. It is just an estimate. It might even be two or three million, basing on the rate at which people are marrying and producing. So, if we cannot really get this census and know how to plan our social services, what are we doing? 

I think hon. Kajara you must have brought this with difficulty. I am sure, in your heart, you know that this is not the right statement you should have brought because it is so painful that you are telling us that you are postponing something very important. Therefore, I urge the government that we should think of our priorities and set ourselves as a credible government. Thank you.

4.40
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to add my voice to the previous speakers that honestly, if planning for a country you must know and manage the human resource that the country has. 

When you look at the Background to the Budget, the rate of growth is about 3.4 percent. If you look at this money, I do not know what estimates they used because if you say you have a funding gap in 2011/2012 of Shs 27 billion, what estimates did you use? You are saying on the same page 4 that the information you are using is for 2002 but the projection of the country is at 3.4 percent - we are looking at 34 million - and this is from the Ministry of Finance. So, I think it is now important for Parliament to assert itself to allocate money and we have a census because we are going to appropriate the budget. (Applause)

If you say that you are postponing to August 2013, that is another financial year, which is almost after appropriation of the budget year 2013/2014. The activities which are done, look at page 6 – For the remaining activities, you can use Members of Parliament to go and campaign in their constituencies and say, “we are going to have the census today” and we will have it. Why do you spend that money? So, it is a matter of readjusting the cost and we have a census. 

I think since we are going to appropriate money, it is clear that the funding gap is Shs 27 billion. We can reallocate the Shs 8.7 billion, which is missing and we have a census. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I do not see any different views from these. I will have hon. Sempijja, the Shadow Minister for Finance, and I will come to the minister and we finish this. There are other items we need to debate. 

4.43
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Vincent Sempijja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to those of the previous speakers that it is really very unfortunate that we cannot carry out a census as prior arranged. However, on the other hand, even if we want to carry out this census next year, I do not see us prepared to do it as the minister is trying to tell us. 

On the second page, the minister says that some of activities listed in No.5 have already been completed. My biggest problem is publicity and educating our members of the society on this census. During the last census, we had problems not only from the masses but even from Members of Parliament. In my area, it was a Member of Parliament who was opposing the census and he was going around and we tried to counter his project but in vain because he was a Member of Parliament. That means, Mr Speaker, that we really need to do a lot of work on educating the masses. If some Members of Parliament at that time did not know the meaning of a census, then what about the people down there? We need to do a lot of work. 

When you go down, some people still hide their children, property and animals because they do not want to be counted – (Member timed out.)

4.46
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Colleagues, Article 155 of the 1995 Constitution is very clear. We may hit hon. Kajara and blame the Permanent Secretary, but the person who is the problem is the President of Uganda and I want to read: “The President shall cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament each financial year, but in any case not later than the fifteenth day before the commencement of the financial year, estimates of revenues and expenditure of Government for the next financial year.”

According to this Constitution, the President is the minister of finance, so let us hit the nail direct where it matters. If the President is the minister of finance, spend time and read the Background to the Budget and also the Budget Speech. In fact, hon. Aston Kajara, you are carrying a bullet or cross which is not yours because you have lied and you know it that you have lied. There is no money for even financial year 2013/14. So, Mr Speaker, I will beg to move a motion at the end that the statement of the minister be expunged from the records because it is full of false statements. 

Secondly, if you look at- 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, honourable, for giving way. You are pointing out errors which the honourable minister has tabled before us. I just wanted to add to your information an error of figures on page 3, which is very critical and therefore the very reason why we cannot approve this. I am a statistician and I know that these figures should tally, but when you look at sections 8, 9, 10 and 11, I do not think the honourable minister really took time to look at these figures. It is simply disastrous! 

Let us start with section 8; it simply says that the overall budget expenditure on this item called “census” in the three years, 2008 to 2010, was Shs 5.0 billion of which Government contributed Shs 4.0 billion. So, get that figure well, that in the last three years Shs 4.0 billion came from Government and Shs 1.0 billion from the donors, total Shs 5.0 billion.

Come down to section 9, it says that the budget last year was Shs 48.6 billion but they only got an appropriation of Shs 19 billion. Even then he goes on to say that the actual release was Shs 13.5 billion. Now this means that there was actually a shortfall of Shs 33 billion.

Go down to section 11, the very first item on that table, the funding gap for last year was Shs 27.5 billion but in section 9 he says that the shortfall was Shs 33 billion. Now he is requesting for Shs 27.5 billion. The honourable minister is not sure what the shortfall was last year. 

Go down to section 10, it says that the total expenditure commitment on this item is Shs 47.6 billion. Now, this is where you get a problem. In section 9 he says, “As we come to the close of the financial year”, and at the end he signs “July”. The end of the financial year should not have been July. Now, as at that time somewhere he wrote that the total expenditure was Shs 47.6 billion; how do we come to that? In the other three years, we have had Shs 5 billion and then last year we had Shs 38.5 billion. Mr Minister, how did you come to Shs 47.6 billion? You are not telling Parliament the whole truth. 

I would like to submit that we should not approve this because information does not tally anywhere. You get to section 11 where he says Shs 76.3 billion is in this year’s budget. This one needs to be shown. You cannot now request us to approve Shs 8.7 billion as a total of Shs 112 billion because the Shs 8.7 billion is in the next financial year. It cannot arise in this financial year. So, this simply put in figures, the minister is not clear on what he is asking for. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for the information. If you look at page A 64 of the Background to the Budget, to tell you that even our current GDP estimate of 3.2 is full of falsehood and errors - GDP is measured by the number of people with basket of goods and services. So, how does Government of Uganda compute its GDP? 

To show you that things are really upside down, you look at page A 64, population of Kotido; in 1991, it was 57,000 people; 2002 it was 122,000; now 2012 it is 223,000. The level of projection is upside down. Let me give you another district, Moyo; in 2002 it had a population of 194,000 and in 2012 it is 412,000. If you compare with others, the projection of 3.2 per annum, which the statistic level he is using, does not match to all other districts of Uganda.

Kampala was 700,000 now it is 1.7 million. Yes, Kampala is a city but other districts are upside down. Let me show you Tororo; it had a population of 285,000 people and as we speak today, it only has 487,000. While some are tripling, others quadrupling, doubling and others are just increasing by 10 percent.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, for the purposes of the Hansard we need to be clear. Is the Tororo District you are reading today the same Tororo District of 2002? Has there been no change in district? 

MR EKANYA: The Tororo District we are talking about in 2002 to today has remained the same. Buteleja went with hon. Hyuha and you know the period it went. So, if you add the entire record, the information is really upside down. Even the President wrote a letter about budget allocation. Hon. Okupa moved a motion last financial year. You find some districts getting more money than others because the figure they used for resource allocation is based on this false figure.

Without much ado, let me give the facts. It is the Minister of Finance, Bank of Uganda and the President of Uganda that agreed that if we conduct a population census, we are going to distort micro-economic stability and therefore we need to tighten and not to do this activity. As we speak now, there is money in the budget, more than Shs 1 trillion, to recapitalise Bank of Uganda. We have over Shs 1 trillion which was left for Karuma. Karuma matter is in court. I, therefore, want to move that: one, the statement of the minister be rejected; and secondly, that this House appropriates adequate money to conduct a population census this financial year. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, you know the implication of the motion you are moving; can you speak on that?
 
MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, in line with the Constitution of Uganda, we are not adding on the total budget of Shs 11 trillion estimated, which was presented by the minister. What we are proposing is to ensure that within the resource envelope of Shs 11 trillion, we do re-allocation to a key sector, which is fundamental to this economy, and that is conducting a population census.  This is because in the budget the minister is proposing to borrow over Shs 1 trillion from NSSF and the government is proposing to consolidate Bank of Uganda and yet in the Consolidated Fund Account, we have Shs 1 trillion lying idle and we have some other resource in the budget.
 
The Constitution gives us power, and remember that the role of Parliament worldwide is appropriation - the power of the purse.  If we surrender the power of the purse, we shall be like impotent men. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, under your leadership, this Parliament cannot be impotent! I, therefore, beg colleagues across the divide to ensure that the population census is conducted so that when you ask for boreholes, you know the number of people going to be served; when you ask for mosquito nets, you know the number of people going to be served; when you ask for anti-malarials, we know the number of people to be served; when we say women are moving 10 kilometres to look for firewood, we know the number of women who are suffering; when we are doing immunisation, we know the number of  children being immunised; when you are planning for the population through contraceptives, we know the number of women targeted; when we are talking of youth unemployment, we know the number of youth who are unemployed. So, I beg that this motion be supported.
   
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is my responsibility to guide this House. There is a public finance issue, and there is a doctrine in public finance called financial initiative. That doctrine states that financial initiative lies with the President. It is true that appropriation is the responsibility of Parliament, but Parliament appropriates what is proposed. That is public finance; simple. If Parliament approves what is proposed, it appropriates what has been proposed. Financial initiative has never left the hands of the President of the country. 

We are at this moment initiating a budget process. Now, wouldn’t it be proper for the last leg of the proposal that has been made, instead of us pronouncing ourselves on it, to come from an appropriate committee and then the House can pronounce itself on it properly rather than doing it now in this manner? This is because we are not examining any appropriation proposals. There is no motion before us examining any proposals on this. Are we together? So, I would not want the House to act in haste and, therefore, breach principles that are basically ordinary. It is my responsibility to guide. Are we together on this? But I would allow us to deal with the first leg of the motion. 

5.00
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, thank you so much for your wise guidance. Yesterday you gave us a story of a disc thrower in the Olympics who made an exceptional throw far beyond where others had stopped but where he started from, there was a red flag. So, actually it was a no-throw which excited the viewers for nothing. I appreciate your guidance that it is not right for you to preside over any illegality just like someone raised the red flag during the disc throw. 

In the circumstances, without much ado, the only prudent thing remaining for this House, in supporting hon. Ekanya’s first version of the motion, is to reject the minister’s statement outrightly. Whatever the minister is going to do after we have rejected his statement is his problem. If you need our advice, you know where to get us. (Laughter) So, in the circumstances, Mr Speaker, basing on your guidance, I would support the first part of the hon. Ekanya’s motion that the statement of the minister be rejected. 

Also, given the statistical analysis from our statistician, hon. Magyezi, who is also on the Government side, I think it would be grave injustice even to attempt to further dissect your documents when the professionals have already spoken. So, I support the motion that the minister’s motion be thrown out; however, it is up to his discretion if he can apologise to us for our time he has wasted. (Laughter) Thank you so much.

5.02 
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would really not want to dilute your very wise guidance. I appreciate your guidance particularly on the first leg of hon. Ekanya’s motion. 

Now, given your guidance on the first leg of his motion, I would think that rather than rejecting this paper, it is referred to the committee – (Interjections) - It is as if there is a referendum in the House on this matter! I was of course trying to establish a point of reference. Did I hear you right, Mr Speaker; did you propose that this matter goes to the committee?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. I said that the earlier one of saying that we give money for the census in the budget could be handled at the committee level.

MR RUHINDI: Then it can find its way there. Thank you so much. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, I would like to second the motion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is seconded. The motion is that the statement presented by the minister be rejected by this House.
 
5.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I will willingly offer an apology to the House on behalf of my colleague. However, I would like to amend that maybe the minister withdraws the statement from the House and it is reconsidered later on. So, I wish to propose that instead of rejection, he withdraws the motion. I beg to move.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there an amendment? I am asking because an amendment is a substantive motion, not so? When somebody moves an amendment to an existing motion, I have to seek secondment so that it is formally dealt with. Let us hear from the mover of the original motion; maybe he has a statement on this.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I stated categorically that the problem was not the minister and if I accept that the minister withdraws the motion, it will have a bit of a challenge -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, you do not accept the motion.

MR EKANYA: I do not accept the amendment by the minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is it. So, is the motion by hon. Baba seconded? Who seconds this motion? 

MR SSIMBWA: I do support the amendment moved by hon. Baba that the minister withdraws the statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a motion that the statement be rejected. An amendment has been proposed to that motion that instead of rejecting it, the minister should withdraw the statement. I put the question to the amendment; we start with the amendment and then we go back to the original motion.

MR FRED RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, rather than going into this duel, it should be the initiative of the Minister of State for Finance to withdraw the paper or not because this is his paper- (Interjections) - Why do we have to go into this business of voting on the motion?

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do take cognisance of the wisdom advanced by the learned Attorney-General. However, the stage where we have reached, having successfully reached a motion to throw out the minister’s statement, came after the minister had had ample time to make a decision either to withdraw or not to withdraw. As if that was not enough, there was an attempt to amend the motion which was on the Floor, which was also lost.

Now, the procedural guidance I want to seek from you, Mr Speaker, is whether at this critical time there is any binding procedural arrangement under which the Attorney-General can come to give wisdom, in an attempt to save the honourable minister from embarrassment, and ask him to withdraw when there is already a motion on the Floor to the effect that the whole thing be thrown out. There was enough time to have conceded much earlier on but he chickened out by withdrawing. I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a motion was moved and seconded. When I was proposing the question for debate on that motion, the honourable minister proposed an amendment to that motion, which amendment was also seconded. I was now proposing a question whether it should be debated for the withdrawal and the hon. Fred Ruhindi then stood up and the honourable minister whose paper is the subject of this discussion has stood up. I have no idea what he is going to say.  Can we wait for what he is going to say and then we deal with it? 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, circumstances like these are governed by our Rules of Procedure. Other than having a general debate as to whether what we are doing is right or wrong, or whether the learned Attorney-General was right in rising up, he should have addressed himself to our Rules of Procedure and cited what rule he was moving under. I will be of help to the learned Attorney-General and remind him of the provision of rule 49 of our Rules of Procedure.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you wanted to say something? 

5.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members of the House, I did bring this statement to Parliament to explain the government’s position regarding the holding of the national population and housing census this current financial year. Questions were raised by members of this House as to how much money, for example, will be lost. As to who was responsible for taking this decision -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we have passed that stage. You have no right of reply on this matter. There is a substantive motion. I put the question to the –

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, with your leave, I would like to beg the House that I withdraw this statement, go and bring out some of these issues, and then I can bring it back at an appropriate time with your leave, Sir. Thank you, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you appropriately seek the leave of the House to do that?

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, I wish to seek leave of the House to withdraw the ministerial statement on the national population and housing census to enable us to examine the figures again as has been raised by members and find an appropriate statement, which would be given to this House. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leave is sought by a motion. Should I take it that this is a formal motion you are presenting? In which case you have to cite the rules, and in which case whether this falls within the rules of those motions that do not require notice. 

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, I have not addressed myself to the - 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, I would like to know whether the honourable minister is in order to consume a lot of our precious time revising the rules in front of the cameras, not only embarrassing the President but also embarrassing the ruling party and displaying high levels of ignorance of the rules. Is he in order to revise in front of us? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am sure you have been properly advised that you can move a motion under rule 49 - rules that require no notice - to present your motion formally for withdrawal and then we move from there.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, I take your advice -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The other way you could do it is to amend the motion of hon. James Baba where now you are moving formally to deal with this issue.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, this is a statement that I brought before the House and it is not yet concluded. My belief is that if somebody brings a statement to the House, before it is concluded they can move that it be withdrawn. In the circumstances, I move, and with your leave and with the leave of the members, that I withdraw this statement and bring it at an appropriate time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is that motion seconded? Who seconds this motion? It is seconded by hon. Kabakumba, hon. Baba Diri and other members. The honourable member is seeking leave of the House to allow him withdraw.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There was a motion, then there was an amendment and now this is a motion. According to your previous ruling, the minister should have moved an amendment to the amendment, which is second-line amendment. Otherwise, if he only moves a formal motion, then he makes the first motion and the amendment redundant and that is not provided for in our rules.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when handling motions and amendments to motions, the decision normally is, you process that motion which is likely to deal with the substance of the matter completely. If it can deal with the subject matter completely, then you do not have to vote three times to come to that conclusion. 

What this honourable minister has requested is that he be granted leave of the House, in other words permission of the House and not the permission of the Speaker. It is up to the House; this leave can be granted or withheld. Yes, rule 49 is there. If the minister has proposed that he is seeking leave of the House, that the House should allow him to withdraw, can I put the question as to whether the House agrees to the leave he is seeking or not? Can I put the question to that? The question is whether the honourable minister be granted leave of this House to withdraw this motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, leave has been granted to you; would you now like to withdraw your motion.

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, I wish to seek your guidance especially as far as the front bench on the Government side is concerned. You remember this morning there was a minister who came with an information paper and we wasted a lot of time and there was almost no business done. Again we have a minister who has come here and we have wasted about two and a half hours on this matter. 

The guidance I am seeking is: we sit here for long hours; how do you advise us to proceed with business given the fact that the front bench is either unprepared or so reluctant or just unbothered about the time that we spend here? I am really seeking your guidance because this is getting to unacceptable proportions. I do not know what you are going to tell me, but just say something to convince me because I am now worried about the calibre of the Executive before me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you will recall that I made a statement at the beginning that I had granted hon. Otto leave to present a motion to this House to express the displeasure of this House on the conduct of the members of the front bench of Government. I granted this leave last week. If this motion was here, we would have heard it but it is not here.  So, I have stated it personally on the record of this House that I am personally disappointed with the way we are handling business in this House especially from the Executive. I have made directives about what documents should be submitted by what date, documents do not just show up. I have directed that questions that are pending should be answered, they do not come. I have directed that all ministerial statements should be brought to the House and they start bringing information papers with information of this nature. (Laughter) Really -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, in a few minutes when this document was presented to the House by the Minister of Finance, who is competent in finance, members immediately noticed errors. The qualification to be a Member of Parliament is an A’ level certificate; so, a senior six person was able to see things in the shortest time possible, and yet we have technocrats in these ministries. 

Mr Speaker, I want to seek your guidance about these documents coming to Parliament; is it for purposes of just a ritual or passing time so that when they come here and they are squeezed, they seek leave of the House to withdraw. I want you to guide; what should we do in such circumstances?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have already guided on that, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I have guided so many times. I am waiting for members to help me execute my guidance on this matter.

Honourable members, there are two other statements on the Order Paper - actually three - but given the nature of the debate we have had on these statements, and yet we have unfinished business on the report of the National Security Information System which we had agreed we would deal with - That one is also there; it is pending. We have statements which have taken us three hours to move nowhere. Can I propose that we deal with the two short petitions in five minutes and then we move to the issue of the national IDs and finish it so that it stops appearing on our Order Paper every day? Can we do that? I propose that we deal with the petitions, items 4 and 5, and we go straight to item 7 and we finish with that. Agreed? Under our rules, the Order Paper is accordingly amended. 

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had thought that having granted leave to the minister, he would formally withdraw. I see us moving to the next item without him withdrawing his information paper, which was actually a ministerial statement. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, you disrupt the proceedings. I was calling upon the minister to withdraw then there were all kinds of interventions and somehow, the proceedings got completely complicated. Honourable minister, please formally withdraw with an apology to the House and we move to the next item.

5.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, this is to formally withdraw the ministerial statement to Parliament on the status of the National Population and Housing Census, with apology. I beg to withdraw. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Statement withdrawn and the space it occupies on the Hansard shall be treated as if it was empty. (Laughter)  

PETITION ON THE UNPRECEDENTED AND/OR ORCHESTRATED FORCEFUL ENCROACHMENT AND GRABBING OF THE HISTORICAL SCOUT’S LAND AT THE KAAZI TRAINING AND CAMPING CENTRE

5.30
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise under rule 27 of our Rules of Procedure to move a petition on behalf of the Uganda Scouts Association: 

Your humble petitioners are the Association of Uganda scouts which is one of the largest youth organisations in this country. 

Since its inception in Uganda, your petitioners have not only contributed to non-formal education and development of young people as individuals but also as responsible citizens and as members of their local, national and international communities through a value-based system on the scouts’ promise and law, helping build a better world through instilling essential virtues of self-reliance, responsibility and commitment to good values and development. 

Of recent, they owned land at Kaazi but portions of this land have been and are still being encroached on by several persons who are illegally erecting structures and other developments day and night, to the extent that approximately over 30 acres of this land is under serious threat of being taken away.

Your petitioners have tried to get help from the Police Land Protection Unit. However, these efforts have been fruitless. 

Your humble petitioners are fearful that if the status quo is maintained, the planned National Scouts Camp of over 6,000 scouts from all over Uganda scheduled for 3rd to 10th August at Kaazi may be disorganised. Your petitioners may not be able to control the wrath of the youth who may turn out to be rowdy and channel their more than abundant energies on the illegal encroachers and criminal trespassers. 

Therefore, your humble petitioners seek the indulgence of this august House and pray that this Parliament investigates this matter and further directs the Ministry of Internal Affairs to immediately intervene and protect the camping grounds, which are going to be used during the planned National Scouts Camp of over 6,000 scouts from all over Uganda.

Your petitioners, as duty-bound, will ever pray. 

I beg to move. They have attached a list of people who have signed this petition. They are leaders of the association. Also, we have attached a copy of the land title. This land was given to the Uganda Scouts by the Ssekabaka of Buganda, Daudi Chwa, in the 1940s. I lay the petition on the Table. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. The rules are that this matter be referred to a committee but the matter is urgent. There are allegations of people quickly building on this land, putting wall fences. There are even allegations of some gunshots in the process. I urge the committee to do whatever it takes to come back to this House quickly and make some quick interventions such that the status quo can be preserved and we deal with this matter properly. The way it is being handled, from the brief I got when I received this petition, is not good.  

The committee will be the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and they should act. I hope the chairperson is here. Act quickly and advise us on how best to move to preserve land which was duly given, titled land at that.  
   
MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. From what you are saying, it seems the matter is quite urgent. The two ministers responsible are actually opposite me right now. The Minister of Lands is here and the Minister of Internal Affairs in whose docket Police falls, which has failed to do the job, is also here. They are all looking at us like they do not recognise the urgency of the matter. (Laughter)

By the time the committee goes through the proceedings, maybe in a week, two weeks or a month, the status quo could have changed. Mr Speaker, I thought you would use your authority to urge the two ministers who are responsible, and fortunately are in the House now, to make sure that as the committee is doing its work, they take appropriate decisions and steps to make sure that the status quo is maintained until the committee brings the report, we debate it and make recommendations. That is the guidance I seek, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the prayer of the House. Can the ministers make statements on this? 

5.36
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Katuntu for the observation he has made, which is really pertinent. This matter has been brought to my attention this afternoon. Normally when we are faced with such a problem, we take off time and try to address the matter so that corrective measures are put in place. We are going to take this up. I am going to get a copy of this petition so that we can be in a position to examine the record.

I also accordingly seek the support and input of my colleague, the Minister for Internal Affairs, so that we can be able to find a comprehensive solution as the matter is being handled by the committee of Parliament.

5.37
THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Hillary Onek): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Abdu Katuntu for actually observing correctly that we are all in the House and looking at them. (Laughter) 

Our police force is prompt in addressing any irregularities or any matter that is brought to its attention. In order for us to go and put order into that kind of land encroachment, we shall need from the Minister for Lands a clear demarcation as to where the boundaries are, and if possible, we may also need a court order. There are summary court orders that can be issued; if there is an illegality of that nature, it does not require attending court.  Otherwise, I will deploy people to understand what is happening there but to enforce it, I need clear information.

MR EKANYA: I thank you very much. I think the Minister for Internal Affairs has goodwill. I want to refer him to the Constitution and the rules. We have the power of the High Court to enforce. When I was the chairperson of local government and I was faced with such a situation, I would use the power of the High Court to call for the titles and order stay of any action and we succeeded in saving land around Kampala. Even the land between Uganda Manufacturers Association and Shoprite, we had so many titles there. So, can you know that this is a directive from Parliament and go and act because we have the power of the High Court?

MR ONEK: I thank you, hon. Ekanya. We shall take your directive very seriously and we are ready to act now. (Applause)  We need the land title urgently from the Minister for Lands and we get a lands officer who will help us to pinpoint the mark stones, and I will deploy Police there tomorrow. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I had asked the committee to act on this and take remedial measures to preserve the status quo. I was very aware about what hon. Ekanya has stated, and that is why a committee can liaise quickly with the concerned people so that these things can be done properly. I thank you. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I seek clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On this?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The next item! (Laughter)

PETITION ON THE COMMUNITY LAND ENCROACHMENT BY UGANDA WILDLIFE AUTHORITY (QUEEN ELIZABETH NATIONAL PARK)
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Boaz Kafuda. By the way, the executive members of the Uganda Scouts Association have been watching this since and they are now leaving. (Applause)

5.41
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, BUSONGORA COUNTY NORTH, KASESE): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to present this petition under rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda to the Speaker of Parliament of Uganda. It is a petition on the community land encroachment by Uganda Wildlife Authority (Queen Elizabeth National Park) from Kahendero Parish in Muhokya Sub-County; Katunguru Parish in Lake Katwe Sub-County; and Katwe-Kabatooro Town Council all in Kasese District. 

The humble petition of the people of Kahendero Parish in Muhokya Sub-county; Katunguru Parish in Lake Katwe Sub-County; and Katwe-Kabatooro Town Council in Kasese District, South Western Uganda, through hon. Boaz Kafuda, the Member of Parliament representing Busongora County South, Kasese District.

In 1925, the Department for Elephant Control was set up to stop the elephants from marauding villages and destroying cultivation, the overall aim being to keep them within certain boundaries, protecting both elephants and people. As a result, a series of game reserves, sanctuaries and national parks were established over the years. 

Across the border in the Congo, Parc National des Virunga was designated in 1925 by the Belgian colonial authorities, and pressure to protect the adjoining eco-system in Uganda led to the establishment of Lake George Game Reserve and Lake Edward Game Reserve in the late 1920s and early 1930s. 

Several geographic and name changes followed, and Kazinga National Park eventually was gazetted in 1952, encompassing 1,978 square kilometres. However, two years later in 1954 when Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II visited the park, it was renamed in her honour as Queen Elizabeth National Park.

The controversy is about the newly 1991 erected demarcation pillars by Uganda Wildlife Authority, which never followed the surveys and mappings of 1952 and instead encroached onto people’s land in Katunguru Parish in Lake Katwe Sub-County, Kahendero Parish in Muhokya Sub-County and Katwe-Kabatooro Town Council in the areas of Kyakitale Ward, Kihabule Forest Reserve, Rwenjubu Ward and in the salt lake area adjacent to Kanyamiyomba.

This confusion compelled the communities to uproot some of the demarcation pillars, hence leaving one person dead in the names of Mr Mugisa David in Katwe-Kabatooro Town Council in 2011, and his body was taken by the game park rangers and UWA officials present during the fight and up to now the body has never been seen -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please go to the prayers because it looks like the petition is drafted in a very long form. Please go to the prayers.

MR KAFUDA: The prayers, Mr Speaker: 
Therefore, by this petition, your humble petitioners pray that Parliament –

1. 	Compels Government to degazette at least four square kilometres of land to enable the Katunguru community have status for its existence in Queen Elizabeth National Park. This will enable the Katunguru community get land to bury their dead and also carry out other community tourism activities for their economic development; 

2. 	Parliament should immediately intervene in the verification of the Uganda Wildlife Authority boundaries as gazetted in 1952 when Queen Elizabeth National Park was established as the only solution to ascertain the truth and convince all the communities.

Under rule 27(3) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, herewith are appended signatures of the aggrieved communities of Katunguru Parish in Lake Katwe Sub-county, Kahendero Parish in Muhokya Sub-county, and Katwe-Kabatooro Town Council. The letters and the Kasese District council minutes are addressed to the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda. They are here. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you ask to lay that document on the Table.

MR KAFUDA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the petition on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that, and the matter is referred to the appropriate committee to handle expeditiously. We do not have to apply the 45-day rule as some of these matters are issues that need to be dealt with quickly. It is accordingly directed.  

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE INQUIRY INTO THE PROCUREMENT OF EQUIPMENT FOR THE NATIONAL SECURITY INFORMATION SYSTEM (NSIS); THE NATIONAL ID PROJECT

(Debate Continues)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we had started this matter and we were confronted by technical difficulty and we could not proceed. Can I suspend the House for five minutes, ring the bell and we see if we can conclude this debate today. The House is suspended.

(The House was suspended at 5.54 p.m) 

(On resumption at 5.57 p.m., the Deputy Speaker, presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had started on the recommendations of the committee and I had pointed out that they were without page 11 because we had finished it. We had come to page 14, but we had some difficulty. The rest of the report is of the pages that I had outlined to Members earlier. The recommendations on page 14 –

MR TINKASIMIRE: Mr Speaker, I recall that yesterday you made a ruling to have this matter stood over because there was no quorum. But even now, when you count through, you realise that there is still no quorum. But most importantly, I would like to point out that the frontbench has deliberately chosen to deny this House quorum. We have 78 ministers and when you count now you will notice that we only have 13 ministers present. But of these 13, two are ex-officios and they don’t vote in this House.

Mr Speaker, I am at pain with what we have gone through today. From the onset a minister presented to this House an information paper instead of a ministerial statement. Another minister presented to the House an inaccurate statement. Another problem was coming from -(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Is it in order, Mr Speaker, for the honourable member holding the Floor to just meander by talking about so many things without coming to the point?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Member referred to was still expressing his concerns by seeking guidance on the matter. I don’t think there is any violation of any order of the House. Please proceed and wind up on what you wanted to raise.

MR TINKASIMIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I was only expressing my displeasure, particularly in respect of people who must be here. We can excuse other members, but on the front bench, for God’s sake – why should they – is it procedurally right for them to persistently derail this House by bringing uncoordinated and inaccurate statements on top of absconding from attending Parliament proceedings thereby denying us quorum not to proceed? –(Interjections)– I mean the frontbench of the Government side. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Actually, the issue being raised by hon. Bernabas Tinkasimire relates to our rules. Rule 31 of the Rules of Procedure is to the effect that ministers shall attend sittings of the House to answer questions asked to them. So, when they are not in this House –(Interruptions)

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, the frontbench, where I sit is full. So, I don’t know whether hon. Barnabas Tinkasimire meant the frontbench led by the Leader of the Opposition. Otherwise, as far as I am concerned, our frontbench is full. So, is he in order to impute bad motives on the frontbench of the government when it is actually full?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the record should show that the frontbench is properly represented in this sitting.

MR TINKASIMIRE: Mr Speaker, why I raised that matter is because I am aware of the number of ministers that were approved – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that issue is already done. Do you have any other matter? 

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, we have our Minister of Health present and procedurally, I don’t know whether it would be proper that he guides hon. Barnabas Tinkasimire to the nearest eye clinic since he cannot see the numbers. (Laughter)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, the matter we are going to discuss is very important to this House. But when you look at the front bench of the Opposition, you realise that it also has problems. In fact there are only three members – some of them were removed – but I can see hon. Nandala-Mafabi, with hon. Abdu Katuntu. This means that there is a very big problem as far as quorum is concerned. I am also a little disappointed, as far as the Opposition is concerned. Actually, I would be very glad if possibly the Opposition could ask hon. Jack Sabiiti to also come and sit at its front bench because he is a regular Member of the House.  So, Mr Speaker, are we going to debate this matter when we don’t have quorum?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are so many recommendations and some of them, in the opinion of the chair, are not controversial at all; some of them possibly are. Can we just use this time to go through them and see if we can guide ourselves on how to proceed? If there are aspects that are difficult, we can do more consultation on them and push them forward, but if there are matters that we can deal with, let us deal with them now. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am proceeding from the premises that what you just said is not a ruling. It is my view that any time we waste here is man hours lost and if we cannot discuss business and take a decision, there is no reason why we should come here and just talk - literally having a conversation. The Speaker, at the beginning of this session, communicated the sort of standards she expected of us as Members of Parliament and she did caution us that in this session, your Office is going to be serious on attendance of business in this House. 

I do suggest, Mr Speaker, that you remind the whips, both the Government Chief Whip and the acting Opposition Chief Whip because we have a slight problem, which I am sure my brother Dr Bitekyerezo did not realise, but since the Leader of the Opposition is here, he will mobilise our colleagues and we attend to this important report the following day we when we are going to do business, and that is most likely Tuesday, and we conclude it without any controversy. 

We cannot continue with serious business when on record people are saying that there is no quorum. Other people might take advantage of that, arguing that after all, decisions were taken without quorum. So, I suggest, Mr Speaker, that you direct the gentlemen and ladies who lead both sides to do their job and mobilise Members to attend and we dispose of this report as soon as possible. I so pray, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I call the meeting for all the whips tomorrow in the Deputy Speaker’s boardroom at 10.00 O’clock. Please attend. Important matters will be discussed. Honourable members, the issue of attendance in this House is grave and of great concern not only to the Speaker, but even to the electorate who sent us here, and especially because they expect us to be making decisions, but we are nowhere. I wish the camera could just do a round check to cast to the country those who are in the House and those who are not there because it is really not fair. We are now trying to consult with other parliaments. The Zambian Parliament has 100 percent attendance every day of sitting. You cannot raise the issue of accommodation when you have all these MPs absent. 

Honourable members, it is a matter of concern and the time I suspended the House, there were more Members than there are now. You have come here to take decisions. There is no point in fearing decision time; good or bad, we stand by them; we fall by them. So, the honourable members in the canteen and around the precincts of this House, it is decision time and the decision bell has been rung to alert Members that we are going to take decisions on some issues that have been pending for a long time and we are unable to take these decisions because we don’t have the numbers. It is not fair to Ugandans. 

MS ABIA: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance. I really do not know what constitutes attendance of a Member of Parliament. I am raising this because you find Members who walk into the lobby, they sign and walk out. They don’t even attend here and yet there are Members who walk in here without even registering their names or they forget to register. What really constitutes attendance of a sitting, because there are Members who will look at the Order Paper and say there is no business here and walk away. There are those who come and as soon as they speak, they are off; and there are those Members who come here and look at the gallery and if the press is off, they walk in there and say the press is not here. So, I think we need to find a mechanism to justify what attending a sitting is. Otherwise, this registration at the tables there is not helping us because if you look at the records there, so many Members of Parliament have been recorded. Now look at us here, we get the monies of the taxpayers and we are unable to discuss important issues. So, I just want to think that we should quantify what attending a sitting is.  

MR OKOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Given the circumstances that we are experiencing, I would like to propose that registration should be done at the end of the session such that when you adjourn the House, then people start registering as they walk out. Thank you. 

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I note with a lot of dismay and discontent, especially when it comes to the issue of attendance that the human brain is so bright that it will play around every time you decide anything, including a proposal of signing at the end. They will all come at the end. So, the very time you want to start, you won’t even have the numbers. 

I propose, Mr Speaker, using your position that - we must be aware that as Members of Parliament, we are eating taxpayers’ money and we must take personal responsibility. We must be aware that we are actually making this taxpayer lose a lot of money. So, signing should maybe, be before the Sergeant-At-Arms. We can have one of them stationed there; otherwise, the whole thing has been that because they record the number of times you attend, people come and sign and leave at will or at leisure. So, since have a Sergeant-At-Arms - you can even employ one for the sake of Members of Parliament. You can’t know how much time we have lost in terms of doing serious business for this country. 
 
MR MWIRU: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker and colleagues. We should stop the pretence. When this report came to the Floor of this Parliament, the greatest mistake we made was to actually allow it go to the NRM Caucus. When you adjourned this House, I actually made an effort and I went up the canteen and I found Members seated there, even Members from my region Busoga feared to enter this Parliament for one reason; this report concerns three Members from the Busoga sub-region. The reason as to why we are here is to take decisions.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much Rt Hon. Speaker. I rise on a point of order. I am the Chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs that worked on this report, and I am from Busoga. I did sign this report, I am the Vice-chairperson of Busoga Parliamentary group, and almost all my Members are here. Is the honourable member in order to begin inciting the public against Members from Busoga that they are not attending Parliament?

Is the honourable member in order to begin losing confidence in his own people, moreso his own caucus and himself? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I see the hon. Milton Muwuma; I see the hon. Migereko; I see the hon. Muzaale; I see the hon. Lumumba. I see hon. Katuntu, hon. Mwiru. I see the ember for Eastern region; I see the honourable Minister for Gender. Honourable members I think if we are to go by regions, the Busoga region is more represented than other regions. The statement uttered by the honourable member is unfortunate because these Members are here before our own eyes, we can see them. 

The honourable member may want to correct the record of Parliament so that we proceed in a harmonious way. Hon. Mwiru, please correct the record.

MR MWIRU: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for the record and for harmony in this House, I want to withdraw that statement, but you should take cognisance of the fact that we are 28 Members of Parliament and we are all not in this House. Thank you Mr Speaker.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, attendance is regulated by our Rules of Procedure, among others, and it is crucial. Even when one is seeking leave of absence, it is through your office and that is either in writing or verbal communication. I want to make two proposals and maybe we can actually choose one. This business of signing out there has a problem. For instance, if you are going for a board meeting, you find a book inside, and you sign and sit. Everybody sees you; there would be no congestion whatsoever if, for instance, a table is put there; a person enters and signs when we are looking at him or her. That certainly makes a difference.

The other alternative is to get the book after some minutes and it is up to you to call upon anyone to make a contribution or otherwise. You can even notice who has put his or her signature and who is not in the House. But I think the other option of putting books in the corners where people can sign can make a difference. Thank you.

MR WADRI: Thank you so much Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to say that it is not the first time that Parliament is frustrated by lack of quorum and more particularly, when we come to scrutinise and discuss serious matters which in the public eye are seen as matters of national importance.

It is also a fact that before we started debate on this report, several attempts had been made by several caucuses to build consensus. This is a fact; I am not saying this because what has been happening somewhere is unknown to us. It is a fact that caucuses were conducted outside Parliament to build consensus so that when you come here, your position is able to be sold.

Having said that, I am also reliably informed - because these meetings are not conducted in sound proof rooms where there is no leakage; we get leakages thereafter - the discussions divided the caucus group in terms of how to conduct business and this is not the first time. The other time in March, when we had a contentious issue here, when it came to time for voting - I am happy you were here Rt Hon. Speaker - it came to a point where Members started sneaking out of the Chamber.

Based on these two experiences, I will beg that because of the seriousness of this report and other reports which will follow thereafter, that serious matters of this nature should take priority in terms of arrangement on the Order Paper; so that after hearing your communication, we immediately go to consider reports when the House is still fresh; when the number of attendees is still high, so that we are not constrained by lack of quorum.

This is my humble suggestion, although the idea which has been mooted by the Learned Attorney General can work. 

You see, Members come to Parliament at different times. Parliament is supposed to start at 2.00 p.m. and at exactly 2.00 p.m. you may find that not every Member is present. Somebody may come at 2.30 p.m. and if that book is already withdrawn from the lobby table and it is already here at the Table of Speaker, I do not know whether it would not look clumsy for every other late comer to come to the Table of the Speaker and say I am late by 30 minutes or an hour, I was caught up by this, can you allow me sign? I think that would make our Parliament look very clumsy. 

The other thing is that we should be what we are in terms of titles that we hold, “honourable members.” Really, if you come and you only append your signature in the register and you leave without even seeing the inside of the Chamber, surely, that is not proper. So, let each one of us appeal to his/her conscience to find out whether you deserve that title of honourable. After signing the attendance register, you should then come and participate in the business of Parliament; otherwise we are not going to police or to ask the whips to whip everybody.

We came to Parliament for a purpose and, therefore, we must live to the commitment that we made with our voters and the country because at the end of the day the country is losing.

In the Sixth Parliament and at the beginning of the Seventh Parliament, you will agree with me that what you used to be the basis of paying emoluments to Members of Parliament was their attendance. So that if you do not attend Parliament and only attend five times; then you would get Shs 150,000 X 5 days. That is what you would go home with. But now, when the commission opened up, this is now again being abused. So, really, my appeal to honourable colleagues, let us not embarrass ourselves before the public. The Public knows that they are spending money on us, paying for our emoluments, for us to be here and deliberate business on their behalf. So, let us reconsider and recommit ourselves to this noble cause and more importantly, Rt Hon. Speaker that these important matters take precedence in as far as business on the Order Paper is concerned. I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I think this is the saddest day of my life, while sitting in this Chair, to listen to honourable members appeal to their colleagues to do exactly what they came here to do. Just imagine, you were elected, came and took oath to represent the people of your respective areas and constitute the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda in this Ninth Parliament, and now you are being persuaded. We are spending time talking to Members that, “Please, come and sit in the Parliament.” Really Members, I don’t think any amount of speeches, however beautiful they may be, the final issue is that it is the highest form of corruption.  

We are here shouting on the radios, on the streets, to journalists that we are fighting corruption. If this is not corruption, you tell me what it is? Obtaining money by false pretext is even criminal. You go around pretending to be a Member of Parliament and you are paid for that when you actually don’t sit in the Chamber. 

Honourable members, I should inform you that when I was seated here, there are Members who wanted to raise the issue of the presence of a stranger in the Chamber. (Laughter)  There is a Member of Parliament who I had never seen and Members had never seen. So, when the Member showed up in the House, Members wanted to say, “There is a stranger in the House.” But I stopped them. So, just imagine after one year, which is a whole session of Parliament and your colleagues consider you a stranger to the House. (Laughter)  

Honourable members, most of us are even here right now by accident. By the way! most times we are not here but those of us who are here and have heard, let us agree because sometimes you say we should start with urgent business. I want to respond to what hon. Wadri said, if you say you want to start with business of this nature, we come to the House at 2.00 p.m. and there are 15 Members and you call the matter, what happens? By the time we started the sitting of this House today, how many Members were in the Chamber? So, even if you say prioritise urgent business, it still can’t work at the beginning. So, you are going to force the Speaker to continue monitoring if there is quorum and alter the Order Paper immediately to accommodate urgent matters. No, that is not how you do business. We are going to get compelled to start waylaying Members. 

You might have to instruct the Clerk-at-Table to count and the moment they reach the required number, call me such and such an item. Surely, it is not only bad politics, but even bad manners to behave in the way some of us are behaving. Let this message go loud and clear. We are going to devise a system where the country will know. And there are Members who love their offices so much in this building that they sit and watch us from there; they are even watching me right now as I am talking. (Laughter) 

Really, Members, we do not want to be forced, as people in charge of the administration of this House, to take measures that might be embarrassing to the honourable members because we are left with no option but to try to make some things enforceable. Just imagine enforcing attendance of a Member who voluntarily assumed office and went through an election. I would dread that day, but for sure it is coming very soon.  We are not able to proceed with business on account of what is not possible for us to discharge. This House is adjourned to Tuesday.

HON. MEMBERS: There is laying of reports.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, let us deal with the reports then.
                    
PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

(I) SHEEMA DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.33
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Jack Sabiiti): Rt Hon. Speaker, as directed by Rule 28, may I present and lay on Table the audited accounts of various districts, town councils and municipalities.  

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the financial statement for the financial year ended 30 June 2011 for Sheema District Local Government. I lay it on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let the records capture it at such. Thank you. 

(II) KIRUHUURA DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

THE CHAIRMAN OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Jack Sabiiti):  Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the financial statement for the financial year ended 30 June 2011 for Kiruhuura District Local Government. I lay it on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let the records capture it at such. Thank you. 

(III) KATERERA TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

THE CHAIRMAN OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Jack Sabiiti):  Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the financial statement for the financial year ended 30 June 2011 for Katerera Town Council. I lay it on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let the records capture it at such. Thank you. 

(IV) MBARARA DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

THE CHAIRMAN OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Jack Sabiiti): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the financial statement for the financial year ended 30 June 2011 for Mbarara District Local Government. I lay it on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let the records capture it at such. Thank you. 

(V) (MBARARA DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.38
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, Mbarara District Local Government accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

(VI) MITOOMA TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.38
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, Mitooma Town Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

(VII) KABUYANDA TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.38
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, Kabuyanda Town Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

(VIII) KIBINGO TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.39
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker I beg to lay on Table, Kibingo Town Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

(XI) NSIIKA TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.39
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker I beg to lay on Table, Nsiika Town Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay it on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

(X) NTWETWE TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.39
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, Ntwetwe Town Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

(XI) NAGONGERA TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.39
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, Nagongera Town Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

(XII) KIRUHURA TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.40
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, Kiruhura Town Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

(XIII) BUDADIRI TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.40
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, Budadiri Town Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

(XIV) KABALE MUNICIPAL COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.41
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, Kabale Municipal Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

(XV) TORORO DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.41
MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker I beg to lay on Table, Tororo District Local Government Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

(XVI) KABWOHE-ITENDERO TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.41
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Allow me, Mr Speaker, to lay on Table, Kabwohe-Itendero Town Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

(XVII) MBALE MUNICIPAL COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.41
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Allow me, Mr Speaker, to lay on Table, Mbale Municipal Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

(XVIII) RUKUNGIRI MUNICIPAL COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.42
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Allow me, Mr Speaker, to lay on Table, Rukungiri Municipal Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

(XIX) NTUNGAMO MUNICIPAL COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.42
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): I lay on Table, Mr Speaker, Ntungamo Municipal Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

(XX) BUSHENYI - ISHAKA MUNICIPAL COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 
30TH JUNE 2011

6.43
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipal Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.
	
(XXI) RUKUNGIRI DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.43
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Allow me, Mr Speaker, to lay on Table, Rukungiri District Local Government accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

(XXII) MANAFWA DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.44
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Allow me, Mr Speaker, to lay on Table, Manafwa District Local Government accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

(XXIII) BUTALEJA TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.44
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on Table, Butaleja Town Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

(XXIV) RUSHANGO TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.45
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on Table, Rushango Town Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

(XXVI) ISHONGORORO TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.45
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on Table, Ishongororo Town Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.	

(XXVII) IBANDA TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.45
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on Table, Ibanda Town Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.	

(XXVIII) HUMURWA TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.45
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on Table, Hamurwa Town Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.	

(XXIX) KATUNA TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.46
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on Table, Katuna Town Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

(XXX) HIMA TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.46
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, Hima Town Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

(XXXI) MUHANGA TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.46
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I lay on Table, Muhanga Town Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.	

(XXXII) BUSOLWE TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.47
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, Busolwe Town Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.	
 
(XXXIII) MALABA TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.47
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, Malaba Town Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on table.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.	

(XXXIV) BINYINY TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS  FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.47
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on Table, Binyiny Town Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

(XXXV) MANAFWA TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.47
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on Table, Manafwa Town Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you pronounce that correctly, honourable chairman? Let the records capture that. 
MR SABIITI: Maybe for the interest of Members I could repeat this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is okay, 

MR SABIITI: It is understood.	

(XXXVI) KIHIHI TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.48
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on Table, Kihihi Town Council accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

KASHENSHERO TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

6.48
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on Table, Kashenshero Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011. I lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

Honourable Members, these reports and accounts stand submitted to the appropriate committees for action as required under our rules and under our laws. Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

Honourable members, this sadly brings us to the end. Can we proceed with business? Are we okay? The other report has a problem; it has screen videos.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I have seen the Minister for ICT here. We have been trying to fight about quorum issues and attendance. I recall when hon. Aggrey Awori was the Minister for ICT, he had proposed bringing to Parliament electronic gadgets for us. When we are entering, we press and we enter and they count us; when we go out again, you press and it shows the time you have gone out. Can the Minister of ICT help us to deal with this issue?

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The information I want to give is that the same type of registration is used in Nsambya Hospital where the medical staff come in and register electronically. It shows the time when you entered and when you are going out. You register electronically and it shows the time you have gone out. That one will assist us as Members of Parliament to know what time you have come in and at what time you left so that we can maintain membership within Parliament.

6.49
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkinzi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, the Commission as well has noted that the issue of absenteeism is actually a very big challenge and it is not partisan contrary to some of the debates. It is an act of indiscipline on both the ruling party side and also the Opposition and Independents. So, it cuts across all in plenary and also in committees.

This matter has come to the Commission which you chair. W have discussed it and there are some proposals, some of which may appear harsh, that have to come.

We have been restraining ourselves and we are appealing to each one of us re-examine the way we have been behaving in this Parliament. The Commission is studying different proposals to see if it will be necessary to enforce them. There are proposals, for instance, like you did say, of tagging payments to attendance. There are proposals on electronic registration which we thought maybe would be introduced when the new Chamber is constructed. But in light of the fact that this seems to be a problem, maybe, these are some of the issues the Commission may look at. Our appeal to Members is that even without these rigorous measures, all of us must be disciplined and come -

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to inform the honourable commissioner that you do not need a new Chamber. In fact, if you have just Shs 300 million, you can install electronic systems at all our entrances and when you enter, you press it because you have a code. When you are getting out, you press it and it shows how many times you have entered here and how many times you have gone out. Just for Shs 300 million - the system is available in town.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Like I said, we are looking at different proposals and maybe instead of asking the Minister for ICT, I think it will be the Parliamentary Commission to look at this, but we shall discuss with the minister responsible for ICT to see what is possible; but also, the budget of the Commission is not elastic, but this is a matter which we can consider, Mr Speaker.

6.52
THE MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS AND ICT (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The point raised by Ndugu Nandala-Mafabi is very well taken and a number of answers have been provided, especially by Ndugu Baryomunsi. It is the primary responsibility of the Parliamentary Commission to improve the performances and efficiencies in the House.

We in Ministry of ICT and in Government in general, will give as much technical support to the Parliamentary Commission as is required. So, we support the improvement of our performance to ensure that people come to attend Parliament and also electronic voting; we have the necessary technical information; we are waiting for the Parliamentary Commission to advise us on that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we adjourn these matters. Clarification on this issue?

MS KARUNGI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This matter is concluded, honourable member.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Actually, when we were discussing the matter, a colleague of mine sent me a message that she had gone to pick up something in the office at Bauman House, but luckily enough she is already here. I heard some news somewhere that very soon those in Bauman House will be re-located to this building -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That one is administrative; it is not a matter for discussion in the House.

MS KARUNGI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This House is adjourned to Tuesday 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.45 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 17 July 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
