Wednesday, 10 July 2013

Parliament met at 2.22 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We will adopt stopping at 6 O’clock to allow our colleagues who have started the fasting season to proceed to be with their families as I announced yesterday. So, today will be the first day we will be stopping at 6 O’clock. So, we need to use the time maximally so that we don’t waste any time.

There are statements that were raised by Members and we asked the responsible ministers to make responses. I have been told these responses will be coming in tomorrow at 2 p.m. The statements will be responding to issues raised in respect of telephone companies and supervision of the bulky messaging system on the way it sometimes causes chaos and commotions in public. 

The second one will be responding to the issues raised on cultural rights and their exercise by cultural leaders. This statement will be presented by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. I had forgotten to tell you that the first statement will be presented by the Minister of ICT.

We will also have a response by the Minister of Tourism and Wildlife on the new tax on the tourism sector – but I think this should come from the Minister of Finance maybe in consultation with the Minister in charge of Tourism. 

Finally, I think there was a matter raised on Karamoja Affairs – I don’t know the details of these. I hope the discussions were done; otherwise, those statements will be coming in tomorrow. Just prepare to debate them and we will be winding up the week.

Honourable members, you also know that the Greater North Parliamentary Forum held elections over the weekend and now have a new executive for the coming period of two and a half years. I wish to inform you that the new executive committee comprises the following:
    a) Hon. Dr  Sam Okuonzi Agatre	-	Chairperson
    b) Hon. Everline Tete Chelengat	-	Vice Chairperson
    c) Hon. Dr Peter Eriaku		-	Secretary General
    d) Hon. Sarah Lanyero Ochieng	-	Deputy/Secretary General;
    e) Hon. Ayepa Michael		-	Treasurer
    f) Hon. Jacob Wangolo		-	Secretary for Research and Documentation
    g) Hon. Connie Galiwango		-	Secretary for Information and Publicity
    h) Hon. Tophace	Kaahwa	-	Secretary for Social Services; and
    i) Hon. Amos Okot			-	Secretary for Gender and Cultural Affairs. (Applause)

They also constituted a new advisory board chaired by the hon. Kaps Hussein Fungaroo. The members are: hon. Maganda Julius, hon. Sarah Netalisire, hon. Ahmed Awongo and hon. Auru Ann. This information has been circulated by the chairperson, hon. Dr Sam Agatre Okuonzi. I wish to congratulate youand wish you the best in protecting the interests of the people you represent in the Greater North Parliamentary Forum. Thank you.

PRESENTATION OF PETITION BY THE UGANDA TEACHERS UNION

2.28
MS THEOPISTA NABULYA NANTONGO (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to present a petition in line with the Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament. This is a humble petition from the Members of the Uganda National Teachers’ Union (UNATU) presented on their behalf by I, hon. Theopista Ssentongo Nabulya, Member of Parliament for Workers. The petition states thus:

Your petitioners are members of the noble teaching profession in the service of the nation and are affiliated to the umbrella of the National Organisation of Trade Unions (NOTU); 

You will recall that in 2011, arising from an industrial action by your petitioners, negotiations were undertaken between your petitioners and the Government of Uganda, as a result of which the industrial action was called off with Government of Uganda committing itself to a 50 percent salary increment to  be implemented as set out below: 

In the financial year 2012/2013, there was supposed to be a first installment of a 15 percent increment, which was paid; in the financial year 2013/14, a 20 percent increment was supposed to be paid; and in the financial year 2014/15, a 20 percent increment as a third installment was supposed to be paid;

Your petitioners would like to report that the Government of Uganda honoured their commitment but only increased salaries for your petitioners for the financial year 2012/13 with an increment of 15 percent; 

Notwithstanding the fore going, your petitioners are dismayed to report that in the financial year 2013/14 the much anticipated second increment of 20 percent has not been provided for. This is in spite of the fact that your petitioners had presented their case to the Public Service Negotiating Council and agreement had been reached that the ministries of Public Service and Finance, Planning and Economic Development and all the responsible authorities be reminded to make provisions for Government’s commitment to your petitioners; 

Arising from their discontent with Government’s deliberate effort to renege on its commitment to your petitioners, with great consultations, your petitioners and their affiliated comrade, NOTU, unanimously resolved, on 25 June 2013, to undertake another industrial action in accordance with the labour laws of Uganda, in the event that Government remained silent on not making a provision for the second installment for your petitioners’ salary increment as was agreed upon in 2011; 

Whereof, therefore, the petitioners pray that Parliament resolves as follows:
    a) That Government of Uganda unequivocally and unconditionally expeditiously makes provision for the second installment of 20 percent increment of the teachers’ salaries for the financial year 2013/14 as was agreed upon on 28 July 2011.
    b) Should the Government of Uganda not adhere to the resolution of Parliament as expressed in (a), Parliament shall be constrained to refrain from passing the budget estimates for financial 2013/14;

And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray. 

Here too are your humble petitioners with their signatures. Thank you for your attention. I beg to lay this on Table. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the petition. It stands committed to the committee responsible for education for expeditious handling so that this matter can fit into the processes of the budget and facilitate the debate rather than forestall actions of Parliament in these matters. So, to have harmony on this issue, the committee should help Parliament to respond to this matter.

Honourable members, tomorrow is World Population Day and we have in this Parliament, the Uganda Parliamentarians Forum on Food Security, Population and Development. The Chairperson of this forum has requested to make a statement on tomorrow’s occasion. I alter the order paper to allow him quickly make the statement.

2.24
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Mr Speaker, this is a statement from the Uganda Parliamentarians Forum on Food Security, Population and Development in commemoration of the events of the World Population Day. The World Population Day is observed on 11th July every year to raise awareness of global population issues and to reaffirm the human right to plan a family. National celebrations for this year will be held in Ngora District under the theme, “Let us invest in Reducing Teenage Pregnancies: Let Girls be Girls.” 

This year’s event comes at a time when the country’s population has reached 34 million; which indicates both a challenge and an opportunity with implications on sustainability, urbanisation, access to health services and youth empowerment.

The Uganda Parliamentarians Forum on Food Security, Population and Development notes with great concern that about 16 million girls worldwide, aged 15 to 19, give birth each year and complications from pregnancies and child birth are the leading cause of death among girls in this age group, especially in developing countries. It is further noted that 23 percent of the pregnancies in Uganda are girls under the age of 18 years. The issue of teenage pregnancy is compounded by adolescent girls’ vulnerability in early/forced marriages with Uganda having one of the highest child marriage prevalence rates in the world.

It is further noted with concern that the dropout rate, more so in girls, is alarming in Uganda. This has rendered the girl-child less hopeful to continue with life; and the only survival venture has been in early marriages, premarital sexual behaviour, teenage pregnancies, prostitution and other related dangers. The situation has been aggravated by the high poverty levels where many youths engage in risky behaviour for survival.

Broken marriages due to domestic violence, HIV/AIDS, among other cases, have ushered in an era of child-headed families where many youths are forced into risky behaviour as survival alternatives for the families they head. The situation is worsened by lack of parental love which has forced teenagers to get married when they are still young.

Teenage mothers in Uganda face a higher risk of experiencing serious complications during pregnancy and child birth because their bodies are not yet fully matured. Adolescents also have a high unmet need for family planning services which increases their risk of getting pregnant. 

The forum considers this event as a means to raise awareness of the issue of adolescence pregnancy in the hope of delivering a world where every pregnancy is wanted, every child birth is safe and every young person’s potential is fulfilled. 

In recognition of the above situation, the Uganda Parliamentarians Forum on Food Security, Population and Development would like to call upon Government and other key players to consider the following as priority issues for immediate intervention:

    1) To increase people’s awareness on various population issues such as the importance of family planning, gender equality, poverty, maternal health and human rights. This implies a great need for Government to sensitise the people in these areas about the importance of sex education so that their children do not fall victims to sexuality and teenage pregnancy.
    2) The Government should also emphasise children’s rights to education, health and marriage at the right age. This calls for promoting sexuality related education. The youth, both in school and out of school, should be targeted.
    3) We do conduct the national census such that we plan for a population that we are aware of.

Underlying all these efforts is the understanding that the dignity and human rights of adolescent girls must be respected, protected and fulfilled. It is our duty as legislators to take measures that enable adolescent girls to make responsible lifechanges and to provide the necessary support for them in cases when their rights are threatened. Every young girl, regardless of where she lives or her economic circumstances, has the right to fulfil her human potential. Today, too many girls are denied that right. We can change that and we must.

This is the time to end teenage pregnancies: let the girls be girls. I thank you for listening to me.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. It has been the practice in this House that ministers come here on days preceding international or national celebrations to make statements on events under their ministerial jurisdiction. We have seen, for example, the Minister of Defence making a statement preceding the Tarehe Sita celebrations; the Minister of Labour making a statement preceding International Labour Day and International Women’s Day; the Minister of Health making statements on days preceding celebrations for World AIDS Day and other internationally recognised celebrations. 

Today we have seen- and I wish to thank my friend, hon. Milton Muwuma, for bringing a statement on behalf of the Uganda Parliamentarians Forum on Food Security, Population and Development. Conspicuously absent though is the Minister of Finance who surely should come forward and make a statement. I believe this is his docket. Issues of population are under the ambit of the Ministry of Finance but I see hon. Kasaija sitting silent on the other side of the House. 

The procedure I would like to raise, Mr Speaker, is whether the forum Chairman has substituted the minister in speaking on behalf of Government and Cabinet therefore, and whether the Minister should not be forced to take action or this House takes action against the minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Member, for Kumi County. Because of the difficulties we have in our rules in accommodating parliamentary forums of this nature, we have proceeded under rule 246 as if it were a personal statement; but this statement comes from the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Food Security, Population and Development. And as usual, when we move under rule 46 as if it was a personal statement but this statement comes from the parliamentary forum and as usual when you move under rule 46 the statement is not debatable but the subjects raised under this are very important and the minister has heard. If he has a statement at an appropriate time, I am sure the minister will make that statement when a request to make the statement is made. 

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kassaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, we hold world population day every year and this is the third year I am going to host.At no single point in the past have I come to Parliament to present a statement on this day. It is absolutely unnecessary; I presented a statement yesterday to the press.It is absolutely unnecessary as far as I am concerned.

MR ATIKU: Mr Speaker, the whole country is focused on watching this Parliament as raised by colleagues with whom we sit in Parliamentary Forum on Food Security, Population and Development. Key issues have been raised here, thanks to the rules of procedure of this august house and your indulgence, Mr Speaker.

The issues that have been raised are for Government’s attention and also as it has been for various ministries to make statements on this platform which I believe serves this country for purposes of information to raise the issues such as population -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The order

MR ATIKU: Iam coming to the point of order. As Shadow Minister for Youth, you are aware, half of the population of this country is where the youth are.You are also aware that for 13 years, this government has not carried out a census and the minister says that it is unnecessary to come here and give us a statement before the World Population Day.Is the minister in order to say that it is not necessary for him to bring a statement on the Floor before the celebration of the World Population Day?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are two ways that ministers make statements to the House. Some statements come on the volition of the ministers voluntarily; some statements like the ones going to be made tomorrow are on the request of Parliament.

I have not received a request from Parliament and I have not received a request from the minister to make a ministerial statement on the World Population Day. So, I do not see any violation of any order here.

Honourable members, in the Public Gallery, this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Jinja Army Boarding Primary School, Jinja District. They are represented by hon. Moses Balyeku and hon. Nabirye Agnes. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome.

LAYING OF PAPERS

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week we had a matter presented here -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is coming tomorrow; I read them before on the cultural leaders, telephone companies, on tourism sector and on Karamoja affairs. They are all coming tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock.

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kassaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, the statement is on the way coming so can I do that at the end?

2.47
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Kassiano Wadri):Mr Speaker and colleagues, I wish to lay on Table the Auditor-General’s report and opinion on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 on Uganda Medical and Practitioners Council. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR WADRI:  I wish to lay the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Uganda Blood Transfusion Services for the year ended 30June 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR WADRI: I wish to lay the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) for the year ended 30June 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR WADRI: I beg to lay on Table the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for UNFPA funded programme components of reproductive health, population and development and gender (Ministry of Education and Sports) for the year ended 31December 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR WADRI: I beg to lay on Table the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for UNFPA funded programme components of reproductive health, population and development and gender under Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the year ended 31December 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR WADRI: I beg to lay on Table the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the National Information Technology Authority Uganda for the year ended 30June 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR WADRI: I beg to lay on Table the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Uganda Institute of Information and Communication Technology for the year ended 30 June 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR WADRI: I beg to lay on Table the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for UNDP funded project No.00036601 – 00081058 – Crisis Management and Recovery Programme (strengthening recovering, reconciliation, peace building and development in Northern Uganda) for the year ended 31December 2013.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR WADRI: I beg to move, Mr Speaker, I have laid enough.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Chairperson. All those reports and those opinions of the Auditor General stand committed to the appropriate committee for scrutiny, handling and then reporting to Parliament – please, let us finish this thing. Please honourable, let us finish laying papers.

REPORT ON AN INDEPENDENT AUDIT OF THE FINANCIAL AND WORKS AUDIT OF HOST COUNTRY OWNED LOCAL CURRENCY (HCOLC) DEPOSITED BY THE GOU IN SPECIAL ACCOUNTS MANAGED BY THE DISTRICTS OF GULU, AMURU, OYAM AND KITGUM UNDER THE NUDEIL PROGRAMME FOR THE 12 MONTHS ENDED 30THJUNE 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Chairperson, Committee on Local Government Accounts.

2.52
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Jack Sabiti): Rt. Hon. Speaker, may I, as directed by rules 30 and 31, lay on Table a report on an independent audit of the Financial and Works Audit of Host Country Owned Local Currency deposited by the Government of Uganda in special accounts managed by the districts of Gulu, Amuru, Oyam, Kitgum under NUDEIL Programme for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and it stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling. 

NEC TRACTOR HIRE SCHEME LIMITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR GENERAL

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Chairperson Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises.  

2.54
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Ms Angelina Osegge): Mr, Speaker, I beg to lay on Table financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with a report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General of NEC Tractor Hire Scheme Limited. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that - it is a financial statement for the year ended –(Interjections) - okay, thank you. It stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling.  

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of procedure. Last week, through a matter of public concern, I raised concern about brutality of the Police force in Kampala which has made it difficult for Members of Parliament like me to convene public meetings to consult the people who elected us into office. The minister was not around to answer the question and it is on record that you said that the question would be answered later but I have not seen it featuring anywhere on the order paper on issues to be tackled tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I don’t think I was chairing the House - was that a petition or was there any request for a statement from the Minister for Internal Affairs? We will consult with the minister – yes, the Leader of Government Business?

2.56
THE DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I request my honourable colleague to put the problem formerly before this House – ask a question so that we can take it properly. Please make it in form of a question for oral answer so that we can follow it up. (Laughter) It is a very good suggestion and we are not saying that we do not want to hear it but put it in the form of a question for oral answer and then we can follow it up.  

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, it saddens me to note the whole Leader of Government Business does not know the significance of matters of public concern as cited under Rule 39. If he does not know the significance of such a matter; does he deserve to be the Leader of Government Business? [HON. MEMBERS: “No.”] I stated orally in black and white that Members of Parliament – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you stated orally. Black and white means you put in writing. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Yes, I stated orally and it was captured in black and white.(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was that issue the Member is saying was raised. Please address it appropriately and if youcan come tomorrow with the other statements, that would be good. If he raised the matter, it should be within your knowledge - Police brutality in restriction of Members of Parliament.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Most obliged, but also information to him – (Interjections) - is that one time in Natete– (Interjections) – [HON. MEMBERS: “No, no. Order.”] -do not shout – Mr Speaker -- [HON. MEMBER: “Point of Order.”] -we must be in order in this House and we must listen to one another. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: We are not going to act like we are in a market place. I was saying that the Police brutality will be answered but at the same time, I want to remind this House that the very Honourable member, one time run away from Policeprotection in Natete when he was addressing the people. So what is the problem? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, for Rubaga South, I was one of the people you invited for that meeting so do not raise this subject now. (Laughter) I still recall very vividly how we were left on the bench by the person who had invited us.(Laughter) Let the statement come- the Prime Minister has said he is going to come with the statement to make these responses tomorrow. We said tomorrow. Okay, next item.

REQUEST FOR A PROPOSAL TO BORROW USD 23.0 MILLION FROM THE FRENCH AGENCY FOR DEVELOPMENT (AFD) FOR FINANCING OF THE HOIMA –NKENDA POWER TRANSMISSION LINE AND ASSOCIATED SUB-STATIONS PROJECT

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND CONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (MrMatiaKasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, cowards die many times - I wish to lay before this honourable House a loan request to borrow $23.0 million from the French Agency for Development (AFD) for financing the Hoima-Nkenda power transmission line and associated sub-stations of the project. I wish to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee on National Economy for expeditious handling and report back.We shallknow what the status is. Procedure from the Member from Dokolo District-

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Switch me on, please.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are on, honourable.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on point of procedure because every other day, we get a proposal through the Ministry of Finance to borrow money for various programmes and projects.

We do not have the capacity on our own to trace all these lines of loans and credit that we are getting from various financial agencies. It is very important, for the benefit of all of us, that before the ministry approaches this Parliament to request for borrowing whatever, we should be informed of whatever happens to all these lines of credit that we have been involved in. 

Can we know what is at stake? Has it been completed? Is there a tangible commitment and what have you? We are just endorsing and endorsing and our economy is being debt driven –(Interjections)- I am on a point of procedure and a point of procedure can only be answered by the Speaker. You do not yet qualify to be Speaker -(Laughter)- Mr Speaker, the ministers might know their boundaries of jurisdiction. I am addressing the Speaker and this matter is a matter of great importance to us as Members of Parliament. Can we be informed of how far all these lines of credit have gone so that we can track and know that these loans that we are passing are going to have tangible impacts on the economy and on our people? I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, there is a reporting mechanism; I forget the technical term they use for that. Honourable member for Bunyole West, do you have something?

3.03
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is Bunyole East. Every financial year during the reading of the budget, the Minister of Finance lays a statement covering Uganda’s indebtedness and the performance of the loans. That report is laid to Parliament and it is supposed to be considered by the various committees, the respective committee of Parliament, hopefully the Committee on National Economy. Unfortunately, because of the time schedules, we may not have had time to consider it. 

At a recent workshop in Entebbe, it was resolved that as soon as this Session opens, a special workshop is going to be organised so that Members of Parliament and the Minister of Finance come and make a presentation on all the levels of indebtedness of the country so that we can have an informed decision. It could be that the honourablemember was not in Entebbe but this is the position and this is what has been happening, unless the minister has the contrary. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It serves to reinforce the point that the Member for Dokolo said and it raises an important matter which should be addressed so that the House knows what is going on. Yes, Honourable member, do you want to raise the same subject? 

3.04
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (MP, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. With your permission, I had a matter of national importance to raise but for this particular one – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will raise your statement, towards the end. You lost your chance when you did not come on time. So, we will deal with that towards the end but on this specific issue – 

MR SSEKIKUBO: On this specific one, Mr Speaker, I think the Member for Dokolo County was right. Uganda, not so many years ago, I think in 2008 or thereabout qualified for Highly Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) amongst the most indebted countries and our debts were erased to zero. But now we are again on the verge of collapsing under the weight of debts.This is a matter of serious concern. But we wonder; if we had been forgiven of the debts and then overnight, the rate at which we are laying papers for borrowing and we are again trapped in the same quagmire we were meant to be saved as a country, are we on the right path as Uganda? Does the minister really have into consideration the fact that Uganda could easily slide away into a failed economic state? Is he mindful about the heavy burden that taxpayers have to shoulder under the weight of borrowing, for which he appears to be over enthusiastic and willing and even sending for papers from the office – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, don’t you think we should reserve that for when the motion comes and we debate it properly? Please, let us deal with this at the right time now that the matter has been referred to the appropriate committee and let us leave it for the appropriate committee to come back and then we raise all those issues. 

The committee has a time frame of 45 days but these matters are urgent and they should come back to Parliament as soon as they can so that these matters are disposed of - Members seem to be very interested in discussing. This is not the only request that has gone to the committee. There are others coming. So, Members, brace up and wait for that debate -[MS NAMBOOZE: “When is the seminar?”] - the seminar is administrative. Do you want me to announce it? It is an administrative matter, hon. Member for Mukono Municipality. You will be notified on the date of the workshop and we will proceed from that.

Honourable members, it was decided and I hereby communicate to the Clerk that all instructions given to this House must be documented and put in writing, attaching the relevant documents and forwarding them to the relevant chairpersons of the committees so that there is a tracking mechanism because when documents are laid on Table, there is no proper channel through which they leave the Table and get to the responsible people. I am, therefore, directing that in compliance with what has been agreed, the Clerk extracts these instructions in letter form, attaches a specific document and it is forwarded to the chairpersons of these committees so that we know that they have gone there and the receipts are acknowledged and we handle it appropriately. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING BILL, 2009

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, just to update you on how far we have gone on this Bill; we have stood on clauses 2, 4, 10, 111 and 116. Yesterday, we processed this Bill up to clause 138 and there were discussions that we were not able to complete. I think the issue that was raised yesterday was the issue of duplication of roles - that you cannot have a committee when you have the Financial Intelligence Authority, you have a board, and then you want to create a committee with similar functions like the board. So, there were issues of possible conflicts. I am hoping that the chairperson has resolved the situation with the minister and the people who are affected so that we can move forward on this. 

Mr Chairman, there is a creation of the institution. It was also noted that the composition of this body was not outlined. You proposed deletion but did not substitute. So, you cannot have an organisation with functions but without its composition. Mr Chairman, are you ready to deal with clause 138?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, thank you for updating us on what we stopped at yesterday but I know Members do not have the copies of the report.But you remember when we were dealing with clauses 24 and 25, we also deleted everything. We deleted the composition of the board - for those who have the Bill, it is page 29. We deleted that composition which included representatives of the Ministry of Finance, representatives from Bank of Uganda, representatives from internal affairs, representatives of the private sector, representatives of the Ministry of Justice, the Inspector-General of Government and the President’s Office’s internal security. So, we imported that composition on the committee and we also deleted the functions of that board –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Did you delete or amend? 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: We amended as Parliament; we also amended the functions. So on clause 138: Establishment of an Anti-money Laundering Committee, we proposed that we mention the institutions in this committee. Why this committee? This committee is going to be the one that is going to almost coordinate implementation of this Act if we pass – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, you could help us better if you say that you are in agreement with sub-clause (1) and now you are proposing an amendment to sub-clause (2) and you state the amendment. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. So in clause 138, there is established a committee – we are agreeable with (1) – and the amendment we want in (2) is: “There is established, for the purpose of this Act, a national committee for anti-money laundering and combating of terrorism of financing. The committee shall consist of: (i) the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance – and we have put that one as the chairperson; (ii) a representative of Bank of Uganda; (iii) a representative of the Inspector-General of Government; (iv) a representative of Police; (v) a representative of DPP; (vi) a representative of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; (vii) the Executive Director of the Financial Intelligence Authority or his representative; (viii) ) a representative of the Ministry of Internal Affairs – Immigration Department; (ix) a representative of the Attorney-General; (x) a representative of URA-Customs Department; (xi) a representative of the Ministry of Ethics; (xii) two nominees of high repute,nominated by the Minister responsible for finance, who should have special knowledge and experience in anti-money laundering and combating of terrorism. 

Justification is that this is the committee that is to help Government operationalise this Act, if passed. All these departments – others are enforcement teams and others are regulatory organisations. 

And without this committee, honourable members, we would not have passed this Bill because, on implementation, this is the committee to coordinate all government departments in activation and operationalisation of this committee. Why? The other Financial Intelligence Authority, we created, is specifically for processing information – the ACRs – and forwarding them to implementing agencies for prosecution. So its work is confined to only processing information forwarded to that organisation.We also propose to include special functions that are in our amendment as a committee. What we had left out is the composition of the committee. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Functions are in clause 39.

MR OGUTTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think the committee chairperson would like to make this authority ineffective. We have authorities set up by this Parliament; do we have inter-ministerial committees to supervise them? Do we have one for URA, NEMA, UCC, and KCCA? Do we have authorities of ministers or permanent secretaries? What we are saying of the committee is that you do not want this Authority to take off; you are creating other power centres – people who are even bigger than the Authority like the PS. We believe that this is wrong and you are duplicating functions. 

For instance, if you look at the Authority – like we pointed out yesterday – that there is overlap and duplication. And it was also pointed out yesterday that in countries where they have authorities, there are no committees. If you want to set up a committee operationally, the minister can, but we should not put it in law as a legal body with powers; otherwise it is going to struggle for power with the Authority and make its work difficult. Thank you.

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you, Mr Chairman. There is one thing that is not coming to me very clearly. The committee as it is being set up – I can hear that the PS will be its head plus many other secondments. The question is: Will these people leave their offices in respective agencies and then concentrate on the issue of money laundering? If this is not done, then it means that these people will find a problem of dividing their time on how to work against the time they work at their respective agencies. Thank you.

MR TONNY AYOO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. First of all, I would like the committee chairperson to come out very clearly.Yesterday, one member of his committee put it very clearly that when they went to one of the countries that already have this law in place – in Malawi – they were asked as to why they think they would want to have the board, Authority and the committee. I want you, committee chairperson, to clarify; you want to put the PSs of ministries and yet I thought they would only have representatives – designate persons – to work together with the board in order to see that anti-money laundering programme is going on well. But when you put, for example, the Bank of Uganda Governor, the Inspector-General of Police and then the board chairperson and the Executive Director of the Authority on the other side and they are discussing – I think this other group would need to designate people to work together with the board. And for that matter, why don’t we only have the board, the Authority and these people will still have to send representatives because their relationship will be very clear. 

It seems you are saying that the Police will keep off if you do not have the committee and the Judiciary will keep off and yet all these people will be working together as ministries, departments and agencies of Government to support the fight against money laundering. Unless you bring it out very clearly on how they are going to relate, it is going to be very difficult for us to understand and accept it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, you have heard those submissions from a member of your own committee; do you have a template – a comparison of the kind of thing you want to do that has been done by any other country, from your study?-(Interjections) - then advise the House on what is appropriate. Because if the only precedence is what was cited by the honourable member for Ibanda North, then this Parliament has more work to do than sit on this particular clause. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I do not have my document here but yesterday one member of the committee said that they went to Malawi – (Interjections) - I am coming to that. And then we had a team that went to Mauritius. But we have the Act for Mauritius and I hope my technical people are listening; they will bring the document and I will lay it on Table. 

This committee is premised from the recommendations. There is the National Cooperation and Coordination and this is in the recommendations and it reads: “Countries should have a national AMLCFT Anti-Money Laundering Committee, and policies formed by the risks identified, which should be regularly reviewed and should designate an authority to have coordination or other mechanism that is responsible for such policies.” So we should have a national committee that helps in coordination of anti-money laundering activities away from the investigative authority that we created earlier.

Honourable members, we need to understand that this Act can only be implemented by the Authority that we have created, in collaboration with all other Government institutions and it is not a matter of collaborating today and then refusing tomorrow. That is why we want to put it in the law that they are obliged to work with this Authority.

The members we are putting on this board are not full time. They are part time, they sit and analyse the policies and advise the minister on how to progress with this Anti-Money Laundering Authority. This committee is generally for coordination and we can read the functions that we have proposed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, why don’t you give us the example of Mauritius, which you mentioned?

MR SSEBUNYA: Okay, let me see if he has the papers.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, Member for Budadiri East and I suppose the Eastern side is almost more-

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am helping my chairman concerning the Mauritius Act. I travelled with the chairman of the committee and I happened to get one of the copies. In Mauritius, they have the cooperation of the board, the committee and the task force. Why so? If you go to their Act, which I know the chairman will lay on Table, they have the board because it is largely comprised of around three people only; among these three, there is the chairperson of the board whom they say could be a retired Supreme Court Judge or somebody who is highly knowledgeable about the law. They do so because they say this board is largely concerned with formulating necessary policies for implementation. You are talking about the task force and this is going to be composed of members such as the Police, immigration and other vigilantes so these members cannot come up and propose necessary policies for the implementation.

The next one is to advise on matters relating to the performance of the task force and that is why they have that board. It is about policy formulation, monitoring and implementation. In Mauritius, the committee is very important. It has the composition, which the chairman has been talking about and draws from all the government departments; Bank of Uganda, Inspectorate of Government, DPP, Uganda Police, among others. What is the prime role or function of the task force? 

They are working in a commercial bank, another is in immigration so once they detect that there is an element of money laundering, their work is to get this information and directly inform the committee. When they inform the committee, which is well composed of all these gentlemen and ladies drawn from all these departments, they will sit and evaluate and look at it. 

A task force is like a whistle blower. After raising this, the committee takes it up, sits and evaluates. They analyse, as the chairperson was saying. They will ask, has there been an element of money laundering or not? We are talking about money laundering but where are we failing? Are the Police doing their work? Is DPP doing its work? Who is failing the money laundering combating exercise? That is why this committee is important, as the chairperson was saying. You can have a task force and the board but when you do not have the committee, the success of anti-money laundering may be in balance. That is why I was bringing up the Mauritius experience.

MR MULONGO: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. I think the arguments we have heard since yesterday were based on two key areas. The first one is whether we really need an institutional structure of this nature, that is the committee as explained by the chairperson and supported by the minister. The second one was the question of the reporting relationship between itself, which seems to be suspended and the institution we are trying to create on money laundering.

I had serious reservations about it but on second thought, I think this establishment may be necessary. This is because the nature of money laundering is extremely diverse. It occurs in all sectors and ministries and if the function of identifying and tracking money laundering agencies and sales is left to what we are trying to establish alone, we may not be effective enough.

It is important that we have an inter-agency and inter-ministerial arrangement for both collaboration and coordination of effort so that we leave no chance to money laundering cartels and organised criminal gangs in a place like ours. This is because if we limit it to the money laundering institutional arrangement we are trying to put in place, it will take time to exchange information and track areas that are remote and peripheral to the money laundering agencies we are trying to create.

This brings me to the second part. If we need it, it means therefore that we need to agree at what level this is being created and how it is going to relate to the money laundering vote and authority we are creating. For example, we have military intelligence, internal and external security but they have the Joint Intelligence Committee, which brings them together in ensuring that they share information so that they can move fast on certain targets, but this Joint Intelligence Committee is known as- which helps it amongst the four bodies that constitute it.

Then we have, for example, the joint task force. It is constituted under the military intelligence and other players in the sector. So, we have examples where we can have a committee standing on its own for purposes of coordination and collaboration.So, in this case, we leave it but put in a certain operational and not at policy level because the policies will be done by the Authority and distributing the shares will be done by the board. These ones are supposed to be at operational level. 

So, if we can agree on these operational and tactical levels, we can move forward. So, I would like to propose that we can have the board established but to have it trimmed perfectly so that it does not interfere with the Authority and the board, but augments its efforts. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Starting from where hon. Simon Mulongo left, I would like to say that I agree with him to the extent that we can let this be established at an operational level. This is because things like JAT that he has refereed to, which are playing a very important role, are not in the statute.

Two, when you read clause 138 with clause 24, you find an apparent conflict that is likely to arise. So, we are likely to legislate confusions like we did with the KCCA Act. The functions of the Board, under clause 24 –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, that was amended. So, you need to look at the text again.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I am looking at the principal and that is where –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, it was amended very drastically. You may want to look at what we adopted.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you very much. With your guidance, let me keep myself to clause 138.As a matter of legislation, you cannot say “there is established a committee,” but which is not established by anyone. You need to give the Authority the powers to establish that committee.

But more important than that, it is vague especially when you look at sub-clause 2, which partially reads thus: “… shall consist of 15 members appointed by the minister and being senior representatives from relevant disciplines from legal…” Now who is legal? There is also someone from enforcement, but who is enforcement? Then there is this part of financial and law enforcement sectors –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is the amendment they are also proposing.

MR SSEGGONA: Okay, but let me go beyond that. Otherwise, that alone makes it vague. But why do we object to it even with the proposed amendments? It is because usually where there is a board – and this committee is not going to supervise the board because that cannot happen – they are actually bound to conflict.
When you go to the functions that are established under clause 139, you realise they are either catered for elsewhere or are not necessary. Try to go through them one by one. When you look at (1)(a) about representing Uganda at the National Task Force of Anti-Money Laundering – you could talk of an amendment, but at which national level are we talking about, if you are already talking about Uganda? But also this is basically a liaison function which can either be left to the board or the secretariat of the board.

And there is (b) about advising the minister on the performance of their functions under this Act. Surely, this is the function of the Attorney-General; he/she is supposed to offer legal services to the functions of Government. And there is (c) about fostering a sound and effective Anti-Money Laundering Regime in Uganda. So, what are the functions of the board, if we are to carry these amendments? What is going to be the function of the board if you are going to establish the committee, which will be charged with the task of fostering a sound and an effective Anti-Money Laundering Regime in Uganda?

Lastly, there is (d) about fostering and promoting greater cooperation among the various disciplinary agencies within Uganda’s regional and international partners in anti-money laundering and combating financial terrorism measures and endeavours – I want to inform you that there are already established state agencies to carry out this function either at the ministerial, board or departmental levels.

When you talk about anti-terrorism, we have the Uganda Police Force and other agencies of Government.In my view, Mr Chairman, it is best that we leave these functions that we find necessary to the board and the minister rather than create another agency, which is also going to be funded by the Government of Uganda. This will mean we are creating other avenues of consumption of public resources, which we are already complaining about as being scarce.

With you permission and guidance, Mr Chairman, I would seek the indulgence of the committee and colleagues that we delete these two and if we need to amend, we can only improve on the functions of the board, which is already established.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I just want to say that the committee chairperson has a case but the manner and fashion of presenting this case has a problem. I am saying this because when we adjourned yesterday, we thought the chairperson would bring an amendment that would cater for the fears of honourable members. These fears are mainly three: that this committee may conflict with the board. The amendment I expected today is to state clearly that the committee is subject to the authority of the board; every other Member is raising this issue. This states that this Anti-Money Laundering Committee shall be appointed by the board. But what Members want to hear is that they will be answerable to the board and that is the kind of amendment I expected you to bring. But it is not yet late for you to scribble down something so that we –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, the information I want to give to the hon. ODONGA OTTO is that the committee cannot be established to operate under the board because Parliament does not have the powers to establish those segments below the board. It is the board to do that. We can only agree that we don’t want it and we close the chapter.

MR KWEMARA: Thank you so much, honourable colleague, for giving way. I think this needs to be made clear. When you talk about this committee, we are not talking about a committee to be established by the board. Actually, when you look at what is happening elsewhere, it is an extra ministerial committee. For instance, if a financial intelligence centre is housed in the Ministry of Finance, this committee becomes an extra ministerial committee. In other words, it is not just within the Ministry of Finance – it brings different agencies together.

The importance – (Interjections) – yes, we need it – is that the nature of the crimes relating to money laundering is intricate and money laundering takes place in different departments or organs of Government. 

Therefore, it is important to bring all these people together. That is why we need to have URA, Capital Markets Authority, Bank of Uganda and other supervisory bodies on board. This committee will act as a forum or as an advisory body. And I was telling you, from international practices, when you go to Kenya, they have this committee. South Africa also has it and when you go to Tanzania, they also have it. This means we are trying to conform to international standards. Maybe the challenge is – the committee should help Members to understand why we need it to be in place. Thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you for the information. But I want to say that that approach of saying we are trying to conform to international standards may not help this Parliament now. We need to get out of this. Yesterday, we spent an hour on this and today, we are doing the same.

Now from what hon. MedardSseggona has said - if what he is saying is necessary, then we can just make it one of the functions of the board – to establish an Anti-Money Laundering Committee and go on to state the composition. What needs to come out clearly to this Parliament is that the committee will be subordinate to the board. From the example my colleague gave from Lango, if this other committee has the Governor of Bank of Uganda and the Inspector-General of Police; the other committee has the Chief Justice; and the other committee has appointees or former Members of Parliament, automatically the power centre will shift in favour of the committee where the IGP and the Governor Bank of Uganda are sitting.

So, hon. Minister, can you help us and make this committee subject to the board so that we can see how to move? Actually the Speaker yesterday guided that it should not even be clause 138 after the regulations; we may have to pick it and insert it around clause 24 or 25 so that we proceed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member for West Budama, let me take the Member for Koboko then I come to you.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much. Mr Chairman, normally in the structure of any organisation there is hierarchy. You have the highest structure- for example, in an organisation you have let us say the board then after the board you have the general assembly up there, then you have the secretariat. 

Now in this case, I would like you to enlighten me. Who is higher than the other: the Authority or the committee? And who makes decisions? Who implements what? If we know who makes the decisions so that if, let us say, the committee follows the decision of the board then they have the authority over the committee but if they are parallel to one another it becomes very difficult. I want to know who is subordinate to whom. That one will tell us exactly what we want to do and what the structure should be. Thank you very much.    

MR FOX ODOI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have listened very attentively to the Chairperson of the committee- for whom I must confess I have great respect- and the more I listened to him this afternoon the more persuaded I became that we actually do not need this committee. The chairperson advances two cardinal arguments of justification for the committee. 

The first one is that the committee will be the core implementing agency of the law; that without the committee the law will not be implemented- if I heard him right. That makes me absolutely worried. For all the days we have been sitting here, we created organs that are embedded in this legislation. We have an authority. We have offices we created. We have a board. If all those organs cannot implement this law minus this particular committee, then we have been labouring in vain. And that cannot be the case. We cannot have a law that hinges on a single committee. But that is the case of the chairman and I am not persuaded his case is very convincing. I am, to the contrary, persuaded that this committee is absolutely irrelevant. 

The second case by the chairman is that international best practices would dictate that we must have this committee. To state it plainly, the chairman is arguing that we must copy and paste; because other people have it, we must also have it. I hold a different view. It is alright to copy but it is always advisable to modify before you paste and the modification in this particular case requires that we drop this particular committee.

We have, for two days, advanced the case that apart from creating avenues for tempting other citizens, this committee does not add value. I have instructions from the Bible that I passionately read -(Laughter) - the book of John has this to say: Woe unto you who tempt innocent citizens for I would rather prefer that a big ball be tied to your balls and you be drowned -(Laughter)- you heard me right. Mr Chairman, this is from the Bible. 

Now my case is this- (Interjections)- my case is a very simple one. For every office that you create, you are creating a power centre. You are creating an office that will have responsibility and that will therefore be susceptible to abuse. The more we minimise the offices, the more effective this legislation will be. We need a very lean institutional framework and a solid legal framework to fight the crime of money laundering and terrorism financing.

Mr Chairman, I, therefore, plead with the chairman of the committee that he drops this case of his and we conclude this matter.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Kampala District- Kampala Authority?

MS NAGGAYI: Kampala Authority and City and District altogether. Mr Chairman, I want to raise a point that as Parliament, we are very interested in a very solid authority. Like they say, there is a challenge in an authority we remodelled on our own. We tried to make something new with the KCCA and I think we are grappling with everything. We can have a middle ground where the concerns of this country- where we have the IGG, the Inspector-General of Police and every other body that deals with investigation.

We are worried about corruption and that is why we are all moving around in circles. Where do we insulate the board? We need to go back to the chairman to see how other institutions- I have many sympathies for the chairman because he is the one who was tasked with bridging the gaps that we were looking at in this whole Bill. 

I can say that I do not know if re-inventing the wheel as Uganda will solve the problem. Re-inventing the wheel where we have a very unique authority which has never been seen anywhere else –that is also a challenge we should look at. Are we starting something new completely that has never been tried anywhere? The chairman is trying to show us that these people have done it like this. Could we do something maybe similar? Maybe we might have skipped a very important step and I concur with my colleague, the hon. Member from Koboko, where she says that in case the board is not doing what we need it to do, how do we insulate Ugandans? Maybe we skip the issue of AGM. Who eventually calls all these stakeholders: the Police? Who calls URA? When do they intersect for the good of the Act? That is where we all need to focus. Where do the stakeholders converge for the good of the Act? That is where we need to focus.

In case we have a board and an authority that is doing something that is not what is expected, where will the measures be to bring them to account and say, “No, you are not going in the right direction?” And that is why we should not be quick to drop it but we should look at amending it so that we have an overseer. All stakeholders like the IGG - because they have been doing some work, where the problem is like immigration. Some people are coming in with their other issues and I think we do not need to ignore it. It is very important that we look at who in this case, the board and the authority, is not doing their work. Where will they get recourse?I do not think we want to trust the minister. We want to trust several stakeholders and I think the lawyers should be able to formulate that. The chair should go back and get legal opinion on that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let me just do this so that we can see how to proceed. Let me just summarise what we have done from clause 24 to 25. All that we are discussing are actually in the original text of the Bill. The proposed forum for stakeholders to meet was initially in Clause 25, but actually when we went through the Bill we found that it was housed in the wrong place.

So this thing to do with the Chairperson of the Board, Director General of the Authority, representative of the Minister of Finance, Bank of Uganda, Minister Internal Affairs, private sector - Minister of Justice was in Clause 25 initially. So we removed it there because it was not right for it to be there.

The functions of the Board were initially in 24, we removed those also. We now have a new set of functions, which we adopted as 24. We now have a new composition of the Board which is now in the new 25. The new 25 does not have those of Bank of Uganda and others. It is now something else and the composition is about five members. 

The initial draft in the Bill in Clause 138 tried to create an institution that they did not understand very well and that is the purpose of this discussion we are having now. If they had conceptualised it properly at the beginning, we would not be having these problems.
Having removed that stakeholders’ forum from Clause 25 now they want to bring it in Clause 138 so that now becomes the coordinating stakeholder forum where they can all feed all the things. That is where they have moved it to now; because if you look at the current functions of the Board as adopted, it has nothing to do with what was initially in the Bill or what we adopted as the functions of the Board. That is where we are now, are we together? We are together now.

Now the committee in an effort to deal with the gaps created by the amendments in clauses 24 and 25, they now propose this to deal with that stakeholder coordination mechanism of the Bill. That is why now you have the proposed clause 138(new) complete with functions.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman, there is a committee Member who talked about the Malaysian experience. With Malaysia yes they did not incorporate everybody into this arrangement, and I wish the colleague was here. Malaysia is now learning from Mauritius. In Malaysia, there is now a blame game. The blame game is there because not all Members were brought on board. Members say, “That is not my mandate, where is it provided for.” Now when you come here to the composition of this committee all these stakeholders who are supposed to be key players in fighting money laundering are now brought on board. Once they are coordinated under this committee, we shall now see who will say, “It was not my mandate, I am not part of that” like what is now in Malaysia.

So, it was in that good spirit after we compared the two we came up with that. It is true some committee Members went to Malaysia others went to Mauritius and when we sat as a committee later we saw that Mauritius was having the best practice of this law than you compare to Malaysia.

If Members are saying we do not take up that committee, where will you fit all these stakeholders? Are you going to carry them all and put them on the Board? Or you are going to divide them: some go to the Board and the rest to the task force. That is the question I am asking.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, I just want to reinforce your point and I will do that by reading something to this House: “International standards on combating money laundering and financing of terrorism.Recommendations”-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What document are you reading?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: This is from UN; recommendations to countries that develop the legal regime in order to combat the money laundering practice. Am I allowed to read?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Proceed.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: “Countries should ensure that policy makers, the financial intelligence unit, law enforcement authorities, supervisors and other relevant competent authorities at the policy making and operational levels have effective mechanism in place, which enable them to cooperate and coordinate domestically with each other concerning the development and the implementation of policies and activities to combat money laundering and terrorism financing.”

The question which we need to answer is, do we need a body that will help us to coordinate all this? If the answer is yes, now we look for where to put this committee. If we say that we put it under the Board, will you have a Board composed of all the agencies that help us to combat this ill? That is the question, can we? It is not practical; the Board cannot have a committee that will have a permanent secretary. 

Where is hon. Otto? Hon. Otto was raising a very fundamental question and this is what we must sort out. The question was, Aren’t we creating power centres which will step on each other’s feet and in that case we end up creating a bad law? So what we need to agree on now is this body/committee: How will it be relating with the authority; how will it be relating with minister so that these various bodies do not interfere with each other’s operations? So that is all, Mr Chairman, I am reinforcing your point. This law is creating three bodies: the authority, with its board - I was looking for hon. ODONGA OTTO because you raised a very pertinent issue which I want to share with you - and this body that will coordinate and make sure that what we provide in this law will be implemented, because you need all these various sector holders to bring them on board so that the law can be implemented. So, once we have known that one and where we place it, to me it is not a very big issue as long as it is created and it does not become a burden and it has your authority of making sure that we coordinate, then I am not bothered.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, what coordination and relationship mechanism are you proposing as the minister responsible for this Bill?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Very good question, Mr Chairman. My proposal is this. This committee, if you allow that we use the word, “committee”, (a) it will be appointed by the minister. Okay? The people will be appointed by the minister and it will be reporting to the minister. Then the minister will get the report of what they have submitted and hand it over to the authority for them to look at the various policies – (Interjections) - a Board is just for administrative purposes to design policy and what not and it ends there. But the question of real implementation – I would really like that we focus our attention on the implementation of this law. I feel the committee should do this.   

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let me have the Member for Busongora and I was asking him to smile when he is coming up because – (Laughter) -

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, I have ably listened to my colleague and also the minister when he was trying to justify why the committee or a body that is going to assist in the implementation of the law.

Mr Chairman, the minister has said that it is the minister to appoint members of the committee or whichever body that is going to work with the Board; unfortunately, the Board is supposed to report to the minister and then the committee is insinuating that the committee should be reporting directly to the minister and the minister now reports to the Board. I do not know what kind of confusion we shall be creating in trying to address the issue of money laundering and yet we are not bringing out a structure that is clear, that we can reckon and say, yes that when the committee reports to the Board then the board also reports to the minister. But in assertion of the minister, I think it is real confusion.

Secondly, the independence of the committee will not be assured because according to the committee’s proposal, it will be appointed by the minister and they report to him. So, I do not think that the members who have been appointed by the minister will actually be independent and reporting genuinely to the structure that is there.

Finally, Mr Chairman -

MR SSASAGA: I want to give my brother information that in simple language, the Board is a bureaucracy and it looks through the activities that are being carried out by the committee and its big role is to advise the minister. They look through and advise. They stop at policy formulation and advise to the ministry whereas the minister is in direct affairs with the committee. So there won’t be confusion because in my understanding, I believe because their role is just advisory to the ministry.

MR NZOGHU: I think that when we go to that direction, we shall be confusing ourselves and we shall not achieve the object of the Bill that we are trying to legislate on. 

Mr Chairman, when you look at the committee or whichever body that will be appointed by the minister - history can also tell that when you look at some of the scenarios that have happened in Uganda especially in respect to corruption, you realise that somewhere some ministers have been in the spotlight and it shouldn’t be fair for some of the ministers who have been in the spotlight to be the ones to appoint members of the committee that is going to oversee anti-money laundering. 

It should be in the interest of our country that there should be a system that should sieve out properly how the reporting mechanism will go but I do not see any logic in the minister appointing a committee, and the committee reporting to him directly and also there is a board which is reporting to the minister. It will be real confusion. I think that hon. ODONGA OTTO’s and hon. Medard Sseggona’s suggestion was fair that we delete these two clauses and we have the members of the Board responsible in appointing the members of the committee, if it is to be established.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The minister was making reference to some guidelines but those are guidelines and recommendations, and I do not think they bind us that we must copy and paste whatever is there and in any case,   I do not think the international guidelines say that we must have a committee in a manner in which we are suggesting.  

There are critical elements which are required in an effective anti-money laundering law and what international guidelines give us are that we must create a regime that criminalises money laundering, that ensures that regulators and Police are given power and tools  to investigate these kinds of crimes. But also put a mechanism to share information with other countries and also a requirement for financial institutions to report - you establish risk based controls and also keep records and be able to report suspicious activities. These are some of the elements that are recommended and I think our law captures some of those.  

There are very many institutions in this country, which have boards and secretariats but also they make attempts to ensure that there is participation and inclusion of various stakeholders. If I can use the example of the Uganda AIDS Commission which is established by an Act of Parliament; it has a board and a secretariat but also it has established what they call a “partnership committee” that brings on board development partners, NGOs, civil society and government actors together but this committee is put in place by the board. 

The fear the House is raising is having two parallel institutions, which are likely to clash as their functions and responsibilities are more or less the same. We can still achieve the same by having a Board; we give it powers to create committees - not all these committees have to be statutory as some of them can be operational and they can still do the work. They do not have to be statutory and to be a creature of the law. 

So my suggestion is that we maintain the Board and the intelligence authority but we give powers to the Board to create operational committees, which can bring on board various actors because by passing this law without putting this committee, it doesn’t mean that police do not have powers to do their work with respect to enforcing this law. It does not mean that CMI or intelligence services cannot work to enforce this law. It doesn’t mean that him, I or intelligence services cannot work to enforce this law. So, I think we need to cut short this debate and ask the chairperson of the committee to concede and then we just give functions and powers to the Board to put in place those kinds of committees that can accommodate different players. 

DR SSEMUGABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I support hon. Chris Baryomunsi’s submission, but still I propose that the composition may remain and the powers to appoint that committee are left to the Board.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I am sure you have captured what the Members suggested properly. [Mr Odonga Otto: “Motion”] yes, before we go into the motion, let’s have the Leader of the Opposition.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, to begin with, money laundering –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, do not give very long speeches.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, I will not. Money laundering is a crime, Mr Chairman; and crime is handled by the Police. Secondly, we have the Uganda Revenue Authority, where there is smuggling or tax evasion. I have never seen them, in their law, making a committee to handle smuggling and tax evasion. Standards are important; I am a professional accountant and we have what we call international standards but they are not the law. When making a law here over the Accountants Act, you never copied the standards and put them in the law and I conform to it. We are aware that boards are formed and boards can create audit committees, finance and administration committees, procurement committees; even this board can be mandated to create a committee in charge of money laundering.

Mr Chairman, yesterday you yourself asked why it did come at the end after regulations; this is completely an afterthought and if you see the composition – the PS from Finance is the Chairperson, then if you bring Bank of Uganda, what will be the purpose of the Board? Given that we have discussed this, the chairman should agree to delete this clause and we move on. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairperson, did you take your final speech on this matter because I have to propose a way forward.

MR SSEBUNYA: I thank you, Mr Chairman and I thank hon. Nabila Naggayi for her submission. It is as though she was part of the team that benchmarked. My only appeal to Members is that we can cause a committee, if it is for reporting purposes, to be composed by the Board and this committee can have all these members from these organisations for proper implementation of this law. Members have said that this law is to fight a crime of money laundering. If these members in these institutions are not obliged by law to be part of this law, they can have a laissez-faire affair with the authority and not actually on any demands of this authority but if it is the wish of this House, I can concede. For reporting purposes, let it be composed by the Board and at least it reports to the Board. I beg to submit.

HONOURABLE MEMBER: You move the motion formally.

MR SSEBUNYA: So, can I move to amend Clause 138 to have a composition - Let us delete – because (1) is saying, there is established a committee to be known as “the Uganda Anti-Money Laundering Committee appointed by the Board and shall consist of “– 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No way. Leave it at that.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I fail to understand what the Members are saying. They said I should propose and I am proposing and they are saying – I need your guidance, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal is that there should be a committee and there seems to be that agreement that that committee should be appointed by the Board. The Member for Kyankwanzi proposed to harmonise - because this is supposed to be a stakeholders’ forum – since we know the stakeholders and the suggestion from the committee is that those who should comprise this committee and will be appointed by the Board should be listed. Let me finish. I am just summarising what has been discussed; these are not my views. Since these stakeholders need a forum as highlighted by the hon. Member for Kampala - now I do not know what Kampala is, but Kampala geographical something –(Laughter) – and reinforced by the Member for Kyankwanzi that in this committee there should be known members because they represent institutions. Since those institutions that are involved in that particular activity are known, therefore they should be listed as the people who will comprise this committee but the instructions to them will come from the Board. That will be harmony. Will that be okay? Hon. Minister, would that be a good position for us to adopt? The institutions are already there - yes, the institutions are already there but this law says “by mandate they should be brought under the authority of the – you know, the Member for Budadiri East County said they are failing in Malaysia because institutions are saying “It is not my mandate so, why are you calling me” because they are not mentioned in the law. So, we are trying to deal with the experiences they have brought to see whether we can make a superior law based on all the experiences they have been able to share with us. 

MR MULIMBA: Mr Chairman, I was almost moved and I thought when the chairman was proposing an amendment, he moved a little well but along the way, he stumbled. In my opinion, I thought given all the input of the Members, by now we all concur that we need this committee but I think the issue should not make this committee statutory. We only have it as an operational committee. If we can only agree on that, because if we are saying you want to marry the police, the intelligence services and the UPDF, all these agencies have their constitutional mandates which we do not have to run away from. The moment there is crime, Article 212 commands political amends. The moment there are issues to do with sovereignty, the UPDF must come in, the Bank of Uganda has its rule of regulation. In any case, we are talking about this being a very complex crime. When the URA began enforcement of taxes, especially fighting smuggling, I thought in Uganda is when we first had the most complex issue because then, it was the very big people that were involved in smuggling and we thought it was very difficult to crackdown on them. Therefore, the moment you fail to involve a committee which is also going to begin clashing and with respect to responsibilities and functions, you will end up with a blame game.

Mr Chairman, my proposal to the committee is that they should simply adjust and delete that clause –(Interjection) - I will take that information.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I thank my colleague for giving way. First, this is not the first time we are establishing agencies with a specific mandate; we have got the IGG, for example, and there is no committee enforcing its operations. We seem to have agreed at a point, where we said that this is at an operational level. And when we make it statutory for the Board, we even decide where they must draw the composition and mandate from; we are tying the board’s mandate. There may be the need at one point to bring in people from different backgrounds – because my colleagues have stated it quite well that we are dealing with institutions whose mandate is already defined in the law and who, indeed have an obligation. You could even take the example – we could establish just one single offence called money laundering and the Police will swing into action immediately. 

So my suggestion is that let us not limit the mandate of the Board; let us just provide that, “The Board shall appoint committees for effective discharge of its functions.” If the functions of the Board are clear enough – they are to do with policy and implementation, the Board will establish – not only this committee, by the way – it could even establish other committees which we do not have to provide for in the statute. For example, every ministry had departments, directorates and others which we did not establish by statute. 

So my view, Mr Chairman, is that we could still delete this and replace it with just one sentence “Empowering the Board to appoint committees for proper discharge of its function.” Thank you.

MR MULIMBA: Thank you for the information. Mr Chairman, I wanted to wind up by saying that we do not want to undermine the powers of the Board. But at the same time we do not want to withdraw the minister’s powers also because the minister has to come up with regulations. So somehow the composition can be in the regulations. What is wrong with that? This will save us from embedding it in the law and make it statutory. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, the proposal has been made. What do you say?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, I am extremely happy that we have agreed that we need a committee for coordination, whether it is under the Board or not. He has proposed that a Board may make committees that will assist it to execute its mandate. So to me, I am contented and will concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So would that mean that we delete the next two clauses and recommit Clause 25 to incorporate this particular function among the functions of the Board? 

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, as we recommit Clause 25 – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We are not yet there. When you recommit – 

MR SSEBUNYA: I am putting Members on notice because they forgot what they did to the authority; they trimmed all its functions. So as we recommit that clause, we propose that all the functions that were proposed for it – specifically for these institutions – are carried back into the – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You will move that at an appropriate time. Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 138 as it stands in the Bill be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 139, deleted.

Clause 4

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, before we go back to Clause 4, I have children – I am not supposed to communicate at committee stage but it looks like they want to leave now so I will announce. In the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers of Emmanuel Christian Mixed Day and Boarding Nursery and Primary School. They are represented by hon. Alice Alaso and hon. Stephen Ochola and hon. Elijah Okupa of Serere District. They have come to observe the proceedings; please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers of Bwicha Secondary School. Their representatives in Parliament are hon. Tophace Kaahwa and hon. Henry Kajura of Hoima Municipality. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House; please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers of Kisule Nursery and Primary School Bukoto. They are represented by hon. Fred Ruhindi and hon. Nabilah Sempala. They have come to observe the proceedings; please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) I do not know whether they have left or they are still here. 

We also have pupils and teachers of St Joseph’s Bombo Mixed Day and Boarding Primary School Luweero District represented by hon. Dr Khiddu Makubuya and hon. Brenda Nabukenya of Luweero District. Please join me in welcoming them as well. (Applause) Thank you. 

Clause 4

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Clause 4 was stood over.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. First of all, this particular part and more particularly Clause 4, in substance, establish offences. And I see a number of offences established in Clause 4, itself, although made into ingredients of one offence. But I must state that technically it does not create an offence; it only makes a prohibition. It goes to create an offence somewhere ahead in part (iv) where I will revert later. In part (vii) where there is prohibition of money laundering; offences and penalties. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What clause?

MR SSEGGONA: Clause 111, which was also stood over. Now, clause 111 provides that: “Any person, who engages in money laundering prohibited in section 4, commits an offence.” And it stops there. Now, when you go back to Clause 4 which establishes the prohibition, it is provided that: “It is prohibited for a person to intentionally do all these activities.” Now, in criminal law, you do not establish an offence like that; you must state that “A person found guilty of doing A, B, C, D commits an offence and is liable on conviction to” this and that kind of sentence. But when you look at all these ingredients, they themselves, in each of them actually constitute offences.

My view, Mr Chairman, would be that we create a host of offences from all these, specifically, for example, “Where a person converts, transfers, transports or transmits money knowing or suspecting that such money are proceeds of a crime for the purpose of concealing or disguising the illicit origin commits an offence” and that, that offence carries this kind of penalty.

When you look at all of them, they do not carry the same weight; these ingredients in Clause 4 (a) to (g) so definitely they would carry different penalties. My suggestion is that we create an offence out of each of them with separate ingredients. Concealing and disguising, impeding and so forth is an offence because it has its own ingredients, then we prescribe also its penalty as opposed to creating one offence in sections 4 and 111 without stating the penalty, which I understand the penalties provide for generally. I think it is not a modern way of drafting and establishing offences.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do you have a draft that you can now propose?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I can come up with one in a few minutes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You know we stood over this clause many days back so by now we should have perfected what we wanted to do with this clause.

MR SSEGGONA: I would concede, Mr Chairman, and undertake to do that in future but also state that the process of thinking is a continuous one.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, in the original proposal of the committee, we had said Clause 4 - We had intended to change the headnote Part 2, “Criminalisation of laundering or proceeds of crime anti-terrorism financing.” So we stood over the title headnote, including the phrase “and terrorism financing”.

Members were agreeable to Part 1 of “prohibition of money laundering”. As a committee, we had formed Part 2, “Prohibition of terrorism financing”. We stood over it because there was no definition for “terrorism financing” and the Attorney General, now that he is not here, said that we can cross reference the definition of “terrorism financing”. This is the document of the Attorney-General where he said that in clause 2 when we go to interpretation, we can say it is amended by inserting the following new definition.

We define “terrorism” as the meaning assigned to it under the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002” “Terrorism financing means the financing of terrorism provided for in this Act and the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002.” So if we recognise that definition then we would go ahead to include the new provision by the committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What is your view on the proposal from the Member from Busiro on the first part that you need to define or state these as offences and penalties and provide for them? Is that okay?

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I am happy you have caught my eye. Whereas I entirely agree with –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable, am I the one who caught your eye? (Laughter)

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, whereas I entirely agree with the proposal by hon. Sseggona, I would suggest that we delete the word “suspecting” in Clause 4 (a) and (b) and wherever it appears because it is known under the law that a suspicion, however strong it may be, can never fix a man with criminal liability. So we should substitute the word “suspecting” with the words “or having reason to believe” and say “convert, transfer, transport or transmit property, knowing or having reason to believe such a property to be the proceeds of a crime”.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I want to re-submit the position by hon. Sseggona and persuade Members that we delete the heading “prohibition of money laundering” because what it means is we would be making money laundering an offence and we have not yet passed Clause 2, which is the definition section. If you look at the definition of “’money laundering’, it is the process of turning illegitimately obtained property into seemingly legitimate property.”

Honourable members need to pay attention to this. What hon. Sseggona is saying is, we would rather retain those ingredients under 4 (a), (b), (c) and we make those offences on their own. If you conceal or disguise, you already commit an offence. If you acquire and possess, convert and transfer, you commit an offence. We should retain those ingredients on their own and not create an offence of money laundering. 

The reason is, if we create an offence of money laundering today on this 10th day of July, it means as per Article 28(7) of our Constitution, someone who undertook money laundering yesterday, even if it was Ugshs 50 billion, would not have broken any law. So we would have selectively left out some people who are engaged in laundering. Even if you do it now, it is still not an offence. So there is more danger in creating an offence of money laundering today. We would rather leave (a), (b), and (c) because if you do any of these, by default you would have still done aspects of playing around with money. I am not calling it money laundering now.

So I want to move that (4) “prohibition of money laundering” and subsequently the definition of money laundering when we reach (2) should be deleted so we leave these ingredients to be the offences.

Let me put it this way for the minister’s sake. If we maintain the heading “prohibition of money laundering” and money laundering has been defined, it means today we are creating an offence of money laundering. According to our Constitution, Article 28(7) says, “No person shall be charged with or convicted of a criminal offence which is founded on an act or omission that did not, at the time it took place, constitute a criminal offence”. What this means is you can do whatever you want, it will not be an offence unless it is clearly written in the law of that country to be an offence. 

So what we are seemingly doing wrong is making money laundering, which has been taking place in this country for years: five, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40 years - We are just criminalising that activity today, which would mean those who did it yesterday would be free. So the only way to ensure that those who did it yesterday are not free is not to create the offence of money laundering. It is to leave the ingredients under (a) converting, transferring, transporting, conceal, disguise, acquire, possess. So I beg to move that this marginal note “prohibition of money laundering” and the offence of money laundering be deleted and we retain the ingredients of that offence.

MR NIWAGABA: Maybe to get out of the impasse, can we head it as “offences related to money laundering”?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I suggest we leave it as “offences” and then we lift all the other offences, for example, in Section 111 and place them under part two; but we just leave them as “offences” and we go ahead to create offences.

Mr Chairman, I now move that one, we delete that headnote and replace it with “offences”. Secondly, that we lift the “offences created” in part seven to part two after which, we proceed to “create offences”. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Chairperson of the committee, do you have any additions?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, I just want to be helped by the legal minds. Can we legislate retrospectively? Is that permissible? (Interjections) Okay, if that is permissible –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No. That is exactly what hon. ODONGA OTTO has just said. Even if we create these offences now, they still cannot be applied to situations of yesterday. That is correct. 

So, what you punish the offenders for here is the conduct. If the conduct stipulates similar offences contained in provisions of other laws, that can be a basis for prosecution.

You remember the ingenuity we applied as we dealt with the LRA situation when we brought the Geneva Convention Acts as they were adopted by this House and some people were charged under that law? This was because we could not use the Rome Statute as a basis for prosecuting crimes that had been committed before 2002. That one is standard. So, even if we pass it now, hon. Odonga Otto, it will still not apply to yesterday’s situation.

If it is in the Penal Code Act – that is why I am saying it is about the conduct. If you have a regulated conduct by any other law, you are at liberty to prosecute somebody.

Anyway, my suggestion, chairman of the committee, is that you put offences and assign penalties together so that there is proper sequencing of your law. That is what has been proposed. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, the object of this Bill is to fight money laundering. Therefore, if we list all the offences under money laundering, that is okay; I will have no objection to that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. Now, can we deal with the redrafting of (a), (b), and (c) before we deal with sub clauses (d), (e), (f) and (g)? Should we delete them? They are there in the existing Clause 4 – what do we do with them.

MR SSEGGONA: With (a), Mr Chairman, I am taking over from where my colleague for Ndorwa left. I propose that we redraft (a) to state as follows: “Any person who converts, transfers, transports and transmits property knowingly or having reasons to believe that such property to be proceeds of crime, for purposes of concealing or disguising the illicit origin of the property or assisting any other person who is involved in the commission of the crime generating the proceeds to evade the legal consequences of his/her actions, commits an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to imprisonment not exceeding 15 years.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is there any currency point attached?

MR SSEGGONA: Yes, “…or to a fine not exceeding 100,000 currency points or both.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is the proposal. We can now leave it to the people who will do the redrafting to see whether that can be a stand-alone clause in the law. That will remain in their mandate. If that is okay with you, I now put the question to that amendment –

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We have seen the remedy or the penalty that has been proposed. This can only apply to an individual; how about the legal person? I think we should frame a penalty for a legal person as well.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the Member has a point. Hon. Members, you will recall that we already passed penalties for these offences under Clause 131. So, it might be just an issue of marrying the two. That clause has only penalties. In the first part, it reads “The offence of money laundering referred to in Section 4 is punishable by (a) and (b)…”

So, honourable members, can we create the offences and see how to marry them with the penalties passed? What? We stood over this one? No, the penalties are in Clause 131 and they have been passed – no, if the principle is passed, you can leave them as general penalties because they provide for general penalties for all offences under 4.
If that is okay, then all we need to do is to create the offences in (a), (b) and (c). We are already done with (a) and the amendment is to create the offences; we will only stop at the point of assigning penalties in respect of this particular clause because the general penalties are already taken care of in Clause 131. Can we now go to (b) – it looks like hon. Simon Mulongo has a proposal for (b) - we will come to the headnote later; about offences.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, for (b), I propose that we create another offence in the following terms: “Any person who conceals, disguises or impedes the establishment of the true nature, source, location, disposition, movement or ownership of or its rights with respect to property knowing or having reasons to believe such property to be proceeds of a crime, commits an offence ….”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is okay because the other part is already catered for.

MR SSEGGONA: Most obliged, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is the proposal from the Member for Busiro. I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we move to (c)?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, still from Busiro and for the benefit of the hon. Kabakumba Masiko, Busiro-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You mean it has another meaning?

MR SSEGGONA: The “u” changes the meaning, Mr Chairman. (Laughter) “Any person who acquires, possesses, uses or administers property knowing or having reason to believe at the time of receipt that the property is the proceeds of crime…” and then we continue with “commits an offence and is liable to….”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, that is the proposal. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: (d), (e), (f), (g) - you will finish with (c). You can also amend (d) - in fact, all of them. You can amend them in the same framework. 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, with respect to (d) I propose to create an offence in the following terms: “Any person who acts to avoid the transaction reporting requirements provided for in part 3 of this Act commits an offence.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, that is the proposal.

MR ROBERT SSEBUNYA: Maybe, to add to what the hon. Member from Busiro has said, we can create, (d), (e), (f) and (g) and say, “Any person who commits...” say (a) then an offence, (b) an offence then we finish with (g). 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, can we adopt the offences then the drafting can take care of itself? We can adopt that what has been stated is an offence. “A person who acts to avoid a transaction reporting requirements provided in part 3 of this Act commits an offence”- No, we have to state for the record. That is what is proposed. 

I put the question to that amendment in (d). 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us finish with what is in the Bill. (Mr Odonga Otto rose_) Do you have an offence or have you committed one? (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, in (e) “Any person who assists another person to benefit from known proceeds of crime commits an offence.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, under (f), “Any person who uses known proceeds of crime to facilitate the commission of a crime commits an offence.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Lastly, Mr Chairman, “Any person who participates in, associates with, conspires to commit, attempts to commit, aid and abate or facilitate and conceal the commission of any of the acts described in sections (a) to (f) above commits an offence.”   

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, hon. Mulongo, you can pull out yours. (Laughter)

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. When you look at the offences you have created, it leaves out one critical activity: that of tipping off information. We suffer disadvantages when investigating and following up such matters like money laundering because people get tipped off. So, I would like to propose that we have a specific provision for punishing those who divulge information to the effect that “Any person who knows or suspects that an investigation into money laundering has been or is being or is about to be made to divulge that information to another whereby the investigation is likely to be prejudiced, commits an offence.” I wanted it to be included among the offences,

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, you have heard the proposal. If you deliberately conceal something - you have heard the proposal. You used the word “suspecting” and things like those. Of course, we can improve on those ones.  I am being informed it is in Clause 112. Does that deal with the issue? “It is an offence of any employee, officer, director or agent or any accountable person to notify…” - Clause 112? 

MR MULONGO: Mr Chairman, Clause 112 is about the corporate persons who act singly or in a group. But this one can be by virtue of somebody’s access to the information about investigations and he or she tips off-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I see. This is about somebody who knows - leaking information leading to possible runaways and further concealments and disappearances of evidence and things like these. Honourable members, that is the proposal. Should I put the question to that?   

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I was listening in to an effort by hon. Otto in that the law we are making, apparently, cannot have a retrospective effect; and you can be sure that money laundering has been going on till this morning and even as we speak. (Laughter) So, for people to jump this window, isn’t there a way we can find in the offences to widen the net so that those who seem to be laughing all the way to their banks can be pulled back, and we have recourse on how to proceed against them? We are making good nets but apparently, we are only helpless to see that we are only laying them now. There are those who have been pushed from the same and are ready to cause havoc. I would imagine that if we can find some way we can arrange for some offence so that it remains standing such that we can fall back to it when opportunity arises, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member for Lwemiyaga, you used the example of a net. Criminal legislation acts like a net. It starts catching from the time you drop it in the water. If you are still holding it in your hand and you are walking around with it, it does not matter for how long you have been walking around with the net- (Laughter) - it cannot catch anything. It may catch you instead. That is how criminal legislation is. For as long as you are making it a criminal offence, it cannot apply yesterday or before it is law. 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Just to clarify what the hon. Member meant. Investigations into this activity, in the countries we have benchmarked – actually, investigations can be done up to 10 years back from the time you started acquiring this property. If you are a person who has been identified for investigation for any anti-money laundering activity and it is suspected that you acquired that property using those fraudulent money and you are trying to clean it, it can handle properties acquired 10 years back. I do not know how we can frame it in the law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is already in the law. The question is, can you take somebody to prison for it? That is another matter. No, you cannot. You can do all actions civil in nature and grab that property but to lock up the person today when it was not offence when he did it is not possible. Re-confiscation is not a criminal punishment.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, in agreeing with you, let me add some little voice. What the chairman is expressing is under Article 28 of our Constitution. If someone did an act which did not constitute an offence at that time and you legislate today, you will not catch up with that person. However, one thing, which you need to know, if you started driving last year without a driving permit and it was not an offence last year, definitely, we will not catch up with you.
But if we pass the law and you are continuing to drive without a driving permit, then we will catch up with you.

Now, tracing as the chairman has clarified, I cannot put it in a better language but I can only say if you stole last year and this is stolen money and you keep it and you continue using that money and we establish that it is stolen money - I want to leave it at that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is correct because if you buy property and you are beginning to earn rent tomorrow - are we together on this? Are we done with Clause 4 now? And the head note changes from “prohibition of money laundering” to “offences.” What happens to the general heading of the part?
The committee had proposed “criminalisation of the laundering of the proceeds of crime and terrorism financing.” Can I put the question to the head note for this particular clause?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, I am seeking guidance from you. I would like us to look at Clause 4 and Clause 111.  Clause 4 is talking of “prohibition of money laundering” in the original Bill, Clause 111 is talking of “money laundering” and I think the committee recommended that they should also include “terrorism financing”. Don’t you think, Mr Chairman, that there is need either to lift Clause 111 and bring it here, since under Clause 4, we are creating offences?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, Clause 111 will just be deleted because we are talking about offences under Clause 111.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: You know, Mr Chairman, we have to be very careful. Is what we are providing for under Clause 4 capturing everything that is under Clause 111?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, because it says “A person who engages in money laundering prohibited in section 4 commits an offence” and the agreement of the House is that we are not creating the offence called “money laundering” we are regulating this conduct that would constitute what would be understood to be money laundering in specific terms now. So, actually, Clause 111 would fall by the wayside once we are done with 4.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chair. Before we deal with the title, there is an amendment that we had proposed at committee but I do not see it here and I wanted to put it here in terms of cash courier. “Cash courier” is the issue of money launderers carrying money from one country to the other, using cash because they are aware that if they put in banking system they would be got. 

So, I would like to propose an amendment that, “Any person found in possession of Uganda shillings or any other currency equivalent to 25,000 currency points, will have committed an offence.” You will need to declare, you have to fill declaration forms but at the same time, it should be prohibited, carrying amounts of money over and above 25,000 currency points.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: How much Uganda shillings is that? 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I would like to support the Member for Bukedea in principle, but I want to know in terms of figures; when you talk about those currency points, how much is that in terms of amounts? – (Interjections) - 50 million shillings? I think I will support her. We just need to redraft.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Chairman, we have many Ugandans who are now in the Diaspora and they have been working. They come back to this country carrying this money. Now, if one arrives at Entebbe and declares: “I have my $50,000.” Is that a crime? You are bringing money into this country. You have worked for it. What offence have you committed, if you are coming in with the money?

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, actually, the hon. Member for Mbale Municipality has been an ambassador and I am sure you have passed through many airports and immigration points and it is prohibited for you to carry over $ 10,000. Just that amount!

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You are not prohibited. You are supposed to declare.

MS AKOL: What I want is an improvement to this but the issue is cash courier through any immigration point. If you have monies beyond 25,000 currency points, it should be a must that you declare that and the forms should be prescribed in the law as well.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Chairman, I have no problem. If one declares the money, then they have not committed any offence. It is your own money; if there is payment of income tax, then we do that but if you are carrying the money you have declared, you have not committed an offence but if you have concealed the money, then you are held responsible.

MR MPONGO: Mr Chairman, I am in support of declaring the money because most of our businessmen who go out, they go out with cash dollars and I know of some who go out with about $500,000 to Dubai. They declare this money, go to Dubai, buy their merchandise and come back to Uganda. We must really legislate in the spirit of allowing others do here what our businessmen do elsewhere. If ours go out with a lot of cash in dollars, then it will be difficult to refuse others to come in with cash in dollars. 

Mr Chairman, what I am submitting is that maybe, we could enforce on the declaration of the money so that at least it could be easier to follow up that money, should there be any suspicion.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, all we need to agree upon is a threshold that will require declaration and the Member is proposing 2,500 currency points. How much would that be? Shs50 million or its equivalent?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we passed Clause 9 and we amended it to 1,000 currency points. So, if this is what is applicable, then it should be 1,000 currency points.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think we have already approved that. If it was approved, then that is fine.
MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, we are actually talking about cash going out or even coming in – it has to be declared. What provision do we have for those ones who have smart cards or visa cards?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is not cash -

MR NZOGHU: Because it translates into cash.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is not cash.  That is money in the bank.

MR SSEGGONA: May I seek clarification before I give her my professional support? Are we talking about money entering or leaving the country? 

HON. MEMBERS: Both.

MR SSEGGONA: Because for me, for money entering the country, I have no problem – (Interjections) – yes, I know it has issues of inflation. But my concern - and in the spirit of the anti-money laundering law we are making - is money leaving the borders because we are not targeting people who are coming in to invest here but we are looking at people who steal our money and they start laundering it around. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But hon. Member, you are also in a cooperation arrangement with those who steal money from Kenya and come to Uganda. It is part of the international, regional cooperation against crime.  

MR SSEGGONA: At that level, then I will agree. I will take information from the LOP.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the information I want to give him is that somebody steals Shs 1 billion, converts it very well into dollars, goes to Dubai and succeeds at the airport and he comes back and he says he is coming in with money. “I am an investor from Bugiri” and yet, that money was the same money that was taken from here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the Member has conceded on that. Please. (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, there are problems concerning declaration because what about the safety of the person carrying the money? You people know every time you have Shs 20 million, you even almost fail to walk in Kampala. People even put money in their stockings. (Interjections) No, even when you fill the form, they will leave you to travel to Kampala. What guarantee do you have that you are able to reach with that money? We may be causing more problems.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, this is also part of showing that it would be a risky business to keep moving with cash. You need to have other instruments that can help you do these transactions. Put it into the bank and take it from the other side.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I concede. In that circumstance, I think we should raise the threshold to Shs 200 million because Shs 50 million is not money these days. So, we raise the threshold. You cannot just move with Shs 200 million like that because you can cause problems in the country. So, we put the threshold to Shs 200 million and beyond that, that is where -

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We are talking about cash transits and I think I sit on the same committee with hon. Wamanga-Wamai. Of recent, we have just scrutinised and seen how we can encourage our people in the Diaspora to invest in this country. We are talking of terrorists and the rest but have seen a situation where most of our people in the Diaspora work a lot and want to help their people back in Uganda. But in most cases, when they put their money in the bank to transfer it to Uganda, they are charged highly and in fact, they are affected so much, for example, through Western Union and sometimes when they come to URA here, it is never easy for them. 

So, a situation where somebody is carrying cash and coming with it, it is our opinion that they clear but we are limiting them to say $ 1,000 dollar. I do not know how we are going to help them because we have realised that the money from the Diaspora adds a lot to the GDP of this country. Can we see this issue before we go far? I thank you.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, the issue is; if your money is more than Shs 50 million, you just declare that “I am coming with money” and fill a form saying - because they will be asking, “Are you moving with currency more than Shs 50 million” and then you simply say, “Yes”. Or “Are you moving with currency more than Shs 50 million” and you do not know that, then you say, “No.” because it is not. Everybody carries currency especially when you are going abroad, you carry some currency unless you are the one who says “The Lord will provide.”

MR TODWONG: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think the purpose of setting this declaration regulation is to enforce the discipline of financial transactions through the recognised financial institutions. Why would someone move with Shs 200 million in his bag and enter the border and does not want to declare? Why would you want to go out of your country with Shs 500 million in your bag and you do not want to declare? We have heard stories in this country where people sleep with the money under their beds.

This is part of the requirement that we have to enforce discipline in financial transactions to enforce that people should bank money and the banks will capture this money that is in circulation. Otherwise, as we stand now, we do not know the liquidity capacity we have as a country or money in circulation. There is a lot of black money going around.

So, Mr Chairman, I propose that we pass this and we really emphasise that we need to agree on the level of currency points that should be declared as we are now debating but the requirement to declare should be mandatory. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is already there and we approved $ 1,000. But it will not catch the person who has money under his bed – certainly, it will not because nobody will come to give you a form at your door to ask whether you have the money in your house. But currency points have already been passed – 1,000 currency points.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I wanted to enrich the submissions of hon. Todwong and hon. Rose Akol. I was at Eagen Petrol Station and I met Ugandans talking to themselves.  They were saying that a young boy was captured and taken to Game and from Game, they tied his face and they took him somewhere to fumigate money, which was being eaten by termites. The man fumigated the money and they brought him back to Game. Actually, they first sedated him. I believe that everyone that has come with money to this country should declare it. What is wrong with declaring the money you have? This thing of keeping money under the beds must stop. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is from “General” Bitekyerezo. Please, let us conclude this matter. We have agreed on Clause 4, we have, however, not agreed on the proposal by hon. Akol - the one proposed by hon. Akol is already taken care of as you have proposed, but they were talking about the proposal of leaking information, as proposed by hon. Mulongo. Hon. Mulongo proposed that if you leak information or something like that – 

MR MULONGO: Mr Chairman, I want to withdraw it because I realised that it was already catered for in Clause 112.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. I put the question to this. Hon. Chair, you have an amendment, which you have not enlighted the House on. 

MR ROBERT SSEBUNYA: Maybe, you should put the question to the proposal by hon. Akol.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What was the formulation? Can you restate it? “Any person who is in possession of 1,000 currency points and will fail to declare commits an offence.” Is that what is proposed? 

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, that amendment should read as follows: “Any person in possession of currency worth 1,000 currency points or its equivalent must declare on entry or exit at any immigration point. Failure to declare constitutes an offence that is punishable by law.” 

MR MBAHIMBA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just want to make a comment on what she has just talked about and I am looking at 1,000 currency points. It is Shs 20 million and I am looking at what the strength of our money in Uganda is. What is Shs 20 million that you have said? If I am carrying it to go down to the market to shop, I must declare it? I am looking at it as little money. I agree that we should have a limit but this is too little. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In the US, it is $10,000.

MR MBAHIMBA: In the US, it is $10,000 which is about Shs 26 million but, Mr Chairman, we do not live in the US. Our economy is not strong like the US; ours is still weak. Therefore, the Shs 20 million may not have the same weight like in the US. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Chairman, the honourable member from Kasese is confusing two things; entry points and someone having money in his possess within the country. If I have my Shs 20 million and I am in Uganda and I am a Ugandan, why do I have to declare that money? But when exiting and when coming back, it is an obligation to declare it and that is what they are saying. So, hon. Member from Kasese, if you have your Shs 20 million, you can sell your katunda, move around Kasese and buy things from the market. 

Otherwise, when within the country, I cannot declare my money because I am a legitimate citizen of the country. So, I think he never understood what we were talking about. It was about declaration at exit and entry.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us look at the redraft.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I beg to propose a draft that will read as follows: “Any person in transit into, through or out of Uganda and is in possession of an amount exceeding 1,000 currency points, who fails to declare the same to the relevant authority, commits an offence.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is an improvement from hon. Mulongo.

MR MULONGO: Mr Chairman, I buy the proposal by the honourable colleague but with an amendment on the issue of “transiting” because when you are transiting, you really have not entered because you have not touched the authorities that are supposed to administer this - the customs. So, when you travel out there, whether it is in the Asian countries or the States, it is about entry and exit and not transiting. If we can amend this –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can you recast it with the entry, exit?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I would concede on the issue of “transit” because you may just be driving through Uganda and you do not want to even stop for a minute. So, it will read: “Any person who enters in or out of Uganda and is in possession of an amount exceeding 1,000 currency points and fails to declare the same to the relevant authority, commits an offence.”

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I seek clarification. I have been reading section 11(1) and (2) and I do not know what we are trying to draft now and how it fits in section 11(1) and (2). Isn’t it covered?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member for Bukedea, does Section 11 answer those issues? The challenge I have is that, I did not handle this earlier part of the Bill. So, I do not know what we passed and what we did not. Isn’t it the same thing? 

MS AKOL: I have read Section 11(1) and (2) and I find it covered. So, I withdraw my amendment.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, under clause 4, the committee proposes an amendment. In the spirit of the earlier clauses passed, we can say, “It is prohibited for any person to refrain from taking such measures as are reasonably necessary to ensure that neither the person nor any services offered by that person is capable of being used by any person to commit or facilitate the commission of money laundering and terrorism financing.”It creates an offence; here we are creating offences. Can I read it again? [Hon. Members: “Yes.”] 

“It is an offence for any person to refrain from taking such measures as are reasonably necessary to ensure that neither the person nor any services offered by that person is capable of being used by any person to commit or facilitate the commission of money laundering.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you using “money laundering”?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: That input is to prevent inaction by accountable persons to take necessary measures to prevent money laundering.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us see if we can reflect on this better so that we shorten the discussion. This is going to be a general provision on a person who refrains from taking such measures, whether in (a) or (b) or (c), because some people have the means to stop these things. 

What the committee is proposing is that there should be a clause or a general provision for refraining to take measures. In other words, which now makes you almost – what is the word? Normally we regulate attempts, being accessory after the fact and all those things. I think this is an attempt to bring those people who can be – (Mr Bitekyerezo rose_)

We have a proposal, honourable member, which is not in the Bill. This proposal is in the report. So, if you are looking at the Bill, you are looking at a wrong document.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I would like to persuade the committee chairman to abandon that proposal. I know members do not have the copy, but what it actually means is that if you are aware that a crime is being committed, you must do something about it. But in our country, some people just run away from a crime scene because they have enough of their own problems. (Laughter) You know our society. So, for you to bring a clause like that one in law, that when you find anyone committing treason you are allowed to pick up arms and do anything necessary to restore order, I think in this particular situation you cannot do it. 

If someone is committing an offence in a taxi park, it means you are going to be charged because you were there but did nothing. It really puts unnecessary responsibility on even passers-by because they will just pick you up and say, “Yes, you were there; what did you do? You could have carried a stone to put that man down. Why did you opt to run away?” It is a very complex scenario.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Committee chairperson, what value is this amendment adding to the Bill?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Maybe we should not say that it is an offence for any person and we instead modify it to say, “an accountable person”. We have a schedule for accountable persons and they are real estate agents, dealers in precious metals – [Hon. Member: “and advocates; do not leave them out.”] - (Laughter) – advocates, Uganda Investment Authority; those are the accountable persons for which we want – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, just show us what value it adds.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: The value it adds is that it refrains those persons from running away from responsibility of identifying money launderers.

MR MWIRU: Mr Chairman, I have been very patient with the committee chairperson but from the way he is moving, it seems he does not want us to pass this Bill today. I implore you, committee chairperson, to abandon that proposal. We want to avoid a situation where you will say, “Hon. Muruli Mukasa heard about the story” and then he is charged. You are inferring knowledge from someone who actually – (Interjections) – Yes! 

It should be the responsibility of everybody. We are delving into the moral aspect. If you know that someone is doing something wrong, it is your responsibility to inform the Police. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we have 25 minutes left.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we said that accountable persons include banks; we want them to report money laundering because they are among the accountable persons. Without the banks giving you information on money laundering, where else can we get it?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no; there is another provision requiring them to do so.

MR AYOO: Mr Chairman, I want to agree with the committee chairperson because we are dealing with money laundering. Here a new element of corruption can come up. We have authorised persons who can decide to conceal so that they facilitate money laundering by pretending that someone is not passing on the information. 

This is not a situation where somebody would find a thief breaking into your house and just bypass him. It is not a situation where you find somebody being beaten and he dies but because you do not want to be a witness in court, somebody can just pass by. In this situation of money laundering, the authorised persons must be held responsible so that they are aware that should they pretend not to report cases which they are in the know of, they will be held liable. That is where I want to support the committee chairperson. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Clause 118, which we passed, talks about refusal, omission, neglect or failure to give assistance. It says, “An accountable person who refuses, omits, neglects, or fails to give assistance to a representative of the Authority in accordance to section 12(e) commits an offence.” Do you want to enlarge this? Isn’t omitting to give information to the Authority covered under clause 118?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, we do not have the copies of the amendment but if you look at clause 4, – the offences we have created – (g) has issues to do with any person who participates, associates, conspires, commits, aids, abets, conceals, facilitates to conceal. I think that covers what the committee chairperson is trying to achieve. Therefore, the value this proposal brings to the Bill is already catered for. Clause 4 and clause 118 can achieve what the committee chairperson is looking for. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I will concede on that as guided by my colleagues.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, I just want to take you back to clause 9 – I think it was clause 9.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We are on clause 4.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, where we are talking about the movement of money across borders. I think it is clause 11. The provision in there does not actually make it an offence; it is simply a requirement for one to fill a form and so on but it does not make it an offence. That is what we are trying to pursue, to make it an offence.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Odonga Otto, please, re-state your position. There is an obligation created under clause 11 and failure to perform that obligation is not punished.  

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, in clause 121, I think the issue of cross-border carriage of money is converted into an offence. If you fail to declare the money, the offence has been created in 121.


THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay? I put the question to the amendment proposed in clause 4 on the creation of the offences from (a) to (g) as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, you had another amendment, terrorism financing. The penalties are in clause 132.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, as a committee, we had proposed to include clause 4(2) and it reads: 
“Prohibition of terrorism financing 
(1) 	No person shall by any means whatsoever, directly or indirectly, provide (whether by giving, lending or otherwise making available) or collect funds or property with the intention that they be used in full or in part to carry out an act of terrorism. 

(2) 	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), an act shall not be taken to be an act of terrorism if- 
(a)	it is committed as part of advocacy, protest, demonstration, dissent or industrial action and is not intended to result in any harm mentioned in subsection (a); or 
(b)	it occurs in a situation of armed conflict and is, at the time and in the place it occurred, in accordance with rules of international law applicable to the conflict. 

(3) 	No person shall organise or direct others to commit, attempt to commit, conspire to commit or participate as an accomplice to a person committing or attempting to commit the offence of terrorism financing. 

(4) 	Knowledge or intent in subsections (2) and (3) may be inferred from factual circumstance. 

(5) 	Where it is necessary for the purpose of an offence of financing of terrorism committed by a body corporate to establish the state of mind of the body corporate, it shall be sufficient to show that a director, office, employee or agent of the body corporate, acting in the course of employment or agency, as the case may be, had that state of mind.”

The justification -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think we have gone through this many times. Honourable members, that is the proposal from the committee to create the offence of terrorism financing.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, I thank the chairperson for the amendment. A number of countries have combined this anti-money laundering legislation with terrorism financing but we have a stand-alone legislation on anti-terrorism activities. I just wanted to seek clarification from the chairman on whether he made reference to that law to see whether some of these issues are comprehensively covered. Did you cross-reference this amendment with what is provided in the Anti-terrorism Act so that we do not duplicate some of these provisions?

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Mine is closely related to what hon. Baryomunsi said. I recall that when this House passed the Anti-terrorism Act, there was mention of what not to do - participate, finance and stuff like that. I was wondering whether the chairman had found those provisions inadequate to the extent that we want to enact a new provision.

Secondly, I would have to be educated on which one then applies? Is it the new provision or the provisions in the parent law in regard to anti-terrorism?

Also, from the way the amendment is framed, it does seem to me that financing terrorism through money laundering is the thing that is prohibited. So, do I go out of here thinking that financing terrorism through other means other than money laundering is acceptable to this country? Mr Chairman, I seek that clarification.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, before the clarification, I have been informed by the technical team that I do not have the support of the Attorney-General and if I do not have that support, I drop the amendment. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. It is dropped. Sometimes it is good for the chairman to speak at the right moment to avoid – So, that clause has now been amended in substance. Did we vote on the title to change it to “offences”?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, before you do that, I seek simple clarification. I do not know if we did this but there is a typing error on (g), the second line - “or facilitate or counsel the commission…” I think this should be “conceal”. It should be, “conceal the commission…” because you cannot counsel the commission. It should be, “…or facilitate or conceal the commission of any of the acts above”. You facilitate or conceal. This is a typing error.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, please, cross-check with the technical bench. It is always advisable to do that. You have a technical bench.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Sorry, Mr Chairman. I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. So, the word is “conceal” not “counsel”. Okay, I put the question to remove, in (g), the word “counsel” and in its place put the word “conceal”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In the headnote of clause 4, the change is now to delete “prohibition of money laundering” and put in its place the word “offences”. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much. There is Part II, the general title - criminalisation of the laundering of proceeds of crime. Is that okay? Okay. We now go to clause 10, monitoring and reporting of suspicious transactions.

Clause 10

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, there was an attempt for us to change the word “transaction” to “activity” so that we have a wider net. However, the honourable members insisted on transaction, so we stayed it. 

The rest of the amendments under clause 10 were about the inclusion of the phrase “terrorism financing”, which we agreed was a result of –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, since we have not approved terrorism financing –

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: That means we do not have any amendments in clause 10.

MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. In addition to what the chairperson of the committee has just pointed out, I am looking at accountable persons in clause 10 and comparing that content with what is in the schedule. 

The first on the list of accountable persons are advocates as defined under the Advocates Act. My concerns, -(Interjections)– No, the schedule is read together with all the provisions that bring it into play. My concern is that advocates, by law, have a duty of secrecy. The client-advocate relationship is built on secrecy. By bringing them here and imposing statutory obligations, we may be crossing the red line into the constitutional practice of their profession – (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: I would like just to give information that even the Advocates Act, Cap 267, section 40, puts obligations on advocates to keep accounts in compliance with the rules. Section 41 of the Advocates Act gives that responsibility to the Uganda Law Council, after consultations with the Uganda Law Society. 

When you read Section 41, you realise that the law already puts us under the obligation to keep accounts of all transactions that we encounter with our clients. So, having this in this legislation will be a contravention of sections 40 and 41 of the Advocates Act of Uganda.

MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: I want to thank my colleague for that information. The Advocates Professional Conduct Regulations do not allow advocates to disclose information they obtain from their clients by virtue of their relationship. It has constitutional implications.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that has no implications on clause 10. This clause just talks about accountable persons. Let us first deal with this clause. You can raise those issues when we get to the schedule. If that is agreeable, I put the question that clause 10 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 111

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 111 be deleted – Yes, we have deleted it with the adoption of clause 4.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, yes we have deleted it, but have we carried the offences under –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is what we spent time on, creating offences under clause 4.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Mr Chairman. You said that under clause 4 one will be liable because they will have committed a crime. Clause 111 says the offences you will have committed – unless we amend under the penalties –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, honourable members, penalties are in a different clause and that is clause 131, I think.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I know why I am saying all this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, penalties are in clause 131. What we have adopted in clause 4 takes care of all that had been provided in clause 111. This clause 111 does not create penalties and it is redundant after adopting clause 4 in that form. I now put the question that clause 111 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 111, deleted.

Clause 116, agreed to.

Schedule 1, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Before we go to the schedules, let us finish with clause 2 because we stood over clause 2. 

Clause 2

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Because there is no terrorism financing, can we adopt the definitions in clause 2. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: We had agreed to insert a new definition of terrorism financing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But we have not approved terrorism financing and now you want to bring it back by –(Laughter)- I put the question that clause 2 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

The Second Schedule

MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, as I stated earlier, the relationship between an advocate and a client is a regulated one and it is regulated by the Constitution - (Interjection) - For the benefit of the honourable Dr Medard Bitekyerezo, Mr Chairman - I have always thought that speaking is the right of those in the know - I was saying that the advocates and their clients have a relationship that is regulated by the Constitution, the Advocates Act and the Advocates Professional Conduct Regulations. These do not permit the disclosure of the information obtained by virtue of that relationship except with an order of court.

As I said earlier, including advocates onto this schedule has constitutional implications. I do not know about other professions, and I said speech is the right of those in the know. Mr Chairman, I suggest and move passionately that we remove them for the reasons I have given. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What about accountants? 

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I acknowledge the fact that I may not speak from legal knowledge, but as an ordinary Uganda I know that many times the advocates connive with criminals and hide behind the laws that protect them. Therefore, my appeal –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The honourable member holding the Floor shall be respectful of the noble legal profession –(Laughter)– and should refrain from using words like “connive” and so on in the commission of offences.

MR OPOLOT: Much obliged, Mr Chairman, but there have been cases, some of which have been cited in our reports to Parliament, alluding to the fact that some advocates and their clients have abetted crimes. 

Also, Mr Chairman, in order for us to ensure that we have responsible and reliable advocates, the law should clearly pronounce itself on how they are required to handle money laundering so that they do not cover up – (Interruptions)

MR ODONGA OTTO: This is just information to the House. It is unfortunate that the Attorney-General is not here. Section 41 of the Advocates Act says, “The Law Council, after consultation with the Uganda Law Society, may by statutory instrument amend the Advocates Accounts Rules and the Advocates Trust Accounts Rules.”

So, if we badly need the advocates to remain on that schedule, the procedure is different; it is the Law Council and Uganda Law Society that pass rules that regulate conduct of advocates. So, this one should then be inserted in the right place and not here. That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much.

MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: I thank my colleague for giving way. Mr Chairman, a distinction ought to be drawn. What we are doing here is not to insulate lawyers from committing crimes; no. The element that is coming out of here is that you are requiring a lawyer to incriminate his client using - (Interjections) - Hon. Kabakumba Masiko, you will have your time. Mr Chairman, I think the hon. Kabakumba Masiko has four years in law school. 

The point I am making here is that we are not insulating lawyers. What we are doing here is to require a lawyer –(Interjection)- I will take it.

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: I know we have been dealing with this Bill for some time-

MR SSEGGONA LUBEGA: Mr Chairman, I am giving information, so I cannot receive information.

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: I am giving you information. Please, receive it.

MR SSEGGONA LUBEGA: I am not allowed, under the rules, to receive information when I am giving information. 

Mr Chairman, the point we are making is that if a lawyer participates in the commission of the offence of money laundering, that is an offence committed by that individual. What we are requiring a lawyer to do here is to disclose information obtained from a client by virtue of his professional performance in a particular transaction. Those are two different things. 

I know that somebody called X has bought land worth Shs 200 million and I may be said to have reason to believe that this money is feloniously obtained within the provisions of this Act. What we are doing now is to impose an obligation on that lawyer to become an agent of the state. One, get this information by requiring the production of identity, bills, etc. and when you obtain it, pass it on to the state. But this is a client who comes to you in confidence. You are going to turn into a witness against your own client. 

The constitutional element that stems from this is that you are denying the advocate an opportunity to practice his profession in terms of representing this person, eventually when this person is placed in the dock. That one is unconstitutional and that is the extent, Mr Chairman, of my objection.   

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much for the information. I appreciate that this is something that touches you personally. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Professionally. 

MR OPOLOT: Professionally.

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. I had wanted to give information; anyway, he will receive it. 

Mr Chairman, we have been going through this Bill for some time and I do understand that some of our colleagues have not been so regular. However, I believe that if you look at clause 15(1) and (2), they do cover hon. Sseggona and hon. Otto’s fears. I could read it if I am so allowed. 

Clause 15, “Obligations of confidentiality not an impediment
(1)An obligation as to bank or professional secrecy, confidentiality and no other restrictions on the disclosure of information whether imposed by law or any agreement shall not affect any obligation under this Act to report or furnish information.

(2) Subsection (1) shall not apply to communications between an advocate…” - like hon. Sseggona – “…and a client, which are privileged under the laws of Uganda.”

MR SSEGGONA LUBEGA: For the record, Mr Chairman, I want to thank Princess Kabakumba. (Laughter) However, I think that is the very reason that the schedule should be amended. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, it is even very dangerous if you read subsection (1) and the footnote; it is even worse. Look at the footnote. It says that this refers to sole practitioners, partners, or employed professionals within professional firms. It is not meant to refer to internal professionals; for example, if the internal auditor sees his Permanent Secretary taking money out, he is not supposed to report. That is what it is saying – not internal employees of any type, not professionals working for Government agencies. This is worse. 

I am not bothered by the first issue about the advocates and the accountants. The people who should actually be up here are the ones we are trying to exempt in the footnotes. 

Mr Chairman, I am also a professional accountant. There are laws which govern us on secrecy and if we bring this here, we may take a whole day. I would propose that maybe we stand over (1). However, when I also look at the footnotes under (2), we are in danger. So, it is my proposal that maybe we lift the footnotes and we delete- 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, do laws have footnotes? Would these footnotes be part of the law? That can never be. Footnotes in legislation! It cannot be part of the Bill. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, what does that mean? Do we delete them? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I thought they are explanatory notes to explain what they are talking about. I have never drafted a footnote in any Bill in all my life and I have done that for a while now. We delete the footnote? 

MR TODWONG: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am starting to feel that our colleagues on the other side, who are lawyers and advocates and professional accountants, and hopefully and indeed, the Leader of the Opposition, seem to be defeating the very logic of the so-called political and professional will to fight money laundering and corruption. I really do not know whether laws are made and the professions are outside the box that govern-

MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, the Rules of Procedure of this House do not allow a member to impute ill motive onto another. Is he, therefore, in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, what were you saying? (Laughter) 

MR TODWONG: Mr Chairman, I was talking about goodwill, and I will repeat for those who might have not heard me well. I was saying it is true that we agree that the law should work for both the advocates and other professionals equally.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think even the footnote is clear. If you are a person working internally, then you do not qualify to be an accountable person. In other words, accountable persons are people who head those institutions. You are not going to pick an employee in my law firm and say, “You are now an accountable person.” That is all it is saying on the second reading of it. That is what the footnote is saying.

MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: That makes it even more complicated.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But we are not adopting the footnotes; are we?

MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I am following from your guidance. If it is true that it does not cater for those accountants the law has been referring to, then when you go to the schedule, it does not draw that distinction. Considering that we are not going to have the footnote in the law, as indeed we ought not to, then we need to qualify it because the footnote gives us the mind of the sponsor of the Bill. The schedule talks about accountants as defined in the Accountants Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, it is past 6 O’clock and we had agreed that our Muslim colleagues could go, but can we seek their indulgence so that we can finish this quickly in another 15 minutes. So, do we make the footnote part of the law?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, due to the fears of hon. Sseggona, we can qualify this statement to indicate that it should be the head of the institution and not any other employee or any other accountable person.

I think it should read, “advocates as defined in the Advocates Act, notaries licensed, certified under the Notaries Act, accountants as defined in the Accountants Act and other independent legal professionals and accountants.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But you see, you can just put an addition after No. 1. Redraft to say that it is not supposed to refer to internalprofessionals that are employees. Can you add that as another paragraph after No.1?

MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, you do not need to put it after No. 1. I think all you need is to indicate, “…Notaries Public Act, accountants as defined in the Accountants Act except internal professionals or employees.”

MR MULONDO: Mr Chairman, we did finish with the corporate people. The institutions and their leadership are catered for in the provisions we finished. This is about those who are practicing as firms or individuals in their capacity as professionals. I think we are mixing the two.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we are not.

MR MULONDO: Yes we are, because we dealt with the corporates. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, it refers to sole practitioners, partners or employed professionals within professional firms. That is what it means. That is what accountable persons means. Now they are qualifying it. It does not refer to internal professionals that are employees. That is what it is qualifying. If you are a sole proprietor of your firm, you are an accountable person. If you are a partner in that firm, you are an accountable person but the professional employees in your firm are not accountable persons. Can you conclude.

MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, my proposal is that we amend the schedule. In light of all that we have discussed, especially the point raised by the hon. Kabakumba Masiko, this puts me at rest. However, in that case, the schedule must be consistent with the substantive provisions. The substantive provisions having exempted advocates, it is only logical that we remove advocates. That is my first proposal. 

My second proposal us that after “accountants as defined in the Accountants Act”, we add the words, “except internal professionals and employees of other types of business” and then we continue to “other independent legal professionals and accountants”. I think we ought not to go beyond “Act” in amending the schedule. I suggest that we drop the words, “other independent legal professionals and accountants” since we have already catered for that to that extent.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, let us not make a mistake here. What is protected in clause 15 are communications and not the entire practice. It says, “…shall not apply to communications between an advocate and his client.” That is what is exempted.

I am talking about what is exempted in clause 15 – “…shall not apply to communications between an advocate and his client which are privileged under the laws of Uganda”. That communication is not the only way advocates practice. Can we now adopt the second schedule?

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, in Schedule 2, part 7, it mentions the financial institutions as defined in the Financial Institutions Act. I would beg the minister to clarify. 

We have been requesting for a legal framework to govern the fourth tier institutions. These are institutions that are dealing in transactions presumed to be banking and yet they are not covered under the Financial Institutions Act. These are some of the areas where some of these offences could take place, especially to do with money laundering. They are not included in this schedule, so I do not know what the minister has to say about that.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman and colleagues, there is a proposed Bill called the Financial Institutions Act (Amendment) Bill, 2009. As we speak now, that law is before Cabinet. Indeed, it was supposed to have been debated in Cabinet today for subsequent processing as we always do.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that Schedule 2 stands as Schedule 2 to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 2, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House to report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, The Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Money Laundering Bill, 2009” and passed it with amendments. I beg to report.   

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

6.25
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North): Mr Speaker, I should start by apologising to you and to the House, but there is an important matter that I beg to move that we recommit for consideration. I promise it will not take more than two minutes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They recommit clauses. What clauses are you recommitting? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I would like to recommit clause 4 (g), and it is in respect to only one word. We deleted the word “counsel” and replaced it with “conceal” and this was actually in error. If you read the whole provision of clause 4, concealment is provided for specifically in (a) and in (b). In (g), the intention of the legislator was to create an offence for a person who provides advice. “Counsel” here is basically in reference to advice. If you advise and facilitate the commission of a crime of money laundering, you commit a crime. That was the intention and we deleted it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. I think that makes sense. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I do concede to his explanation on concealment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is moving a motion for recommittal. Do you have any matter you want to recommit? 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Yes. I also want to recommit clause 2, on definitions. In as far as the report is concerned we did not properly define a beneficial owner and property. So, I also want to recommit that. 

I would also like to recommit clause 37. Under clause 37, there was also a typographical error in (b) where it says, “No action shall not lie against the authority…” I think it is supposed to read, “No action shall lie against…” That was typographical. 

Also under clause 15 there was a typographical error in subsection (2) under the obligation of confidentiality. Where it reads, “Sub-section (1) shall not apply”, it is supposed to read “…shall apply.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What clause is that?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Clause 15.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now have clause 4, clause 15 and clause 37. What other clause do you have? 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the House recommits clause 100, which was initially deleted. It is on the Confiscated Assets Fund. It was deleted for the reason that all this money should go to the Consolidated Fund. 

Our Constitution, Article 153(1), and I would like to read, says, “There shall be a Consolidated Fund into which shall be paid all revenues or other monies raised or received for the purpose of, or on behalf of, or in trust for the Government.” Now, the Confiscated Assets Fund is supposed to even have foreign assets which are not property of the Government of Uganda and therefore cannot be paid into the Consolidated Fund.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What about in trust? It is holding it for somebody else.

MS AKOL: Even in trust.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: “In trust” means holding it for somebody else.

MS AKOL: I would like to read the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 9 (1), which further expounds on this. It says, “All revenues or other moneys raised or received for the purpose of the Government, not being revenues or other moneys that are payable by or under any law into some other fund established for any specific purpose or that may, under any law, be retained by a department of Government that received them for the purpose of defraying the expenses of that department, shall be paid into and form part of the Consolidated Fund.”

Section 9 (2) says, “For the avoidance of doubt, any reference to moneys raised or received by the Government, does not include moneys received on deposit or moneys held on trust by or under the control of any court, officer of a court, the Public Trustee, the Attorney-General or any sums of money held on trust by any other officer for purposes other than the purposes of the Government.”

I believe that these accounts, the Confiscated Assets Fund, were also meant to keep assets and basically foreign assets as well. So, these foreign assets or monies cannot be put into the Consolidated Fund. I am therefore seeking a recommittal so that we establish a fund. If the House wishes that the moneys that belong to the Government of Uganda go to the Consolidated Fund, then we still need to set up a fund to cater for the foreign assets. These will be collected by the Authority for the purpose of carrying out the obligations that have been given to it by this law.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is a motion for the recommittal of clause 100.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, I would like also to recommit clause 20 (4), where we agreed that we shall expand the functions of the board to elect or to compose a committee that shall help in co-ordinating and mobilising information on behalf of the Financial Intelligence Authority.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a series of motions for recommittal of the following clauses: clauses 2, 4, 15, 24, 37 and 100. We can deal with them at that level. There is a motion and if we agree to the motion of recommittal, we can adopt the motion. 

Honourable members, I thought we were going to finish; we will not be able to but let us see how it goes. I put the question to the motion for recommittal of clauses 2, 3, 15, 24, 37 and 100 for the purposes prayed –(Mr Odonga Otto rose_)– Honourable member, you are not on record, so I do not know how to comment on what you are saying.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I think the motion for recommittal should probably be one at a time because we want to stop some of the clauses at this point so that we do not get down to committee stage. I do not think we should vote for all the clauses omnibus because those who have raised them have spoken to them but we are seemingly not persuaded by some. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that we recommit clause 2. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, recommitted.

Clause 4, recommitted.

Clause 15, recommitted.

Clause 24, recommitted.

Clause 37, recommitted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that we recommit clause 100. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, clauses 2, 4, 15, 24, 37 stand recommitted. Some of them are typographical amendments. Honourable members, can we finish this Bill? We have already exceeded the time. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING BILL, 2009

Clause 2

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I thank you for the resilience and the resilience of the members of the Committee of the whole House. 

We propose an amendment in the definition clause, clause 2, to include the definition of “beneficial owner” as follows: “beneficial owner means any natural or legal person or any other entity including any charitable organisation, natural or judicial, including but not limited to a corporation, partnership, trust or estate, joint stock company, association, syndicate, joint venture or any other unincorporated organisation or group, capable of acquiring rights or entering into obligations.” 

The justification is that money launderers more often than not use non-natural persons e.g. companies, corporations, etc. to evade the law.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Before you put the question, Mr Chairman, the word is “juridical” and not “judicial.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: We also intend to include a new interpretation for the word “property” as follows: “Property means assets of every kind whether corporeal or incorporeal, moveable or immoveable, tangible and legal documents or instruments evidencing title to or interest in such assets.” 

The justification is: to harmonise the definition of “property” with that provided for under the United Nations Convention against Corruption. Also, we want to avoid the challenge posed in the Temangalo case where it was argued that land was not an asset as defined under the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Act, 2003 (as amended) and therefore provisions of the Act were inapplicable. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we delete the word “conceal” in clause 4 (g) and replace it with the word “counsel”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal is for reinstatement of the original text of the Bill using the word “counsel” instead of what we had changed to, “conceal”. I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, subsection (2) of clause 15 - “obligation of confidentiality not an impediment” - reads as follows: “Subsection (1) shall not apply to communications between an advocate and a client, which are privileged under the laws of Uganda”. We propose to delete the word “not”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I thought that is what we were debating all along. No, this one is not recommitted. This is what was exempted. It changes the whole basis. There is no recommittal of clause 15.

Clause 24

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are we adopting the text in the Bill?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we wanted to include, “to create a national committee” as one of the functions of the board. So, it shall read, “There is established by the board a national committee for the purpose of this Act…” -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, it cannot be like that. You are putting it under the functions of the board, so you cannot say, “there is established”

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: The board shall establish –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We agreed on this, honourable members.

MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, we agreed on both the substance and the format and we gave reasons. We said, “The board may establish committees…” and not “shall”. “The board may establish committees for effective discharge of its functions.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, is that what we agreed?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Hon. Sseggona says that the board may establish, but we want this particular committee to be created by law. Can you give information, please.

MR MULONGO: Committee chairperson, I thought what the members are referring to as giving powers to the board to establish committees for discharge of its functions is already catered for under clause 27(b)(iii), which says, “The board may appoint committees from its members to assist it in the performance of its functions.” Now, this is different from what the committee chairperson is trying to introduce.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Which clause were you reading? 

MR MULONGO: Clause 27(b)(iii). These committees are different from what the committee chairperson is trying to introduce. These are working committees but what the committee chairperson is trying to bring here is the inter-agency inter-ministerial co-ordination and information sharing committee.

MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I think for the benefit of my colleague, hon. Mulongo, we had agreed to drop the line the committee was coming up with and we agreed to give room to the board to do its work. If the board finds it a necessity to establish a particular committee to carry out a particular function, then it does it. 

We used the words, “operational committee”. We need not dictate to them that they must establish it. If the board, which is already enjoined to carry out certain functions, finds necessity to establish any committee, let them establish that operational committee. That is why we used the words “may establish committees for the effective discharge of their functions” because we are giving the responsibility to the board. So, it is the board to do its work. If it finds – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, we would still have a problem because the board is already given the authority to create committees under clause 27. You already have the one they can create on their own. It is also a committee of the board. So, you are going to have to be a little more specific on the kind of committee you are talking about in clause 24.

MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, the difference is very simple. The one envisaged in clause 27 is a committee of its own members, from amongst the members of the board. For these other ones we are talking about, there is no limit to where they draw the membership from. That is why they can draw membership from any professional organisation, specialised organisations of any kind depending on the nature of the task at hand.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, then we need to put a notwithstanding clause that is distinct. Let somebody propose it properly now.

MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: I think, Mr Chairman, we could provide thus: “Notwithstanding the provisions of section 27, the board may establish such committees as are necessary for the proper discharge of their functions under this Act.”

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I had wanted specifically to modify his statement to add, “…may establish a national committee”. (Interjections) This is because it is a committee outside the board and it includes members that are from outside the board; it draws members from all stakeholder institutions. If that could be included – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order, members! A proposal has been made by hon. Sseggona in the terms proposed. An amendment has also been proposed by the committee chairperson to amend hon. Sseggona’s proposal to say, “The board may establish a national committee.” I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question to the proposal by hon. Sseggona.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 37

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, clause 37(b) reads, “No action shall not lie…” We propose to delete “not” and therefore, it will read, “No action shall lie against the Authority, any employee of the Authority…”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment to delete the word “not” that appears after the word “shall” in the first line of paragraph (b) of clause 37.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Anti-Money Laundering Bill, 2009 with the recommittal of clauses 2, 4, 15, 24 and 37.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, clause 15 was not handled. It is clauses 2, 4, 24, 37.

MR KASAIJA: Clauses 2, 4, 24 and 37 with amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.) 

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING BILL, 2009

6.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Anti-Money Laundering Bill, 2009” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:Honourable members, the motion is that the Anti-Money Laundering Bill, 2009 be read the third time and do pass. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING ACT, 2013”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister. Congratulations, chairman. This has been a long haul. 

Honourable members, today was our first trial date on stopping at 6.00 p.m. but we have not been able to do that; our due apologies to our Muslim colleagues. We had an understanding that we should be closing at 6.00 p.m. to enable them deal with their families. For today, we apologise and the circumstances are as clear as we have tried to see them.

Would the honourable minister do the necessary, as Africans normally thank other Africans when they have done – (Laughter)

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I wish to sincerely thank you for having guided and spearheaded this House in the consideration of this very important Bill for our country and our economy. I also want to thank all of you, honourable members, for having sat here for very many days and diligently putting in all you could to make sure that we make a good law. I thank you, I thank you, I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those were not proper concluding remarks. 

Honourable members, the honourable Member for Lwemiyaga had a matter to raise in the next three minutes and then we will close. Please, keep it brief.

6.55
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is a matter of national importance regarding the earthquake research station in Entebbe. 

We read in today’s papers that a station that records all earthquakes and includes Government laboratories to do with surveying, geology, petrophysics and dressings was attacked and vandalised on Sunday. This is a station that was set up in 1919 and has been operational since 1925. We only have four such centres in the country and according to our National Development Plan, we need 40. 

This one, located in Entebbe on the road to the zoo, was attacked on Sunday night. It is a government installation under the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development but housing part of the Auditor-General’s office, amongst others. It was rundown with windows broken, the roof torn down, all the materials like computers, printers and all other information critical to this country since 1925 was left out or thrown around. 

I thought I needed the intervention of this House to put this matter to order. How can we lose such a vital research station for purposes of an investor. Even if it was given to an investor, these materials are critical to the country and they needed to have been removed. Why remove them yet we have only four such stations and the country is planning for 40? It cannot be thieves because there were lorries that were parked there and all the looted materials were loaded onto these lorries. 

This could not have been a small thing but once it happens like this, I seek your indulgence and intervention for those concerned. It is like they wanted to evict this department from the premises but they had to come on a Sunday night on a public holiday under the cover of darkness. They came boldly with vehicles, loaded items and they destroyed the rest.

Mr Speaker, this country cannot allow this and we demand for an explanation from Government as to what happened. Who is this James Paul who is evicting a government department of long standing? The other day, we were in Western Uganda and people were worried about the earthquake. They think that maybe the mining and the petroleum activities are causing these earthquakes. This is a scientific laboratory and we cannot let this go unchallenged. I rest my case and ask for the intervention of Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, would anybody like to respond. The honourable Minister for Security?The honourable Minister for Energy?

MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the minister prepares to take to the Floor, I think he needs to answer the following questions: 

One, was there a court order sanctioning this eviction? As far as I know, there can be none which is effected on Sunday in the night.

Two, was the government aware of this impending eviction and if so, why didn’t you take care of the stock or the property of the government in this building? I think the minister needs to answer these questions.

Three, was there security at this place?

7.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY (Mr Simon D’ujanga): Mr Speaker and honourable members, it is a sad story that people come and attack, in the pretext of saying, “the land is ours”. Knowing the story, there was no court order and we are preparing a detailed statement for the House. Please, give us time; next week, on Tuesday –(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, he is the minister. Do you want him to give you information he does not have or raw information? 

Honourable minister, these things happened on Sunday and today is Wednesday; we are sure that by now you have gathered sufficient information to be able to brief Parliament. In fact, you should not have been prompted by last minute intervention from the House. So, please, shorten the time when you can come back and brief Parliament.

MR D’UJANGA: Mr Speaker, these are scientific records, which we want to take in detail, and that is why I think we should come on Tuesday. [MS Ekwau: “Order.”]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the rules on microphones are very clear. Please, proceed.

MS EKWAU IBI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a government entity, government property, government premises and whatever happens and the magnitude with which it happens - The week is ending; today is Wednesday and tomorrow is Thursday. Is the minister in order to keep on postponing a matter that seems to be of urgency and that cannot wait? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there are factual things related to the questions that were asked but there are also scientific things. You want to verify the details of the files that are missing and the extent of the damage. What Parliament wants to know is what happened. Was it within your knowledge? If not, what have you done about it so far? Can you do that tomorrow so that we put this matter to rest?

MR D’UJANGA: Okay, obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, we get the statement from the minister. Honourable members, can we adjourn to tomorrow morning? Tomorrow is Thursday, the last day of the week. We have a Bill and we need to close all such businesses so that we can start the debate on the State of the Nation Address. Okay, honourable members, House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7.22 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 11 July 2013 at 2.00p.m.) 
