Tuesday, 7 July 2015

Parliament met at 2.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting and I would like to ask the whips of both sides of the House to do their maximum job to enable this House to be functional. Last week we could not proceed because we were not properly constituted. 

The responsibility of constituting this House lies with the whips and they should help us so that we can have a House that can function to deliver on purposes for which this House was constituted. We do this on behalf of the people of Uganda and Uganda’s posterity. Therefore, we should take heed and do whatever is necessary.

In the gallery this afternoon we have a delegation of clan leaders from Bugwere in Budaka District, represented by hon. Dr Twa-Twa and hon. Kataike Sarah, the woman representative for Budaka District. They have come to observe business conducted in this Parliament. Please join me welcoming them. (Applause)

In that same spirit, we will alter the Order Paper using the prerogative of the Speaker to allow the honourable member for Iki-Iki to present a petition when the appropriate time comes. Thank you. 


BILLS
FIRST READING

The UGANDA HEART INSTITUTE BILL, 2015

2.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Heart Institute Bill, 2015” be read the first time.
In accordance with our rules and the law, I want to lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications dully signed by the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The Bill is, “The Uganda Heart Institute Bill, 2015”.  It is for the First Reading of these matters and I have seen a number of secondments. It stands referred to the appropriate Committee on Health and I think that has to do with the man who is also going to move a petition. This matter should be handled within the framework of the rules. This Bill should be back in 45 days and we see how to proceed with it so that we are not caught up by the impending things in this country.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION FROM THE CLAN LEADERS AND ELDERS FROM BUGWERE 

2.13
DR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Mr Speaker, honourable members and the nation at large. I rise under rule 29 of our Rules of Procedure to present a petition from the clan leaders and elders from Bugwere. I beg to proceed.

The humble petition regarding wrangles in the cultural leadership of Obwa Ikumbaania bwa Bugwere presented by hon. Dr Jeremiah Twa-Twa Mutwalante, Member of Parliament of Iki-Iki County, Budaka, showeth and states that:

The cultural leadership of Obwa Ikumbaania of Bugwere has turned divisive since 2010, which is creating a lot tension and if not handled properly could lead to bloodshed and loss of life and property.

Prior to 1994, the Bagwere had no previous history of a joint leadership involving a king or a queen but they have mainly been organized under the clan leadership system.

The idea of joint leadership was first mooted between 1994 and 2006 under the late Mzee Henry Kaamu Tazenya, by five clans when they came together and formed an association called Abebemberi B’ebitekere Abyeyimbirye Aamo (ABAA) which later transformed into the Bagwere Cultural Union (BACU) in 2006 with 86 clans.

The clans met and elected His Highness Kintu Samuku Balaam Mubbala Pangholi, the Bagwere cultural leader and the elderly Papakomolo peacefully handed over the leadership to Mubbala in 2006.

In 2009, BACU organised a constitutional review which made some amendments and renamed BACU as Obwa Ikumbaania bwa Bagwere and this constitution is the one which is in force to date.  Mr Speaker, it is appended as annex 4.

Obwa Ikumbania bwa Bugwere has been waiting for a formal recognition by the state just like it has happened elsewhere in Uganda where the cultural institutions are recognized. However, this has not been forthcoming.

Since 2010, there has a emerged a lot of controversy and infighting for leadership within the institution and right now there are three factions with each claiming to be the true cultural leader of  the Obwa Ikumbaania bwa Bugwere. 

The latest faction is that which is led by Bishop Wayabire, which surfaced in 2013 as a splinter group from the Mubbala group and this faction is pressing very hard to get recognition as the rightful Ikumbaania of the Bagwere.

The other faction particularly that of Mubbala which has seen and nurtured the institution for a long time since 1994 are not taking it with hands down since they feel they have been betrayed in the recognition process by the state after waiting since 2009 in vain. 

The betrayal became more apparent and complex when in May 2013, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development went ahead to gazette Obwa Ikumbaania bwa Bagwere under the name of the new or latest entrant, Bishop Wayabire. Mr Speaker, a copy of this Gazette Notice 303 of May 2014 is annex 1 and it is also appended.

Following this gazetting, the Mubbala faction petitioned the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the ministry invited the clan leaders in a meeting which took place on 24 June 2014, where the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development acknowledged that the gazette had been done in error and promised to amend or nullify the Gazette Notice 303.

The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development attempted to nullify the gazette but never completed the process. There is a correspondence which is attached from the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and a reply from the acting Managing Director of the Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation. These are annexes 2 and 3; the gazettes which tried to nullify.

The second resolution, which was also agreed on in the meeting, was that the groups continue with the reconciliation process to reach an amicable understanding and forge a way forward for the cultural institutional leadership and this process has been going on. 

Unfortunately, the Wayabire faction appears to be pressing for installation and recognition before the reconciliation process is completed and this is generating a lot of anger and tension in the community, which might degenerate into anarchy.

WHEREFORE by this petition, Mr Speaker, your humble petitioners pray that Parliament:

    1. Urges Government to halt any activity surrounding the installation or recognition of the cultural leader of Obwa Ikumbaania bwa Bagwere until a free and fair reconciliation process is done.

    2. Parliament urges His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda to fulfil the Kibuku pronouncement which he made regarding the leadership wrangles in Obwa Ikumbaania bwa Bagwere.

    3. Parliament urges Government to investigate and pronounce itself on the issue.

Your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray and hereto, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures to this petition. I beg to present.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Would like to lay on the Table a copy of the petition and the signatures of the petitioners and all the relevant documents? 

DR TWA-TWA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a copy of the petition.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture the petition.

DR TWA-TWA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay Annex 1, which is the Gazette Notice 303.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the copy of the gazette.

DR TWA-TWA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay Annex 2, which is the correspondence from the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the response from the acting Managing Director of the Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

DR TWA-TWA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay Annex 3, which is Gazette Notice 515 of 2004, whereby the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development tried to nullify Gazette Notice 303. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

DR TWA-TWA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay Annex 4, which is a copy of the constitution of Obwa Ikumbaania Bwa Bagwere. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. How do you say that in English?

DR TWA-TWA: Ikumbaania?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How do you say that in English? (Laughter)

DR TWA-TWA: The cultural leadership of the Bagwere – the one who collects the Bagwere together.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, when this matter was first brought to my attention, I thought recourse in the courts of this country would have settled this matter better. However, the courts may also have their own time to take decisions on some matters.

I also thought that I could use the prerogative of the Speaker under Rule 29 to refer this matter to the Ministry of Gender which is responsible for this. However, it is the same ministry which is issuing gazettes and cancelling them and creating tension. I am therefore left with no option but to refer this matter to the Committee on Gender. I urge the committee that since there are tensions that are brewing and issues from the statements from the petitioners, there could be bloodshed. We do not want that to happen.

I therefore refer this matter to the Committee on Gender and request that a preliminary report on the preliminary findings on this matter should be brought to Parliament on Tuesday next week. The rest of the matters can be handled as we go along. (Applause)

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a procedural matter. Under Rule 24(6) of our Rules of Procedure, which  reads: “Any item of business standing on the Order Paper on any particular day which has not been completed or reached on the interruption of business under the relevant provisions of these rules, shall be placed on the Order Paper for the next Sitting on such an order as the Speaker may decide”.

Mr Speaker, I remember very well you directed the committees on Public Service and Local Government to handle the report on the motion for the creation of new districts. The committee went ahead and handled the report. By July 2014, the report was ready and it was with the Clerk and even on our iPads. It has been appearing on the Order Paper for the last sittings. However, since Thursday and even today, it is not on the Order Paper. This is a crucial report which even the public is waiting for outside there.

Secondly, as committee members, we don’t want to be seen as if we are not performing. The report is ready and we should not be blamed. You should give us some time and we present the report; let it die here but after we have presented it as a committee. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I am actually not sure what happened because it is not even on “Notice of Business to follow” but it was on the Order Paper last week. We will be using the prerogative of the Speaker to bring that item forward. It should be presented today at the appropriate time so that at least the House can receive the report and see how to proceed with it. If there are any delays from the ministry, that will be from the ministry. (Applause)

My directive is that we will handle that report. It should be presented to the House today. Clerk, find the appropriate time and call this item.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO $70.73 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB) TO SUPPORT THE GRID RURAL ELECTRIFICATION PROJECT

2.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table the request by Government to borrow up to $70.73 million from the Islamic Bank to support the Grid Rural Electrification Project in a number of parts of the country. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on National Economy to handle expeditiously and report to the House and guide the House on how to proceed with the matter.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ANTI-CORRUPTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

Clause 8 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, are we starting with clause 8 now?

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairperson, on clause 8, the committee proposes to substitute for clause 8 the following: Insert a new Section 63B after Section 63 A as follows:

Section 63B Assessment Order. 
    1) Where the Court is satisfied that the convicted person derived benefit from the offence for which he or she was convicted under this Act, it shall make an assessment order, directing the convicted person to pay the stated amount within a period of six months.

    2) Where an assessment order has been issued under this section, the convicted person may, on notifying the prosecuting authority, apply to Court to have the restraining order lifted for purposes of satisfying the assessment order.

    3) Court may-
    a. Grant the application to lift the restraining order on terms it deems fit.
    b. Reject the application and instead appoint a receiver to realise the restrained property for purposes of satisfying the assessment order.
    4. For avoidance of doubt, the assessment order shall not have any litigating effect on the sentence for the offence committed by the convicted person.

Mr Chairperson, the justification is to provide for assessment order and give the convicted person an opportunity to pay for the benefits derived from the offence committed under the Act.

If I may proceed, Mr Chairperson -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, does that mean you have no problem with the proposed section 63A?

MR TASHOBYA: We are proposing this to come before Section 63 to substitute - we are inserting a new provision 63B -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But that comes after Section 63A - Therefore, are you in agreement with Section 63A?

MR TASHOBYA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put the question on Section 63A as it is and then we deal with the insertion? Is that okay? Section 63A which is not an amendment on clause 8 but then they propose to amend clause 8 by making a new section 63B which the chairperson has just read. Therefore, I put the question to the amendment -

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The committee is moving section 63A because when you read the report, they are amending section 63A as it appears in the next clauses.  Therefore, what they are doing is introducing a new clause as if it is replacing clause 8 and they are moving clause 8 forward  and when you read the report, what appears in section 63A will be considered under what the committee referred to as -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, I am looking at the wording of what was read: “substitute for clause 8 of the Bill the following: Insert a new Section 63B after Section 63A.”

MR SIMBWA: What appears here, Mr Chairman -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No. What is in clause 8 is section 63A. Yes, in the Bill it is section 63A; they are proposing to insert a new section 63B. That means section 63A which is in the Bill will be passed as it is, isn’t it? Unless we are deleting it.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, maybe it was a mistake in the report but what they are - section 63B comes after section 63A in the principal Act. From the report of the committee, what appears as section 63A in the Bill is handled later on in the report. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, there is no section 63 A in the principal Act; that is why they are creating it. 

MR SSIMBWA: It is there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is not there. Look at the Bill. There is no section 63A in the Act and that is why they are inserting it in clause 8.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairperson, I think it should be - he is referring to clause 64 and not section 63.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, can I put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee: inserting a new section 63B in clause 8? I would like to confirm, Mr Chairman that you do not intend to tamper with section 63A as proposed in clause 8. 

MR TASHOBYA: No.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. The committee proposes to substitute for clause 9 of the Bill, the following: Amendment of section of 64 of the Principal Act; the Principal Act is amended by substituting for Section 64 the following:  
Section 64: Confiscation Order. 
1) 	Where the convicted person has not satisfied the assessment order within a period of six months from the date on which the assessment order was issued, the prosecuting authority shall apply to Court for a confiscation order.

2)	Where the prosecuting authority makes an application for a confiscation order under sub-section 1, it shall serve a copy of the application on the convicted person and  such other persons as the Court may direct. 

3)	A person, on whom the application has been served under sub-section 2 of this Section, may appear and adduce evidence at the hearing of the application.

4)	The absence of the convicted person in Court or any other person on whom service has been effected shall not prevent the Court from making a confiscation order in his or her absence.

Mr Chairperson, the justification is to provide for a detailed procedure for obtaining confiscation order.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, I need you to help again. Are you proposing to delete the existing clause 9? We are on clause 9; are you proposing to delete the existing clause 9?

MR TASHOBYA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In clause 9, they were proposing a new sub-section 63(b), which was on fees chargeable; is that now irrelevant or will it go somewhere else?

MR TASHOBYA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We are now deleting clause 9 as it is and replacing it with what you have just read; amendment of section 64. Honourable members, I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.­)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. We propose to insert a new clause 10 after clause 9 of the Bill as follows: The principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after section 64 a new sub-section 64A to read as follows: -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: A new section.

MR TASHOBYA: Yes; a new section 64 A to read as follows:
 64A Court to appoint the manager, receiver, or administrator 
1)	Where court makes a confiscation order and is satisfied that the property is realisable or requires special attention, it shall appoint a person to take control or manage, or otherwise deal with the property.

2)	A person appointed under Sub-section 1 shall within 6 months from the date of appointment or such other period as court may prescribe, file in Court an inventory of the property or interest confiscated together with an account of the proceeds recovered.

3)	A person appointed under sub-section 1 shall realise the property specified in the confiscation order and pay proceeds in the manner prescribed by the minister in regulations.

4) 	A person shall be qualified to be appointed a manager or receiver or administrator if he or she is qualified as insolvency practitioner under the Insolvency Act.

Mr Chairperson, the justification is to provide for the management of confiscated property.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is clear. I put the question to that amendment to insert a new clause 10 in the Bill. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the new clause, as inserted, stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause 10 as inserted, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, do you have another amendment?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. The committee proposes to insert a new clause 11 immediately after clause 10 as follows: 
The principal Act is amended by inserting a new section 64 B immediately after section 64A as follows: 
64B Review of a Confiscation Order 
    1) A person who has an interest in the property irrespective of which a confiscation order has been made may within 14 days, apply to Court for a review of the confiscation order.
    2) An application for a review under sub-section 1 shall not be heard by Court unless the applicant has served the prosecuting authority with the application.
    3) The applicant in sub-section (1) shall adduce evidence to show that he or she acquired the property or interests lawfully.
    4) The court may revoke or vary the confiscation order or make the order subject to such conditions as it sticks to fee.

The justification is to provide an avenue for an aggrieved party to have the confiscation order reviewed. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members that is clear. I put the question to the proposal to insert a new clause 11.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(New clause 11 as inserted, agreed to.)

Clause 10

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chair. The committee proposes amendment of clause 10 of the Bill by re-numbering clause 10 of the Bill as clause 12.

The justification is that it is a consequential amendment of what we have gone through. 

(b) Substitute for the words, “paid by the convicted person” appearing at the end of the provision with the words, “recovered from the proceeds of recovery.” 

In other words it would read, “Where the Court orders confiscation of property under section 64, the costs of enforcing the order shall be recovered from the proceeds of recovery.”

The justification is to ensure that the costs of enforcing a confiscation order are realised from the proceeds of recovery. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is clear. Honourable members, I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.)

(Clause 11, agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, do you have any proposal? 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. The committee proposes to introduce a new sub-clause 12 as follows:

Amendment of section 67 

The principal Act is amended in section 67 by deleting the words, “responsible for justice” appearing in the first line of the provision. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members that is clear. A new clause 12 is being proposed by the committee in the terms proposed. I now put the question that the new Clause 12 as inserted stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 12, agreed to.)

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Mr Chair. The committee proposes to insert a new part VIII immediately after part VII and insert a new part VIII after section 67

“Recovery of tainted property”
67. Application for a recovery order 
1)Where the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Inspector General of Government has reasonable ground to suspect that a person:- 
a)Maintains a standard of living above that which is commiserate with his or her current or vast known sources of income or assets or 
b) is in control or possession of pecuniary resources or property disproportionate to his or her current or past known sources of income or assets, the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Inspector General of Government may make an application to the Court for the grant of a recovery order in respect of the property of value of the benefit over and above that which is commiserate with his current or past known sources of income.

2)The Director of Public Prosecutions or the Inspector General of Government shall within 14 days of an application under sub-section (1) give notice to every person known to have an interest in the property subject to the application.

3)A person referred to in sub-section 2 or any other person claiming an interest in the property may appear at the hearing of an application made under sub-section (1);or
    a) to oppose the making of the order or
    b) to apply for an order- 
i)excluding his or her interests in that property from the operation of the order;
ii) Varying the operation of the order in respect of that property or interest 
    iii) Submit evidence as the hearing of the application
 
4) An application for a recovery order shall be made to the High Court.
The justification is:
    i) To provide for a non-conviction based approach for recovery of the benefits derived from an act of corruption. This is premised on the notion that not always will evidence gathered during investigation be sufficient to secure a conviction in criminal proceedings.

    ii) The civil assets recovery of assets acquired as a result of crime has been supported by the United Nations Convention against corruption.  

Article 20 of the United Nations Convention against Corruption provides that States, subject to their constitutions and fundamental principles of their legal systems should consider adopting laws which address the significant increase in their assets of the public official that he or she cannot reasonably explain in relation to his or her lawful income.”  

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman and honourable colleagues, this was a point of departure in our committee upon which I decided to write a minority report for legal and non-legal considerations. My arguments have been fortified by what the chairman has just read and that is the United Nations Convention against Corruption. 

Article 20 of the convention against corruption provides that States, subject to their constitutions and fundamental principles of their legal systems should consider adopting laws which address a significant increase in the assets of public official that he or she cannot reasonably explain in relation to his or her lawful income.  Mr Chairman, One of our cardinal principles, which stems from our Constitution is the presumption of innocence -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, would you like to state what you would like to do and then justify it?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, the import of this proposal is one, to subject criminal burden to the civil regime of the law in that if the state fails to prove its case, through investigation, that a person has accumulated wealth unlawfully, they can file a civil application for recovery.

I am in agreement with the rest of the provisions, which relate to a person that has been convicted but where you cannot find incriminating evidence and the state fails to discharge its burden of proving somebody to be a criminal and then they say, “We will simply file an application, discharging a civil burden and say that this property cannot have been lawfully accumulated” - I object to this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, are you proposing a deletion?

MR SSEGGONA: I propose to delete this completely. Section 101 of the Evidence Act places the burden on the prosecution and what we are amending is criminal law; it is a penal law. Therefore, we cannot bring the civil aspect and shift the burden, which offends the constitution. For those reasons, Mr Chairman, I propose that we delete this.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, I have listened to the argument of hon. Sseggona. However, what the committee is proposing is not new. We have the South African law, which has a part; chapter five, which deals with criminal forfeiture -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, they have just read Article 20 of the Convention for you.

MR SSIMBWA: Yes, Mr Chairman but when you look at the argument -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Article 20 is talking about context specificity. It has to be context specific, not what is happening elsewhere.

MR SSIMBWA: But Mr Chairman, the proposal of the committee – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we know that the mover is eager to put everything in law but he is quoting the South African law, which may be in a different constitution yet we also have a constitution here. Is he procedurally right to move when a Member who is learned has moved that what he is trying to talk about is unconstitutional? Is he procedurally right to move on that?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This Parliament is the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda and not of any other country. It is not bound by any law that is made by any other country except conventions to which Uganda is signatory. (Applause) Mr Chairman, you are not proceeding properly. 

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, thank you for your wise ruling. I would like to refer to Article 28 of the Uganda Constitution, which talks about a speedy public hearing before an independent and impartial court. When you look at the procedures laid down under Part VII of the proposal of the committee, what is provided for under Article 28 of our Constitution is provided for under the procedures laid down in Part 7 of this amendment Bill.

Mr Chairman, when you look at the entire Part VII, we are talking about having an informative application -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, help us. We are only dealing with (67) at the moment not the whole part.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, practically the whole of Part VII is about the same part – (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to rely on the same Article 28 to question the manner in which hon. Ssimbwa is moving. He is failing to concede to a fact that Article 28 gives a right to a fair hearing but 28(3)(a) states, “Every person who is charged with a criminal offence shall (a) be presumed to be innocent until proved guilty or until that person has pleaded guilty.”

Mr Chairman, you have guided before and I rise to agree with hon. Sseggona that in this matter, our legal regime is not yet up to date to try to make a shift of burden of the accused; whether in civil or criminal proceedings and state that when an application is lodged in court, it is upon the accused to justify how you go what you got -

Is the honourable member proceeding well in this respect by fishing out certain legal provisions, which are not in tandem with our local legal framework? He is fishing out South African jurisprudence when this is an independent country with a different legal regime, save for a few similarities. Is he proceeding well to derail the debate, which could have gone much better?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the presumption of innocence in Article 28 carries with it the burden of proving on the state; on the person accusing. The only instance where that burden is altered is where it is a strict liability offence. Unless the honourable member wants to make this a strict liability offence, I would ask the honourable member to proceed and withdraw the matter so that we can move forward. (Applause)

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Chairman and colleagues. Not only have we listened to the arguments and logic of hon. Sseggona, which is a very strong legal opinion but I think also implementing this would be extremely difficult. For one to go out shopping and say, “Hon. Cecilia has built a house, let us first attach it and then Mama Cecilia will come and prove how she got it” - I think it is extremely difficult to import and if the mover of the Bill is not willing to concede peacefully, I think the House can go on to force him to concede using the appropriate means. (Applause)

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Definitely hon. Ssimbwa had very good intentions in bringing up this proposal and so was -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, it is not hon. Ssimbwa. It is from the committee.

MR TASHOBYA: Yes, it is from the committee and we feel that there is need for people to account for the accumulated wealth, particularly those that have public offices. 

People should be able to ask, “With your earning, how were you able to accumulate so much property and wealth in the time you were in the public office?” To that extent of accountability, I think it is good reason for the public to demand to know how you have accumulated the wealth. 

However, taking into account the arguments that have been advanced, from both sides of the House, it would appear that it will be very difficult to push this amendment through. The committee will bow to the reasons advanced by both sides of the House and concede to the proposal of hon. Sseggona.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Just withdraw.

MR TASHOBYA: We withdraw it. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please withdraw on the record. You do not withdraw while walking away.

MR TASHOBYA: By withdrawing when I am walking away -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, can we handle this and move forward, please?

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, I was withdrawing as I was walking away to show the discomfort I had in withdrawing. However, I would wish to reluctantly withdraw the proposal of the committee. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Next, Mr Chairman. Can we at least take a decision on the insertion of a new Part VIII? We can then go and process the rest of it. I put the question for the insertion of a new Part VIII in the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: 67 has been withdrawn, proceed to the next.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The committee proposes to insert a new – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we have withdrawn clause 67 and proposed to put Part VIII. Suppose at the end of the day we have nothing under Part VIII, what happens?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It will fall on its own weight. It is okay, let us proceed.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The committee proposes to insert a new sub clause 67A immediately after section 67 to read as follows: 

“67A Power of the Chief Justice to make rules
The Chief Justice shall make rules to govern the procedure -
    (a) for confiscation and recovery orders;
    (b) to be followed by persons appointed to act as trustees or receivers;
    (c) for any related matters.”

The justification is to empower to the Chief Justice to make rules governing the procedure for recovery.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, that does not seem to be in the text that we have. I do not know whether there is another text. We have 67 and 68 but we do not have 67A. Is that part of the -

MR SSEGGONA: I am not in objection this time. However, I wonder if we could find an alternative word for “confiscation” because in this particular case, we are dealing with a person that has been convicted. When a person is convicted, there is an order. Would it not be better, for legislative purposes, to use the word “seizure” as opposed to “confiscation” because “confiscation” still brings the hungover of the non-conviction based.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is the one of the Chief Justice. Mr Chairman, would you like to - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have a huge problem; I do not know where 68, which the chairman of the committee is reading, is.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I do not seem to have 67A. What is the implication of withdrawing 67 and what happens to 68 and the rest?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. By implication, 68 on page 19, 69 on page 19, 70 on page 20, 71 on page 22, 72 on page 22, 73 on page 23 and 74 on page 24 are necessarily also withdrawn.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Now proceed with the –

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, it would appear not entirely correct. Remember we also have the conviction-based recovery. Therefore, the Chief Justice still has to make –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, the Chief Justice is coming next in 16.

MR SSEGGONA: Okay, then the rest will follow.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, now proceed properly.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I am being intimated by the chairperson of the committee.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The chairman is not intimidating the member but he is surprised that the member is diverging from the position taken by the committee where he sat.

Mr Chairman, on page 24 we are proposing to insert a new clause 67A, immediately after section 57 to read as follows: “67A Power of the Chief Justice to make rules. 
The Chief Justice shall make rules to govern the procedure-
    (a) for confiscation and recovery orders;
    (b)  to be followed by persons appointed to act as trustees or receivers;
    (c) for any related matters.”

The justification is to empower the Chief Justice to make rules governing the procedure of recovery orders.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is where the honourable member had an issue with the word “confiscation”. What is your opinion?  Instead of “confiscation”, he proposes “seizure”.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, when you look at the principal Act under the Interpretation Clause, the word “confiscation” includes forfeiture and where applicable means the permanent deprivation of property by order of court. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is a defined term in the Act.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, since we have deleted 67, I do not think this should now read as 67A. Since we are inserting it under a new paragraph, this becomes 67. Do we have 67 in the parent law?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: When the drafts people are cleaning it up, it will be handled. Are we okay now? Have I put the question on this amendment? Can I now put the question to this amendment of inserting a new clause 67A? I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the inserted clause 67A stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The committee proposes to insert a new clause 67B immediately after clause 67A to read as follows: “67B Reciprocity with other states or territories
Declaration of reciprocating states or territories and courts (1)Where the minister is satisfied that any state has enacted laws for confiscation or recovery orders which have the same effect as this Act, the minister may, by statutory instrument, declare a state to be a reciprocating state and the court with jurisdiction to issue the orders to be a reciprocating court for purposes of this Act.

(2)Uganda shall enter into reciprocal agreements, treaties or arrangements for cross border recovery of the benefits derived from an act of corruption through confiscation order or a recovery order using the terms of that agreement, treaty or arrangement and the provision of this Act shall apply with the necessary modifications consistent with subsisting agreement, treaty or arrangements to which the cases be subject.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is a proposal to insert a new clause 67B.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, countries always agree to these reciprocal agreements but here we are saying “we shall”. Suppose the other country refuses, where do we go? Suppose we have entered into an agreement and the other country says, “No, I am not going to enforce it”, where is the fall back position?

Secondly, is it a must that we should enter into this double agreement?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think the essence of this proposal is that the laws we have here do not have extra territorial effects in other countries. If you have reciprocal arrangements then it obliges the country with whom we have an agreement or a reciprocal arrangement to respect and enforce the orders that have been issued by our courts here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In subsection (2), why do you use the word “shall” instead of “may”? That is the other issue. It reads, “Uganda shall enter into reciprocal agreements…” Is that okay?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, that is the issue. It should read, “Uganda may enter….” It should not be mandatory.

MR TASHOBYA: I do concede to the use of the word “may” instead of “shall”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you read it with “may” so that the records can capture it properly and so that we do not have to put the question?

MR TASHOBYA: In that event, Mr chairman, subsection (2) would read: “Uganda may enter into reciprocal agreements, treaties or arrangements or cross border recovery of the benefits derived from an act of corruption through confiscation order or recovery order using the terms of the agreements, treaty or arrangements and the provisions of this Act shall apply with the necessary modifications consistent with the subsisting agreements, treaty or arrangements to which the cases be subject.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is now clear. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause 67B, as inserted, agreed to.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The committee proposes insertion of a new clause 67C, immediately after section 67B, to read as follows: “Section 67C, extraterritorial enforcement. 

(1)	Where the prosecuting authority believes that any property that is a subject of a court order is situated in a country or a territory outside Uganda, the prosecuting authority shall send a request for assistance to the Minister responsible for Justice to be forwarded to that country for enforcement.
(2)	Where no confiscation order has been made, a request for assistance shall be a request to the government of the receiving country to - 
a) 	provide a list of property owned by or in which the person named in the request has interest;
b) 	ensure that the named person is prohibited from dealing with the property in which he or she has an interest in;
c) 	realise property and the proceeds are transmitted to the Consolidated Fund; or
d) 	do any act, which appears reasonable for the fulfilment of the request.
(3) 	A request for assistance shall not be made for the purposes of this section in a case where a confiscation order has been made and has been satisfied, discharged or quashed.
(4) 	Property realised in pursuance of a request under subsection (2) the amount ordered to be paid under the confiscation order must be taken to be reduced by an amount equal to the proceeds of the realisation.
(5) 	A certificate issued by or on behalf of the requested government is sufficient evidence of the fact it states -
a) 	that the property has been realised in pursuance of a request made under subsection (2), 
b) 	the date of realisation, and
c) 	the proceeds of realisation.
(6) 	Where the proceeds of realisation made in pursuance of a request under subsection (2) are expressed in a currency other than Uganda shillings, they must be taken to be equivalent to Uganda shillings calculated in accordance with the rate of exchange prevailing at the end of the day of realisation.”

Mr Chairman, the justification is to extend the application of confiscation orders beyond Uganda’s boundaries.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank You, Mr Chairman. You might want to look at (2)(b). There is an “in” in (b); the last “in” is repeated. You might want to take it out: “In which he or she has an interest in.” Is that correct?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I wish to make a correction by deleting “in” at the end of sub section (2)(b).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, you have heard the proposal for the insertion of the new clause 67C in the terms read by the chairman. I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, as inserted, agreed to.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Cross reference; insert “Companies’ Act No.1 of 2012” and “Insolvency Act” before “public trustee” of Cap. 161. The justification is to include the Companies’ Act No. 1 of 2012 and Insolvency Act in the list of cross references.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title to the Bill, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.21
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I beg to move that the House resumes and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.22
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.22
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE ANTI-CORRUPTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

3.23
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, The Anti-Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013 be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, THE ANTI-CORRUPTION (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, hon. Ssimbwa and the chairman for finally coming through this. Honourable members, thank you very much and congratulations for making this milestone in this difficult time. Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers of Katente West Primary School in Mubende District. They are represented in Parliament by hon. Anthony Ssemmuli and hon. Benny Namugwanya. They have come here to observe the proceedings, please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are very welcome. 

3.26
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As you may recall, the last time we presented the report on the Parliamentary Pensions Bill, hon. Emmanuel Dombo raised very pertinent issues and we were guided that we should sit down and harmonise our positions with hon. Dombo. 

Subsequently, Mr Speaker, as you may recall, the Attorney-General also got in touch with you and he thought that there were very serious issues that should be addressed before this Bill is passed into law. I had the occasion to talk to the Attorney-General and we are making arrangements to harmonise our positions. In a few days’ time, we should able to report on this Bill, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the brief I got from the Speaker is that she had requested that the Attorney-General addresses the House on this aspect and the proposals that had been made to Parliament and he has not been able to do so. I think that is what the chairman is referring to. It has now resulted into a consultation but my brief was that the Attorney-General should have briefed the House on what the position is before we move forward and that brief has not yet been made. Maybe that is the process that will lead to this briefing. Is that correct?

3.28
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to concur with what honourable chairperson has said because we have since held a meeting with him, myself especially, because of the issues that were raised on the floor and the gap is becoming narrower. 

On a more positive note however, I would also like to note that this morning I spoke to the Attorney-General who is in Russia and I also talked to him before he left. Last week, before we adjourned because of the circumstances that arose, we also had the Deputy Attorney-General, hon. Rukutana who had brought a message concurring saying that in principle, he sees no contradiction in the law and actually, he wished we had done it earlier. However, he will say this himself when he comes. I just wanted to give hope to Members that we are narrowing the gap and we shall soon conclude that matter effectively the way the House wishes to. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was worried because I thought you were going to say that he had delegated you to do the same. (Laughter) Can we deal with the Local Government report?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I received an email, which I know many Members have also received that banks are trying to come to Members to ask them not to pass the Parliamentary Pensions -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, don’t you think you could raise that when that matter comes? Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Concerning issues of the Public Accounts Committee report, somehow I do not know whether it is fate that every other time -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I have already said that they should call item seven.

MS ALASO: Thank you. 

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE ENTITIES WITH DISCLAIMER OF OPINION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, you have 10 minutes.

3.31
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Ms Alice Alaso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and thank you for the 10 minutes. What we have done is a compilation. I do not know whether the Order Paper really envisaged that this would be done in 10 minutes because these are four entities in one report. 

Mr Speaker, Parliament committed the report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June, 2013 to the Public Accounts Committee and we resolved to scrutinise that report using a given criteria: first to sort out those that had advanced a disclaimer of opinion and then the qualified opinion and the rest would follow later. 

I am happy to present to the House a report of the entities with a disclaimer of opinion and these include the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Nyabyeya Forestry College, Mubende Referral Hospital and Uganda Mission in New Delhi. 

The first pages are a table of contents, introduction and methodology. Mr Speaker, I will try first to highlight the synopsis of the observations so that just in case time gets me off, I will have highlighted them.

The committee notes that the most prevalent audit observations in this disclaimer of opinion statement revolve around the following:

    (i) Accounting records 

For all the entities that I have listed, the committee notes the endemic absence of and/or incoherence in accounting records. The committee notes that the major reason for this is the lack of capacity, often created by either understaffing or incompetent staff. This is a huge impediment to accountability and a major precipitator of financial loss. Greater attention by the Public Service Commission, the Accountant-General and the PS/ST is required in ameliorating this pitfall.

    (ii) Outstanding Commitments 

One of the main obstructive factors that impede planning and budget objectives has been the accrual of commitments that remain outstanding. For the Ministry of Justice and Mubende Hospital alone, the outstanding payables stood at Shs 164.092 billion while in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the skyrocketing payables’ position is attributed to a rise in court awards. For Mubende Hospital, it is sheer negligence and contravention of commitment controls. The magnitude of this is an indicator of the need to re-think some aspects of the operation of the Executive with a view of enhancing greater efficiency.

    (iii) Lapses in Corporate Governance 

The committee notes that the most prevalent audit queries cutting across these four entities with advance opinions points to the lapse in corporate governance. However, the entities with advance opinion were generally characterised by the absence of a strategic plan, out-dated organograms, staffing gaps, flagrant violations of the PPDA Act and the Public Finance Accountability Act and their attendant regulations. For the case of Nyabyeya Forestry College, this malaise was epitomised by the absence of a board. The fact that they were unable to put right the aforementioned irregularities in time, prior to the external audit, is testimony of the absence or ineptness of an internal audit function.

I will go to the specifics of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and since the details of this report are available with us, I will only read the query and the recommendations.

Court Awards and Compensation 

The query had to do with the accumulation of arrears.
1. 	The committee recommends that the Attorney-General’s Chamber should be left to do its work without political interference.
2. 	There should be strict adherence to contracts.
3. 	Accounting officer should promptly respond to the court process in order to enable the Attorney-General defend Government.
4. 	The remuneration of state attorneys should be enhanced.
5. 	Any public officer whose actions cause financial loss to Government should personally be held liable.
6. 	The IGG should interest itself in the sky-rocketing court awards with a view to identifying possible culprits who connive with complainants.

Payment of Arrears 

The committee recommends that Government should, as a matter of urgency, clear these court awards to avert accumulation of interest. 

If the resource envelope does not permit, Government should explore the option of borrowing domestically through the issuance of treasury bills and bonds for this purpose.

Documentation

The committee recommends prosecution of the accounting officer in accordance with section 37(3) of the National Audit Act, 2008.

Other Operating Expenses Recurrent

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held liable for violating section 37 of the National Audit Act and be further investigated by the IGG to establish culpability with a view to penalising him in accordance with section 37(3) of the same Act.

Rent Payment, Produce Assets, Private Entities

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held liable for flouting the Public Finance Accountability Act and the regulations thereunder.

The Absence of a Strategic Plan

The committee was satisfied with the steps taken to correct this anomaly.

Nile Divesture of Centre for Alternative Dispute Resolution

The committee urges the Ministry of Public Service and the Prime Minister to ensure speedy operationalisation of the Centre for Alternative Dispute Resolution.

Inadequate Records Management

The committee faults the accounting officer for the failure to establish a proper filing system and advises quick transition from manual to electronic systems.

Out-dated Organisational Structures

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Public Service expeditiously regularises the staff structure of the ministry.

Staffing Gaps

We list the status and what has been filled. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development urgently fills the existing vacancies in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

Unfilled positions of the Administrator-General and Deputy Administrator-General

The committee recommends that the ministry, together with the Public Service Commission, fast-tracks the recruitment of the substantive Administrator-General and an assistant Administrator-General.

Staffing gaps in the Law Council: Observation and Recommendation 
The committee notes that it is incumbent upon the accounting officer to ensure the plugging of any staffing gaps at the Law Council in accordance with section 2 of the Advocates Act Cap 267 and the Advocates (Amendment) Act, 2002 and recommends that the same be fast-tracked.

Lack of Quality Assurance

The committee recommends that the accounting officer liaises with the Ministry of Public Service and the Public Service Commission to ensure expeditious establishment of the Quality Assurance Unit.

Lack of Estate’s Manager

The accounting officer should expeditiously liaise with the Ministry of Public Service to ensure the approval and subsequent actualisation of the ministry’s proposed new structure.

Mischarge of expenditure

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held liable for usurping the powers of Parliament of appropriation and violation of the Public Finance and Accountability – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you actually summarising? Proceed.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence. I will have finished only one entity, that is the Ministry of Justice.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed. 

MS ALASO: Under mischarge of expenditure, the second recommendation by the committee is that the accounting officer streamlines the planning and budgeting function to ensure equitable resource allocation.

Motor vehicle repair

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for negligence of duty.

Non acknowledgement of remittances of Withholding Tax/PAYE to URA

The committee recommends that such tax related documentation should in future be secured in time and properly filed as evidence of compliance.

Budget analysis

The committee recommends that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs takes up this matter in a bid to secure a more comprehensive budgetary allocation for both recurrent and capital development.

On the inadequate provision for recurrent budget, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development adheres to the Appropriation Act and that the PS/ST be held liable for non-adherence to appropriation.

On budget performance, the committee recommends that in order to effectively process legislation, the Office of the Prime Minister should be strengthened, in liaison with the MDs.

Mubende Referral Hospital

The first query is on financial statement accounting records. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Public Service and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development take stock of the staffing gap across referral hospitals and comprehensively address the same.

Outstanding commitments

The committee recommends -
    1. the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to disclose arrears in the financial statement;
    2. the accounting officer should reinstate the figure in the opening balances of the subsequent financial year;
    3. the outstanding commitment be prioritised in the budget of the subsequent year;
    4. the accounting officer be cautioned for negligence of duty.

Lack of budget approval and performance reports
    1. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should recalibrate the catchment area of Mubende Referral Hospital to resolve the impasse on the board. This should take into consideration the socio-cultural and duo political conditions in the area.
    2. The hospital board be put into place immediately.

Journalising the payroll

The committee notes that a sustainable solution to this setback lies in resolving the staffing impasse at the hospital and recommends that the staffing gaps at the hospital be addressed.

Unsupported figures of fixed assets acquired

The committee recommends that the accounting officer enlists the services of the Chief Government Valuer.

Over expenditure on capital development procurement

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held liable for unauthorised expenditure and by implication the usurping of powers of appropriation of Parliament.

Imprest holders are not officially appointed by the accounting officer.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should ensure that imprest holders are formally appointed.

Non implementation of the investment plan

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held liable for causing financial loss of Shs 149,840,000 on procurement irregularities.

In regard to the construction of the parking yard, the committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to carry out proper contract management.

Supply and installation of metallic shelves

The committee recommends that the accounting officer and procurement officer be held liable for flouting the PPDA and regulations there under and be further investigated by the IGG.

Construction of a VIP latrine

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held liable for breach of the PPDA Act. 

Supply of two 10,000 litre water tanks

    1. The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held liable for flouting the PPDA, PSA and the regulations there under.
    2. That the accounting officer be further investigated for abuse of office and causing financial loss.

Consultancy for development of the Bill of Quantities: 
    1. The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held liable for flouting the PPDA
    2. The accounting officer be relieved of his role as an accounting officer.

Supply of assorted medical equipment

The committee recommends that the accounting officer, Dr Edward Nkurunziza and the former Procurement Officer, Mr Chris Karibwije, be further investigated by the IGG.

Nyabyeya Forestry College

Unpopulated cash flow statements:
The committee recommends that disciplinary action be taken on both the accounting officer and the acting bursar for negligence.

Inaccurate figures missing in the statement of change in equity

    1. The committee notes that this is a case of ineptitude and recommends that the accounting officer exercises greater responsibility and diligence in the execution of his duties.  
    2. A substantive bursar be recruited and deployed at Nyabyeya Forestry College.

Financial statement note

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Water and Environment, Ministry of Public Service and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should work closely to plug the staffing gap.

Governance at the college

The committee recommends that the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Water and Environment immediately appoints a governing council for Nyabyeya Forestry College.

Procurement, receipts and issue of accountability stationery:
    1. The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to adhere to the Treasury Accounting Instructions.
    2. That the accounting officer immediately rectifies the anomaly and that the Accountant General should organise periodic orientation for the accounting officers.

Human resource management

The committee recommends that the Public Service Commission immediately processes the filling of vacancies in this college.

The Uganda High Commission, New Delhi

Review of financial statements

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held liable for flouting the Treasury Accounting Instructions, which require that unspent balances and Non-Tax Revenue be remitted complete to the Consolidated Fund. 

Incomplete preparing of monthly returns
    1. The committee recommends that the accounting officer submits the complete set of monthly returns for further investigation.
    2. That the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to declare the required documents at the time of audit.

Segregation of duties

The committee recommends that system be reviewed to enhance responsibility rights to include the Head of the Chancery.

Non-submission of returns to Ministry of Foreign Affairs

The committee recommends that the accounting officer liaises with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for guidance on the exiting submission arrangement and ensures compliance.

Foreign Service Allowances and apparent over-payment

The committee recommends that the overpaid of US$1,698.57 per month amounting to a total of US$20,376 be recovered.  

Review of Foreign Service Allowances

The committee recommends that the management engages the relevant authorities for the possibility of reviewing this allowance.

Payment of repair of Chancery

    1. The committee recommends that the accounting officer follows up the claim and ensures recovery.
    2. Furthermore, in the future, such bills should be independently checked by the responsible officer before they are approved by the accounting officer.

Renting of the property

The committee recommends that the Head of Mission follows up this matter and engages the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for necessary consideration.

Procurement – Lack of a Contracts Committee and Procurement and Disposal Unit

The committee recommends that the accounting officer ensures that the contracts committee is formally appointed and a procurement and disposal unit is established. 
 
The committee recommends that the accounting officer ensures that the contract committee is formally appointed and PDU is established.

In regard to procurements and disposal undertaken during the year, the committee recommends that the mission embraces prudent procurement management by following PPDA guidelines.

Goods and services consumed

The committee recommends that procurement procedures be complied with; that the accounting officer be reprimanded for failure to exercise prudent use of public resources.

Outstanding medical bills
The committee recommends that
    1. The former ambassador Ms Lecia Mardvani be held responsible for overstepping her mandate and committing Government without due authority.
    2. The accounting officer continues following up the matter with counterparts to ensure settlement of the outstanding bills.
    3. The referral of cases for medical treatment should be premised upon relevant clearances as prescribed in the standing orders.
    4. The Accountant General should interest himself in the capacity of accountants and accounts assistants that are deployed at Ugandan missions abroad.
    5. That management engages the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and other stakeholders to secure the necessary budgetary provision.

The mission charter

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to operationalise the mission charter and implementing the activities based on guidelines. 

On review of the inventory, the committee recommends that Government as a matter of urgency allocates funds to the missions to enable them acquire new furniture and equipment.

In conclusion, the committee is of the considered opinion that the amelioration of the audit queries pertaining to four entities that earned the disclaimer of opinion requires continuous institutional reform, stronger and more rigorous internal audit function, greater monitoring, evaluation and advice from the Office of the Prime Minister and the relevant sectors.

Hon. Speaker we had already laid the minutes of these proceedings at the time we submitted this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Madam Chair, for your vigilance and having this matter come out.

Honourable members, this is a report that you are now aware of. I do not know whether we want to debate it now or we want to look at it again and come back tomorrow and debate it or whether there is any need for debating, because the details are here and the recommendations are very clear about what should be done. If a debate is required then we can do it tomorrow after we have looked at it. We can receive two other reports now and then we schedule them for debate tomorrow.

I now propose this motion for the adoption of the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the entities with disclaimers of opinion. That is the motion I propose for your debate and debate starts tomorrow.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE VOTES WITH DISQUALIFIED OPINION BY THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE ACCOUNTS ENDING JUNE 2012

3.56
THE VICE-CHIARPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Paul Mwiru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This report covers the Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Uganda Law Reform Commission.

This is a report with the qualified opinion. This implies that the information provided was limited in scope and the entity audited has not adhered to the established international accounting standards. Contrary to its connotation a qualified opinion is not a good thing, auditors who use it are advising the users that the information within the document is not complete and that the accounting methods used by the company did not follow the international standards.

Mr Speaker, allow me adopt the same method but I will start by giving the synopsis of all the three reports:

The committee notes that most of the prevalent audit observations revolved around mischarge of expenditure, advance to individual accounts, unaccounted for advances, nugatory expenditure, lapses in procurement management and lapses in human resource management.

Ministry of Local Government; Mischarge of expenditure of Shs 4,178,737,274

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be reprimanded for mischarge and diversion of expenditure amounting to the above sale amount.

The Accountant General should exercise greater responsiveness in the supervision of accounting officers.
Advance to individual personal accounts; non-compliance with treasury account instruction. 

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should immediately appoint imprest holders with approval of the Accountant General to safeguard public resources from possible loss.

Advance to personal accounts not accounted for

The committee recommends that the unaccounted for funds and expenditure amounting to Shs 164,013,700 be recovered from the responsible officers who are mentioned within the report.

The accounting officers should be held responsible for failure to avail documents for audit in accordance with the National Audit Act.

Unaccounted for cash withdraws - the committee recommends that -
    1. the accounting officer immediately institutes recovery of unaccounted for funds;
    2. the accounting officer should be held liable for loss of public funds;
    3. the accounting officer should strengthen the document filing system to ease retrieval without endangering the safety of documents.
 
Payment for hotel services

The committee recommends -
    1. that Shs 647,265,371 be recovered from the accounting officer;
    2. the accounting officer be held responsible for contravening Section 37 of the National Audit Act; 
    3. the accounting officer should strengthen his internal controls and ensure compliance with prudent financial management system.

Project refunds/ irregular borrowing from project accounts

The committee recommends that a forensic audit be conducted on the project where funds were borrowed and activities on which borrowed funds were spent.

The committee further recommends that the IGG investigates the said borrowing with a view of prosecution. 

Unaccounted for borrowed funds

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be relieved of his duties as an accounting officer. 
That Shs 70,931,400 being unaccounted for funds be recovered from the accounting officer.

Improperly vouched air tickets expenditure

The committee recommends that Shs 33,377,800 be recovered from the accounting officer with interest at the current bank rate. 

Irregular inter-account transfers

On the failure to close bank account No. 000110088000018 local government sector investment plan with Bank of Uganda upon the closure of the project, the committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failing to adhere to the treasury accounting instructions regarding transfer of Shs 5,211,930,182 which was made from the treasury general in the last week of the Financial Year 2011/12 without authority from the treasury.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer who committed fraud be investigated by the IGG with a view of prosecution.

Regarding utilisation of funds 

    a) That Shs 355,348,860 deposited on individual bank accounts be recovered from the individual officers and the said officers be referred to Public Service Commission for disciplinary action. The list is in the report.
    b) The failure of Ministry of Works to submit accountability for the 1,268,658,000 supported by bank statements and original copies of related documents within one month of completion of assignment as per the MOU.

The committee recommends that the IGG investigates both the Ministry of Works and Ministry of Local Government on the usage of this money with the view of prosecution.

On the failure of the accounting officer to provide the auditor with the policy cover by the contracted cleaning company - implying that the charges of Shs 262,920,000 million were irregular and having no policy of insurance cover certificate and receipts.

The committee recommends that the said money be recovered from the accounting officer on the absence of the bank guarantee executed by the cleaning company for Shs 108,541,812.

The accounting officer be held responsible for predisposing of public funds to risk. 

On the transfer of Shs 6,681,268,246 from the cancelled letters of credit account to this project account which should have been closed, the committee recommends that the IGG investigates the transaction.

In regard to the outstanding balance of Shs 852,593,754 at the end of the financial year which was not disclosed in the financial statements of the ministry as of 30 June 2013, the accounting officer should refund the money.

Payment for protocol and presidential pledges

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for breach of Section 37 of the National Audit Act.

In the absence of verified accountability by the Auditor General, the committee recommends that the accounting officer be made to refund the Shs 84 million.

The accounting officer be cautioned for usurping parliamentary powers of appropriation given that State House, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Local Government have their own approved budgets.

Diversion of Uganda counterpart funding
The committee recommends that:
    1. In future such a diversion of funds should not occur. If indeed additional resources are required, the accounting officer should either seek a supplementary or virement through the legitimate channels.

    2. The accounting officer should be held responsible for contravention of the Public Finance and Accountability Act.

    3. The diverted funds should be immediately refunded to the project account.

Transfer to districts

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held reliable for contravening the standing orders.

The committee recommends that the over payments in Per Diem of Shs 13,680, that is approximately Shs 35 million, be recovered from the accounting officer and the Mayor.

Support to town councils

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for contravening Section 37 of the National Audit Act.

The committee further recommends that the accounting officer improves his supervision of the beneficiary town councils so as to ensure adequate absorption of funds transferred to them.

The accounting officer should list timely accountability for the funds disbursed and spent.

The committee further recommends that Shs 60 million not accounted for be recovered from the accounting officer and town clerks who did not account for the said funds.

Non deductions of withholding tax from local suppliers:
The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to ensure deduction of the said withholding tax and the accounting officer makes good the loss and pays back the Shs 26 million.

Wasteful expenditure to parking fees for grounded vehicles

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for nugatory expenditure and violation of the Treasury Accounting Instructions.

Staff welfare - Irregular allowance

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for payment of irregular allowances and by so doing contravening the Circular Standing Instructions. 

The committee further recommends that the ministry regularise payment of any such allowances in consultation with the Ministry of Public Service.

The committee recommends that the said allowance should be recovered from the said staff within a one year period

Budget performance

The committee recommends that Shs 2,687,000,000 billion released and diverted be recovered from the accounting officer.

Audit committee

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to operationalize the audit committee.

Project

Community Agricultural Infrastructure
Unlimited Pay As You Earn
The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held liable for non-remittance of Shs 14,739,299 deducted in Pay As You Earn and not remitted. 

Failure to deduct six per cent withholding tax from service providers
The committee recommends that withholding tax be recovered from the respective companies and the accounting officer be held liable for causing financial loss. The companies are contained in the Auditor General’s report.

General standards of accounting and internal controls

Spending project funds at source

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held liable for his duties. Subsequently, the Ministry ensures compliancy with the project operation manual by ensuring that project funds are transferred from the line ministry to the projects account for proper monitoring and control.

Field inspections

Lack of routine maintenance of roads by districts

The committee recommends that the accounting officer liaises with the Uganda Road Fund with a view of securing resources for maintenance of community access roads.

Agro processing facilities - Delayed commissioning of agro processing facilities

The committee recommends that the completed yet un-commissioned facility be commissioned immediately to enable the intended beneficiaries to benefit from them.

That the accounting officer improves project monitoring and supervision as quality assurance strategy to guard against the bad workmanship by the contractors.

Lack of capacity by contractor

The committee recommends that the company in question be blacklisted, the 25 per cent of the money advanced be recovered with interest.

The accounting officer be held responsible for botched procurement.

Non-operational markets

The committee recommends that the accounting officer liaises with the district authority to ensure that the sub county authorities, to which the markets were handed over, expedite their operationalization by allocating the stalls to the legible vendors.

The committee recommends that value for money audit be done on all markets under CAIIP-1 with a view of ascertaining their utilisation.

Status of project implementation

Project performance under rural infrastructure improvement component

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should improve his project management practices so as to ensure timely completion of projects and forestall often costly project extensions.

Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme Project 2

Compliance with financing agreement and Government of Uganda financial regulation

Budget performance - Low absorption capacity

The committee recommends that strict adherence to the project timelines and that the accounting officer improves the monitoring of contracts to ensure that the activities are on schedules.

Shortfalls in counterpart funding

The committee recommends that the Executive prioritises its commitment to counterpart funding to avoid delays. Such delays imped project implementation and yet the tax-payers continue to bear the brunt of the interest rates on the loans.

Failure to withhold six per cent withholding tax from service providers

The committee recommends that the withholding tax be recovered from the respective companies and accounting officer be held liable for causing financial loss.

The committee further recommends that the said company be blacklisted.

General standards of accounting and internal control

Spending at source

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should institute adequate internal controls to forestall any possible diversion of project funds.

That the diverted funds should be recovered and refunded to the project

The accounting officer be held responsible for diversion of funds.

Field inspections

Abandonment of community access roads works under batch A

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for mismanaging the contract and paying out half of the contracts sum misappropriate to the works.

The accounting officer improves project monitoring and supervision beyond reliance on districts’ contracts committees.

Delayed completion projects

Delayed completion of community access roads under batch B

The committee recommends that the accounting officer bolsters the monitoring of these roads with a view of ensuring quality and timely completion of road works.

The accounting officer immediately invokes the penalty clauses within the contract agreement for delayed completion of works.

The committee further recommends that given the sluggishness of the contractor and his demonstrated lack of capacity, the contractor should be blacklisted.

Delayed completion of agro processing facilities

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to enforce the contracts.

Lack of Billboards

The committee recommends that the accounting officer expeditiously recovers the cost of each of the billboards from each of the contractors.

The committee further recommends that the respective contract managers be held responsible for failure to ensure that there are billboards erected for each project.

Failure to Re-grade the Road

The committee recommends that the accounting officer and the contracts manager be held responsible for lapses in supervision and monitoring of the project.

Environmental Degradation

The committee recommends that the accounting officer calls upon the contractor to do restoration work on the borrow pits.

Non-rehabilitation of Onyakedi-Ayac-Banya-Dokolo Border Road, Lira District

The committee recommends that while additional works are in progress, there is need for stronger monitoring and supervision of the contractor as a quality assurance strategy.

Non-adherence to Road Specifications

The committee recommends that- 
i) 	the accounting officer and the contracts manager be held liable for causing financial loss by paying for unexecuted works. 
ii) 	The accounting officer should recover the sums paid in unexecuted works. 
iii) 	Grant Engineering Ltd – the contractor – be blacklisted for facilitating fraud.

Closure/Blockage of Roads

The committee recommends that- 
i) 	the accounting officer and the project manager be held liable for failure to ensure creation of alternative access routes during road construction and payment for unexecuted works. 

ii) 	the money meant for alternative access roads be recovered from the contractors.

Lack of Routine Maintenance of Roads by the Districts

The committee recommends that routine maintenance should be prioritised by both the local governments and at project formulation.

Inadequate Workmanship

The committee recommends that- 
i)	the accounting officer and the project manager be held responsible for causing financial loss. 
ii) 	Ficah Enterprises (U) Ltd be blacklisted for having done a shoddy job.

Status of Project Implementation

Project performance under Rural Infrastructure Improvement Component

The committee recommends that the accounting officer bolsters project monitoring and supervision so as to enhance timely completion of activities and avert additional costs accruing to project delays.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for poor implementation of the project.

The committee further recommends that the project design be reviewed with a view of plugging inherent gaps and minimising losses.

Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme – Project II 
(a) Status of Project Implementation
Delayed Implementation of Works

The committee recommends that- 
i) 	the accounting officer be held responsible for delays in implementation of project activities.

ii) 	The procurement chain should be reviewed with the intention of reducing the bureaucratic approval levels and vesting ultimate powers over contracting to the districts.

Markets and Agricultural Trade Improvement Project 1 – MATIP 1

Non-performing Loans from Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa Amounting to $10 million 
The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for advising Government to commit the country to borrow without adequate plans for its utilisation.

The committee further recommends that the Committee on Government Assurances reviews the performance of all loans contracted in the last five years since the borrowing is a commitment by Government to the people of Uganda.

Failure to Deduct Six Per Cent Withholding Tax from Civil Works Consultants

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held liable for failure to deduct withholding tax, thereby causing financial loss to Government.

The committee further recommends that the accounting officer should recover the outstanding withholding tax within three months from the date of adoption of this report. Failure of which, the money should be recovered from the accounting officer and the non-cooperative companies be blacklisted.

Outstanding VAT on Certified Works and Consultancy

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development respects funding agreements and ensures that counterpart funding is always provided to the respective MDAs.

Field Inspections 

Lira Market

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to enforce the contract.

Jinja Market

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to enforce the contract.

Gulu Market

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should ensure that works are completed within the agreed extension.

Hoima Market
The committee recommends that the accounting officer should ensure that works are completed within the agreed extension.

Status of the Project Implementation

Project Performance as per Logical Framework

The committee recommends that the accounting officer expedites completion of remaining markets within the extended timeframe.

District Livelihoods Support Programme (DLSP), Ministry of Local Government

Low Absorption Capacity

The committee recommends that- 
i) 	the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to carry out proper planning in as far as absorption of the released funds is concerned.

ii) 	The accounting officer strengthens project implementation capacity to facilitate absorption and timely implementation.

Non-incorporation of Government of Uganda Counterpart Funding into the Consolidated Annual Budget of DLSP

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to incorporate Government of Uganda funds into the project work plan and budget.

Project Performance as per Logical Framework

The committee recommends that the accounting officer strengthens project monitoring and supervision.

General Standards of Accounting and Internal Control

Spending at Source

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should be held responsible for diversion of funds.

Lack of Motor Vehicle Maintenance Register
The committee recommends that- 
i) 	the accounting officer be held responsible for contravening the Treasury Accounting Instructions (TAIs) by failing to put in place operating records for each vehicle as required by the Treasury Accounting Instructions in order to monitor the frequency of repairs, maintenance costs and spares used.

ii) 	The accounting officer should immediately ensure adherence to Treasury Accounting Instructions in that regard.

Unutilised TOMPRO Accounting Software

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to operationalise the TOMPRO software.

Audit Field Inspections

Lack of Routine Road Maintenance by the Districts
The committee recommends that the accounting officer ensures timely routine maintenance of rehabilitated roads.

Non-adherence to Specifications

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held liable for causing financial loss.

The committee further recommends that the accounting officer and the contracts manager be held responsible for failure to carry out proper contract management.

Abandoned Works in Buliisa District

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to effectively monitor and supervise the contractors and for subsequent loss of public funds. 

The committee further recommends that the accounting officer ensures that there is due diligence during prequalification, evaluation and award of contracts to confirm the ability of the contractors to execute the contracts.

Delayed Completion of Works

The committee recommends that the accounting officer ensures that contractors provide alternative access routes during the road works.

Poor Procurement Record Keeping

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held liable for contravention of the PPDA Act and the regulations thereunder.

Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

Mischarge of Expenditure

It was observed that Shs 1,506,161,379 was mischarged. The committee, therefore, recommends that the accounting officer be held liable for usurping the powers of Parliament of appropriation.

The committee further recommends that the accounting officer be prosecuted for violating the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 and the regulations thereunder.

Unsupported Gross Tax Payments of Shs 1,468,868,156

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held liable for violating Section 37 of the National Audit Act, 2008.

Gross Tax Payment for Non-qualifying Items Amounting to Shs 642,902,785 
The committee-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, you have 10 minutes.

MR MWIRU: The committee noted that the entire policy of tax waivers on finished products undermines local production and its associated benefits. The committee recommends that- 
i) 	the entire policy of tax waivers on imports should be aligned in a manner that stimulates local production, is time-bound, and closely evaluated for policy outcomes so that the intended benefit is realised, lest the benefit will accrue only to the industrialists but not to the local producers.

ii) 	The IGG should investigate further the entire system of tax waivers with the view of recovery and prosecution.

iii) 	Government should review its policy with the view of abolishing tax waivers since they no longer serve the intended purpose.

Amounts due to URA not Disclosed in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development Financial Statements

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should be held responsible for mis-stating the payables position of the ministry and by implication distorting the accuracy of the financial statements.

Unlicensed Gaming and Pool Betting Businesses 

The committee recommends that the lottery board works concertedly with the Police and URA to harmonise and strengthen the regulation of betting houses.

Inadequate Budgeting and Management of Gross Tax Account 
The committee recommends that the transmission of import documents from MDAs to Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be streamlined.

Unclear Criteria for Selecting and Recommending Firms for Tax Incentives and Lack of Information in that Regard

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to put in place the requisite criteria for selecting and recommending firms for tax incentives. 

The committee further recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to ensure availability of information relating to tax incentives. 

Lack of Repair Post-inspection Reports

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for non-adherence to the Treasury Accounting Instructions.

Capitalisation of Institutions

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development prioritises the payment of arrears and streamlines the timely payment of Uganda’s financial obligations to regional and international bodies.

Audit of Subventions/Projects

Irish Aid Support to Equity and Budgeting 

General Standards of Accounting and Internal Audit Control Systems 

1. 	Lack of Critical Information on Payment Vouchers

The committee recommends that the payment vouchers should be duly signed at all times as an integral part of its accountability and a safeguard for public funds.

Compliance with Financing Agreement and Government of Uganda Financial Regulations
The committee recommends that the project accounting officer be held responsible for failure to deduct and remit local service tax. 

Financial Management and Accountability Programme (FINMAP) 

Compliance with Programme Financing Agreement and Government of Uganda Financial Regulations

The committee recommends that the project accounting officer, Mr Yusuf Mawanda, be held responsible for the late filing of tax returns.

Expenditure Reallocation

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should always ensure that the requisite procedure for approval of reallocations is sought whenever the need arises. 

GENERAL STANDARDS OF ACCOUNTINGS AND INTERNAL CONTROL 

Staff Advances 

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should be held responsible for failure to recover the advances within the stipulated 60 days from the date of disbursement.

Payment Vouchers

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to exercise prudent control measures which is at the core of the mandate of an accounting officer.

Project Stores

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to carry out proper stores management.

Field Visits

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to carry out proper stores and assets management. 

Strengthening Evidence Based Decision Making– Finance Component 2013 

Compliance with the Key Covenants of DFID Funding Agreement and Government of Uganda Financial Regulations

Tax of Shs 9 million paid from SEBDEM II Project 

The committee recommends that the accounting officer adheres to the financing agreements and provisions of the MoU at all times.

Second Private Sector Competitiveness Project

Compliance with Credit Agreements and Government Regulations Non Deduction of Withholding Tax
The committee recommends the recovery of the withholding tax due to Government from Mr Kakembo. 

General Standards of Accounting and Internal Control

Discrepancy between Quarterly Reports and Financial Statements 
The committee recommends that the accounting officer should always comply with the reporting and other agreed upon requirements of development partners.

Payments to Wrong Suppliers

The committee recommends that the accounting officer improves internal control to forestall any future reoccurrence of the anomaly. I want to say here, Mr Speaker, that the money was recovered through the efforts of the Public Accounts Committee when the officer appeared before us. 

Mis-procurement

The committee recommends that for smooth project management, projects should be domiciled in their respective sectors or ministries.

Outstanding Project Liabilities

The committee recommends that the IGG investigates the circumstances under which the outstanding liabilities were incurred with a view to prosecution and recovery. 

Land information system

The committee recommends that the accounting officer improves his planning function to forecast, detect and innovate in time.

SIDA Support to Competitiveness Investment Climate Strategy Project
Human Resource Issues
Unapproved Staff Titles
The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for operating outside the approved staff establishment.

Non-remittance of Unutilised Project Funds

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held liable for failure to remit Shs 47,000,000 back to the Government of Sweden.

Procurement of Hire of Reality TV Production Services
The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for violating the PPDA Act and the regulations thereunder. 

The committee further recommends that in view of the fact that there was no evidence of recovery, the accounting officer makes good the six per cent withholding tax that was not deducted and the same should be remitted to URA with immediate effect.

Overspent Items

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held liable for contravention of the Public Finance and Accountability Act and the regulations thereunder by falsifying the expenditure on the three budget items.

Agricultural Credit Facility Project

Inadequate Monitoring and Supervision of the Scheme by the Administrator
The committee recommends that the Agricultural Credit Facility MoU be reviewed with the view of establishing an independent body to monitor and supervise the scheme’s operations so as to forestall any losses.

Non-compliant Use of Agricultural Credit Facility (ACF) Funds

The committee recommends that- 
i) 	the Agricultural Credit Facility MoU be reviewed to provide for adequate and reliable mechanisms to realise the objectives of ACF. This should include a system for adequately verifying the eligibility report by the public finance institutions on prospective beneficiaries. 

ii) 	The Agricultural Credit Facility should be housed and managed under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries as a line ministry with the appropriate technical and institutional capacity and mandate.

iii) 	Bank of Baroda be investigated by the Police for its role in misrepresenting the compliance of Sugar and Allied Industries Ltd with the view of bringing them to book.

iv) 	Bank of Uganda ensures that the ownership of these particular machinery and equipment be regularised.

Non-participation of Microfinance Deposit Taking Institutions (MDIs)
The committee recommends that considering that the Agricultural Credit Facility is a government scheme with disbursements from Bank of Uganda, the lower interest rates should be publicised and matched with a negotiation with the MDIs on interest rates. This is because the lower interest rates favour the intended beneficiaries of the project, thereby aiding the attainment of the objectives of the scheme.

The committee further recommends greater publicity of the scheme to the public.

Lack of Detailed Report Review and Feedback by Management of Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
The committee recommends that the accounting officer establishes a well laid down procedure for eliciting and documenting reviews and disseminating feedback.

Delays in Implementation of Decisions

The committee recommends that the accounting officer ensures speedy consultations with the concerned parties to enable expeditious implementation of decisions.

ACF Programme Implementation Status Field Work

The committee recommends that the accounting officer immediately streamlines the management of the project with the view of bolstering monitoring and supervision. This requires a review of the MoU.

Rural Financial Services Programme

Technical Oversight by the Programme Steering Committee

The committee recommends that the accounting officer ensures compliance with loan agreements and any modification of the terms of the loan agreement should be formally agreed upon by all the concerned parties.

Employee Code of Conduct

The committee recommends that the accounting officer streamlines the training programme and ensures timeliness, fairness, equity and inclusiveness and value for money in the process.

Staff Appraisals for PAU staff

The committee recommends that the accounting officer establishes routine and timely performance appraisal systems.

Inadequate Controls Over Fuel Usage

The committee recommends that while fuel tracking sheets have been introduced, it is imperative to actually enforce and periodically evaluate their usage with the - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up now. Your time is up.

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, as I wind up, I want to make one observation; if we wind up at this point, we shall not have presented our findings on Uganda Law Reform Commission and yet this money was voted under that Act. Therefore, I do not whether I should-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It will be captured in the debate. 

MR MWIRU: Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker. Having presented this report, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, you will agree with me that when Parliament votes money, it is for the intended use of service delivery to our people. However, what is clearly coming out in these audit reports is that the money is squandered and does not serve the intended purpose. It is on the basis of the above that I invite you to adopt the recommendations of the committee in these three reports. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Honourable members, like the previous report, this report will also be debated tomorrow but I pray to propose the question for your debate. The motion that you will be debating is for adoption of the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the votes with qualified opinion by the Auditor-General on the accounts ending June 2012. The debate will start tomorrow. 

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION  OF PARLIAMENT ON THE CREATION OF NEW DISTRICTS MOVED IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 179 (1) (b) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairman of the committee, you have 20 minutes. 

4.34
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Grace Kwiyucwiny): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to present a report by the Committee on Local Government and Public Service on the motion for a resolution of Parliament on the creation of new districts moved in accordance with Article 179 (1) (b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Before I get into the details of the report, I would like to lay on the Table the minutes of the meetings held. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MS KWIYUCWINY: I also want to note that this report has been affected by the moratorium by Cabinet on creation of districts and the long period it has taken to be presented to this House. Under these circumstances, this is what we can present but a lot of the information is still very relevant. 

I would like to start by quoting Article 179 (4) of the Constitution, which says thus, “Any measure for the alteration of the boundaries of or the creation of districts or administrative units shall be based on the necessity for effective administration and the need to bring services closer to the people, and it may take into account the means of communication, geographical features, density of population, economic viability and the wishes of the people concerned.” 
In this – (Interruption)

MS ALICE ALASO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a procedural concern. I heard the chair of the committee saying that the report had been overtaken by the Cabinet moratorium on creation of districts and yet the motion is for creation of districts. So I am wondering whether it is okay for us to continue with such a motion. I think it was initially moved by Government and now the Government has put a moratorium. Is it therefore okay for us to proceed when the motion itself has been rendered overtaken and no longer necessary by the very mover of the motion? Is it okay for us to proceed?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have not received any formal communication to that effect as Parliament. What Parliament received was a motion for creation of districts. The committee has studied it and if the committee came across some obstacles there, they are reporting to us; we do not have any other information. If there is a moratorium, they will speak about it; the minister is here and he will speak. However, what we have is a motion, which has been pending in the committee for a long time. We should receive that report today. Please, proceed.

MS KWIYUCWINY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That was actually part of my report.  A motion to create 25 new districts was moved in July 2012. The report has the list of the districts that were proposed and I am not going to go into the details. 

On page 4, I want to mention a brief background of the evolution of districts in Uganda. At the time of independence in 1962, there were 10 districts, four kingdoms and one special district of Karamoja. By 2010, there were 111 districts, 22 municipal councils and 174 town councils. 

At the moment, there are only five districts that have remained large and pose a challenge in administration and taking services closer to the people. These districts are: Kibaale with five counties, 31 sub counties, four town councils, five town boards, 220 parishes and 1,642 villages. The table highlights the details of Wakiso, Arua, Kasese and Kabale districts. 

Strengthening of the District Administrations through Decentralisation

Mr Speaker and honourable members, you will recall that the pre-independence and immediate post-independence eras focused on creating a strong local government system. However, the period between 1964 and 1985 focused on creating a central government dominion. The period after 1987 to date has emphasised local government supremacy. In the decentralisation policy, political, financial, administrative, planning, legislative and judicial powers have all been decentralised to the local governments.  

I am not going to go into the details of the methodology; I will go to page 8 and read out the findings and observations. 

The committee established that some of the 25 proposed districts were duly requested for by the local people and councils. The minutes of the resolutions of the respective district local councils were accordingly submitted to the Minister of Local Government. The resolutions were in effect to create Kagadi, Kakumiro, Kihiizi, Rubanda, Kyotera, Kyadondo, Kassanda, Kasambya, Namisindwa, Kikuube, Bunyangabu, Kitagwendwa, Rukiga and Rwampara districts. However, the committee noted that while Wakiso District recommended Entebbe and Kyadondo districts Mubende recommended Kassanda and Kasambya districts, Entebbe and Kassanda have been left out of the minister’s proposal for new districts. 

We note that Omoro in Gulu, Kapelebyong in Amuria, Kazo in Kiruhura, Kilak in Amuru and Karenga in Kotido were not visited due to time constraints. 

In addition to the minister’s list, the committee received petitions from Bughendera, Kilak and Kasambya counties advocating for inclusion in the motion in order to obtain district status. There are district council resolutions for Bughendera and Kasambya to the effect that they should be made districts. They cited social exclusion and marginalisation, poor terrain and poor service delivery as the main reasons, among others, for demanding district status.  

While the Local Government Act, Section 7 (5), empowers the district councils to alter boundaries or create new sub counties, the committee noted that there were disagreements on boundaries to form some of the proposed districts as was reflected in the petition from Bubaare and Nyamweru sub counties in Kabale; Opwateta and Kibale sub counties in Pallisa; Mpungu Sub County in Kanungu and Kifamba Sub County in Rakai preferring to remain in the old districts. The committee observed that the resistance to remain in the old districts would affect the boundary demarcations for new districts. It would also mean that Government would review the proposed boundaries to ensure that there is consensus by all actors. 

The committee noted that there was no consensus on the boundaries to create two more districts out of Kasese. The Minister of Local Government was yet to further consult with the local stakeholders on this. In some cases, like in Madi-Okollo, there was no consensus on the location of district headquarters.

The committee also established that the distance between some of the proposed districts and the mother districts was too short, like in the case of Kinkizi and Kanungu. In table 3, the committee highlights some data on populations, the proposed number of sub counties and general remarks. 

Reasons for creation of districts and benefits of new districts include improved service delivery, especially the feeling by particular parts of the district that they are not attended to and that there is poor service delivery. Another reason is reliance on central Government, especially the fact that a district can access benefits from the Government such as university government sponsorship on quota system, the distribution of road units, to mention but a few. The people do not appreciate that they have to make a direct contribution to sustain the functioning of the districts created. 

The other reasons include marginalisation of minority groups and also benefits to the people. It was established that to some extent, the creation of new districts has benefited the people. Accessibility to administrative services has improved and shorter distances and time is taken to follow up on services. More services like roads, health services and water points have been improved on or constructed where they used not to be. New services like banking services in some cases, district and sub county headquarters are now nearer and more accessible to a larger population. A limited number of jobs have also been created in the civil service and the political leadership has been expanded. There are many growing trading and business centres, which have boosted economic participation.

However, we have challenges with the creation of more districts: 

1. Inadequate and Unfair Financial Allocation 

In Uganda, the fiscal transfers are based on available resources rather than actual cost of the decentralised service. The fiscal transfers and local revenues are inadequate to enable local governments optimally meet their service delivery obligations. Meanwhile in Ghana and Kenya, for example, the fiscal transfers to local governments are constitutionally established at 15 per cent, on top of which conditional equalization grants are provided according to the funding envelope.

It has also been established that while the number of new districts and local government and administrative units have increased, the local governments’ budgets have not increased in real terms to match the demands of the units.

It has also been established that more funds are spent on recurrent expenditure than development. We have the table below, which spells that out. 

2. Insufficient Start-up Costs for New Local Governments

Currently, the start-up cost for a newly created district is Shs 100 million while that for a town council is Shs 40 million. This is insufficient to meet the underlying establishment costs, which include office accommodation at the headquarters, electricity, office equipment and furniture, motor vehicles and other capital expenditure. Besides, before a new district is created, Government needs to secure Shs 1.634 billion to cater for administrative costs. This means that the Government would require Shs 40.850 billion for the 25 districts to ensure that the local governments function effectively and efficiently. This is a huge financial requirement. The details are in the table at page 17, which the minister also confirmed.

3. Low Local Revenue of the New Districts 

Many of the newly created districts are grappling with inadequate local resources to run the planned activities effectively. The creation of new districts has also resulted into lower local revenue sources to the old districts. This has resulted in mother districts being left with huge liabilities and debts. A case in point is Mukono District, which is suffering the same following the creation of Buvuma and Buikwe districts.

4. Unequal Distribution of Projects 

The Ministry of Local Government is endowed with other resources for implementation of development programmes including roads and markets construction, appropriate technologies in food milling and processing under CAIIP 1,2 and 3, GLSP, MATIP, ERT and UGOGO. These programmes cover the whole country except West Nile and Karamoja. Even then, some of the districts have benefited from these programmes more than others; for instance, Jinja and Gulu districts have benefited from CAIIP 2 and MATIP, Kasese benefits from CAIIP 3 and ERT, Nakaseke District benefits from CAIIP 3 and DLSP while others do not have any programmes at all.

5. Inadequate Staffing Levels  

Currently, local governments face challenges of attraction and retention of skilled manpower at the strategic level. I will go straight to the table at page 21, which shows a number of districts but since then the situation has improved; I think the most affected districts now are Zombo, Agago, Alebtong, Amudat, Kiryandongo and Kole. Here strategic posts, including that of the chief administrative officer, the deputy, finance officer, district planner, education officer – vacancies have been filled at only eight per cent.

6. Capacity of Local Governments 

The committee observed that many districts that were created in 2010 are still weak and are faced with a number of operational challenges. The local governments are weak in development planning and budgeting because they have inadequate technical skills, planning tools, statistics and comprehensive data.

The planning structures – the technical planning committees, parish and village development committees - do not receive adequate resources for capacity development, technical backstopping, mentoring and support to do their work effectively. The district service commissions in local governments are not operational. Gomba and Butambala districts by then were sharing a district service commission from Mityana District. The Local Government Public Account Committees (LGPACs) are weak and not functional in some of the districts. 

7. Conflicts Based on Ethnicity 

There is a growing tendency by local people to demand new local governments and create new administrative units based on tribal sentiments. Various conflicts have emerged that have resulted into marginalisation and disenfranchisement of the minority tribes. Such conflicts are found in Bundibugyo District among the Bamba and Bakonjo; the Basongora and Bakonzo in Kasese District among other minority tribes. There is no formal framework to unite the tribes in conflict and as such these have grown to undermine unity, nationalism, cohesion and patriotism.

8. Positioning ourselves for the East Africa Regional Integration Process 

The East African Community countries – Uganda, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Burundi - are moving towards economic and political integration. This creates opportunities for peer learning among local governments across the region. This will require harmonisation of decentralisation policies, fiscal decentralisation strategies, local government structures and systems, and sharing of benefits from the outcomes and impact of local economic development across the region.

At the moment, Kenya has 34 per cent of their national budget allocated to local governments while Uganda has only 15 per cent. This could cause disparity in local governments’ growth and service delivery in the region, putting one country at a disadvantage.

Moratorium on Creation of District Local Governments 

The Minister of Local Government informed the committee that Government took two major decisions to guide the creation of new districts and local governments. These decisions are: the declaration of a moratorium on creation of new districts and local governments; and the establishment of additional criteria for creating new local governments.

At the moment, the criteria for the creation of new districts is provided in Article 179 (4) of the Constitution as quoted earlier on. The sector minister proposed to provide additional criteria for the creation of new districts and other local government units as indicated below: For districts, we would need to have fiscal capacity, human resource capacity, human settlement and land use patterns, and should at least be above 3,200 square kilometres. For a sub county, we would need at least four parishes and above and an area of 64 square kilometres. For a parish, we would need 10 villages and above, and an area of 30 square kilometres. For a village, we would need 100 households and above.

The minister further informed us that the criteria for the creation of urban councils will be established after the urban policy is passed.

The committee observed, from the above, that the Minister of Local Government has not provided the criteria for creating counties/constituencies and yet the demand for creation of new counties/constituencies is also on the increase.

Recommendations

With the challenges highlighted above, the committee recommends that while it is constitutional to create new local governments and administrative units, emphasis should be placed on strengthening the local governments with the view of making all of them functional and effective in providing better services to the people.

The committee, therefore, makes the following recommendations:

1. Strengthening the Staffing and Institutional Capacity of Local Government 

The Ministry of Local Government must prioritise staffing with particular emphasis on administration and management functions of local governments and service delivery units. The local governments require appropriate staffing and adequate funding in order to improve the impact on service delivery. 

The Ministry of Public Service and Ministry of Local Government must fill all the vacant and acting positions immediately to ensure that the staffing levels and wage bill in the district local governments are raised from the current average of 51.7 to 65 per cent.

The Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Public Service should ensure that staffing positions at the newly created districts are at a minimum of 40 per cent to enable local governments to perform effectively. This will ensure adequate human resource capacity for efficient and effective service delivery.

The Ministry of Local Government should focus on staffing at sub-county level by ensuring that parish chiefs, community development workers and extension workers, who are crucial in the implementation of service delivery, are in place.

The Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Local Government should urgently provide a status report to Parliament on the performance contracts of accounting officers in local governments.

The Ministry of Local Government should ensure that there is an effective and functional district public accounts committee at every district.

The Ministry of Public Service should ensure that there are effective and functional district service commissions.

2. Strengthening the Local Governments through the Decentralisation Policy

The decentralisation policy should be reviewed to ensure that the local governments are strengthened to deliver on their mandate. 

Political Powers 

The Ministry of Local Government should urgently review the Local Government Act with the view of making the Local Council I and II elections cheaper. The Ministry of Local Government should, together with the Electoral Commission, urgently hold elections for LC I and II.

Financial Powers 

The allocation formula specifically should be reviewed such that the percentage of budget transfer and allocation to local governments is increased and fixed to at least 40 per cent to ensure that resources allocated to districts are commensurate with the decentralised functions. The Ministry of Local Government and the Local Government Finance Commission should review the formula for budgetary allocations and define the framework in line with the above percentage.

The Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Local Government should ensure that local governments’ budget and adequately facilitate the local councils in their oversight and management functions in order to undertake regular supervision and inspection of service delivery units timely.

The Government should enforce accountability and severely punish mismanagement of funds and corruption in the local governments.

Planning Powers 

Planning at all levels, especially at parish and sub county levels, must be strengthened and all stakeholders must be involved in order to ensure a sense of ownership. Priority should be given to strengthening the supervision and monitoring function of local governments to ensure effective fiscal and physical accountability.

Legislative Powers 

The Solicitor-General should expeditiously approve the local councils’ by-laws and ordinances to enable the local governments’ enforcement.

Judicial Powers

Once the local councillors are elected, they should be trained to effectively handle the local courts as provided in their functions. The local council courts at sub-county and town council levels should also be strengthened to render their services effectively.

Social-cultural Issues 

The people of Uganda should be sensitised to co-exist as Ugandans and not as tribes and clans. District political, cultural and religious leaders should preach national unity.

Recommendations for Criteria for Creation of Local Governments and Administrative Units
The committee recommends that the Government treats the moratorium on creation of new districts and local governments as a temporary measure, which should have been reviewed immediately after the national population census of 2014. Meanwhile, Government should ensure adequate resources are directed to strengthening the existing local governments to effectively and efficiently deliver on their decentralised function.  
 
The committee supports the additional criteria for creating new local governments as a means of making the local governments more viable and effective. The committee recommends that the additional criteria suggested by the Minister of Local Government should be adopted in addition to what is provided for in the Constitution. These are: fiscal capacity, human resource capacity, human settlement and land use patterns, and the various area requirements in terms of measurements.

The committee recommends that the creation of new local governments and administrative units should be done after the national population census, starting with the very large districts of Kibaale, Kabale, Wakiso, Arua and Kasese for ease of administration and taking services nearer to the people. All proposed local governments and administrative units here in the motion for creation of new districts should, as far as possible, be subjected to the additional criteria proposed above before they can be elevated to district or constituency status.

The regional tier system of governance should be reviewed and implemented in order to consolidate and strengthen local governance and co-operation for better service delivery and positive impact.

East African Community 

The Ministry of Local Government should ensure that there is harmony with other East African Community countries in the implementation of the decentralisation policy and creating positive socio-economic impact on its people.

In conclusion, the moratorium should be treated as a temporary measure to allow Government evaluate the creation and expansion of new administrative units with the view of focusing more on quality, efficiency and effectiveness of service delivery. The Government should take time to critically analyse the situation and impact of service delivery to the people. 

Using the forthcoming national population census information and opportunities, the Government should address the challenges herein that hinder the effective performance of local governments. Government should develop a comprehensive framework for strengthening local governments towards effective service delivery, thereby transforming the socio-economic and political life of the people.

Mr Speaker, I beg to report. However, I also would like to say that we completed this report in July 2014 but in November 2014, a minority report was written by the hon. Betty Nambooze after she signed our list of attendance. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there a minority report by the hon. Betty Nambooze? Is somebody ready to present that minority report?

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand on a point of procedure. I see the Member proceeding to present a minority report made by hon. Betty Nambooze. According to our Rules of Procedure, my understanding is that a minority report is presented by a Member who is dissenting from the majority report. However, here we see on the list of signatures of Members who adopted the majority report the hon. Betty Nambooze is included. How then can she be allowed to present a minority report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, actually that is the substance of a minority report. A minority report does not have to disagree with everything that the main committee has articulated. We have had instances - when I was chairing a committee, I had two minority reports, one from the hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi and another from some Member I do not quite recall, but they were only in respect of one article out of the 118 articles which we were amending. They agreed with all the articles and they only disagreed with one that they dissented upon. So, that is the procedure. 

Signing the main report does not preclude you from disagreeing with one aspect of the report that you did not support.  That should be the procedure. This tendency that I now see, where one Member is disagreeing with only one small bit of the report but refuses to sign the whole report as if the Member now disagrees with the entire report, which most of the time is not the case, is not the proper procedure. 

The procedure is, if you agree with the entire report, that is another matter but it is very rare that a Member disagrees with the entire report. You always find where you agree with everybody else, but there is that one little thing or one or two aspects where you dissent from them and that is why you express a minority report. That should be the procedure. This is the correct procedure. My only problem was that it was filed three months later but that is okay since it is already on the record. (Applause)

5.05
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. My senior colleague had wondered how I can present a report when I am not a member of the committee but the rules allow me so to do. I will now invite Members only to refer to the rest of the report and proceed to the recommendations. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, please.  

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Hon. Betty Nambooze in dissent recommends as follows: 

1. 	That all districts be subjected to a thorough performance assessment and evaluation with a view to merging the less viable ones and considering provisions for the reversal of decisions to alter district boundaries for districts that have failed to produce economically sustainable results.

2. 	That Parliament adequately addresses itself to the establishment and operationalisation of regional governments. It is time the matter of creating viable administrative and politically strong provincial governments be strongly considered. It is important to revisit the matter of federal and to let it be adopted as the most favoured system by the people of Uganda. It has been favoured by most Ugandans and alternative systems that have been proposed have failed to meet the standards coveted by the people of Uganda. 

Regional tiers were created with only one region in mind and that was Buganda. When Buganda rejected it, all other regions like Bunyoro and Busoga that had expressed interest were given a lukewarm position by Government. We need to amend the Constitution to scrap Article 178 because it has been rendered redundant. Parliament should not also entrench this unpractical Article by passing the Region Tier Bill into law.

3. 	Government recommits itself to the full implementation of the devolution system, empowers citizens to hold local leaders accountable at all levels and gives local governments full control over their decisions but retains important policy and supervisory rules at the centre.

4. 	Government emphasises the establishment of strong accountability mechanisms that will effect proper resource allocation, management, transparency, efficiency and effectiveness as well as accountability in service delivery and responsive leadership to allow for good governance and for participation to thrive at local levels, with citizens participating in identifying their own local development priorities and interventions.

5. 	Government looks to enabling local governments financially improve service delivery and make them more self-sustaining since they are the entry point to governance in the country.

6. 	Parliament should resolve for the creation of new municipalities in areas that have recently become considerably urbanised - this could apply to areas around Kampala like Wakiso - instead of curving new districts out of them. Wakiso District has inevitably grown to be part of Kampala City, in that policies of KCCA have either affected the district or are likely to affect it in the near future.

In this case, the elevation to municipality status of Nansana and Kira town councils would be more viable. The same could apply to Kibale, which despite being quite expansive and densely populated, has four town councils.

7. Government should also focus on extending the jurisdiction of some existing municipalities and integrating adjoining rural or semi-rural areas, which would facilitate the re-merging of districts that have formerly been curved out of others. 

8. 	Government should conduct a study with a view of reducing the number of districts to a manageable number of about 60 by the end of 2015. 

9. 	Commissioning a study with a view of forming viable culturally acceptable provincial governments with sound provincial assemblies that devolve power to the centre. 

In the circumstances, Mr Speaker, the mover proposes that the main report be rejected and the minority report be adopted.  (Laughter) I beg to move on behalf of the hon. Betty Nambooze. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the report which was ready in July of last year. Before I allow the minister to respond, the motion that I now propose for your debate is that the report of the sectoral Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the motion for a resolution of Parliament on creation of new districts, moved in accordance with Article 179(1) (b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, be adopted. That is the motion I propose for your debate but let me first invite the Minister of Local Government to make a statement on this matter.

5.10
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to register my thanks to the chairperson and the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for this good report. I also thank the sponsor and the mover of the minority report for the effort in presenting it.

Mr Speaker, as you heard from the report of the committee, it is true that Government introduced a motion in July 2012 to create 25 new districts. That is a correct record. Following the introduction of that motion, debate ensued within Government and within the public. Government, through Cabinet, took off time and reviewed its decision to introduce the motion to create 25 districts. In reviewing its decision, Government decided on a moratorium on the creation of new districts, which naturally affected the motion we had introduced on the Floor of this House.

The reason for this moratorium was a fundamental one. When we calculated the actual cost of creating a new district and the annual cost of running a district, we came up with Shs 59 billion for introducing a new district and Shs 14 billion for running that district every year. Because of these figures and realities, Government came to the conclusion that it was not sustainable to continue pursuing the motion in the form that we had introduced it. 

I promptly came to the committee of Parliament, which oversees the Ministry of Local Government, as the chairperson has reported, because this House works through its committees. I made this revelation to them and my expectation was that the committee would look at it and come to this House, like they have done today. That is why part of their report mentions the moratorium. The information they have given was from my presentation before the committee. That is why the committee talks about the additional proposed criteria for the creation of new local governments. That information came from Government through the Minister of Local Government who appeared before that sectoral committee.

Due to the reasons I have given, the position of Government is that there is a subsisting moratorium on creation of new local governments and districts in particular. 

The second position of Government is that we have evolved additional criteria, which is reflected in the report of the committee, which I support. In addition to the criteria in the Constitution of necessity for effective administration, means of communication, geographical features, density of population and economic viability, we made proposals to ensure that before a district is created, Government must have the fiscal capacity to run the district and it should have sufficient human resource capacity. The committee in the report recommends at least a minimum of 40 per cent staff required to run a district. In addition, the land area should be a radius of at least 32 kilometres or 20 miles for a district to be created. 

As Cabinet, we also agreed that part of these criteria like the size and population can be varied or reduced or even waived, depending on the special circumstances of an area. If you look at a district like Ssese for example, if Parliament was to be very strict on population, Kalangala would not have been created with only about 16,000 people then. However, everybody who is observing the growth of Kalangala as a district can agree that Parliament took the right decision to have Kalangala created as a district.

In view of the moratorium and the new criteria - I am happy the committee has recommended that Government should treat the moratorium for creation of districts as a temporary measure. This is also the thinking of Government. This temporary measure should be reviewed, according to the committee, immediately after the population census. I therefore pray, Mr Speaker and Members, that you give Cabinet time to sit and review the moratorium which it made and we also look at the committee report. I will then come back with a new position that takes into account the recommendations of the committee and also the views of Cabinet, which had already agreed on a moratorium. The committee is saying review it but I cannot review it here without the blessing of Cabinet. That is how Government works. 

I would, therefore, pray that I am given time to go back to Cabinet and get the guidance – (Interjections) – No, the rules do not allow me. I pray that I am allowed to go back to Cabinet to review its decision. When I get Cabinet’s guidance, I will come back here to Parliament. 

The options are three, Mr Speaker: to continue with the motion which I moved in its current form, or to amend the motion, or to withdraw the motion. I can only get guidance on any of three from Cabinet. I pray.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have a timeframe in mind, honourable minister?

MR MWESIGE: In view of the workload that Cabinet has at the moment, I pray that you give me three weeks to go back and prepare, move Cabinet to review and I come back to this House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Madam Chairperson and the committee. Thank you, honourable minister, for those responses. I think they are comprehensive and they treat the subject in a very holistic way. That is the way we should move. So, debate on this motion will be deferred until the minister comes back with those positions of review and whatever Cabinet will decide and then we will see how to move from there.

Honourable members, this is how we will proceed tomorrow. We have Prime Minister’s Question Time. I hope the Prime Minister will be here to answer some of these issues. We have three reports that have been presented. One was presented last week and the fourth one has been deferred until the minister comes back. 

This is how we will proceed tomorrow and the Order Paper should reflect this, and also go with the knowledge that this is the Order Paper for tomorrow: The report of the Committee on Government Assurances - that report that came from West Nile comprising of Arua, Yumbe, Moyo and other districts of West Nile. I think there was a report that was presented from the Committee of Government Assurances that we did not debate. That debate will be taking place first tomorrow. It will take priority because it was presented first. That will be followed by the one of the Public Accounts Committee on entities with a disclaimer of opinion. The third one will be the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the votes with qualified opinion by the Auditor-General on the accounts ending June 2012.

Honourable members, this is already part of the Order Paper announced in advance. So prepare for this debate tomorrow because we will proceed with that. If there are additional matters that will come up during Prime Minister’s Question Time and other issues, for example the Bills we have deferred - I am not sure whether the consultations will deliver results by tomorrow – these will be part of the Order Paper. This House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.20 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 8 July 2015 at 2.00 p.m.) 
