Thursday, 26 July 2012

Parliament met at 2.28 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are welcome to this sitting. You will recall yesterday when we were adjourning to resume today, I communicated that there was consultation yesterday before the House started and the conclusion was that this House should sit today. It was agreed that some members and the Speaker would be at the burial in Katakwi while I would proceed with business with the remaining Members of Parliament. The reason being that there is a lot of business pending and we will be running out of time. If we could do some work today while joining, in spirit, with our colleagues in Katakwi, it would still be serving the same purpose. We are here together in fellowship and in memory of what is going on in Katakwi but at the same time doing what the honourable member would have loved to do today. That is also in honour of him. So we will proceed. Thank you.

STATEMENT ON THE SEARCH COMMITTEE FOR THE VICE-CHANCELLOR OF MAKERERE UNIVERSITY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable minister is not here. Is there a representative? We can stand over that matter.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US$ 30.28 MILLION FROM ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK FOR FINANCING THE CONSTRUCTION OF A SPECIALISED MATERNAL AND NEONATAL HEALTH CARE UNIT AT MULAGO NATIONAL REFERRAL HOSPITAL
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall this matter was brought to this House and the matter was referred to the Committee on National Economy. The report is ready and has been circulated and the minister is here. I will ask the chairperson to present the report.

2.32
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Frederick Nkayi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise to present a report from the Committee of National Economy on the request by Government to borrow US$ 30.28 million from the Islamic Development Bank for financing and construction of a specialised maternal and neonatal healthcare unit at Mulago National Referral Hospital. This is a 22-paged document but I will endeavour to pick out the most pertinent issues as we move along.

Introduction 

This request was presented to this House by the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and accordingly referred to the Committee on National Economy for consideration in line with Article 90 of the Constitution and rule 144 of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure. The committee considered and scrutinised the request and now begs to report.

Methodology 

The committee held meetings with the relevant ministries. We held meetings with the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Health and the management of Mulago Hospital. The committee also interacted with the parliamentary sessional Committee on Social Services. 

The committee further made references to a good number of documents; among them, we have the minister’s brief on the loan request, the minutes of the project preparation meeting between the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Islamic Development Bank, and the draft loan financing agreements.

With me, I also have a copy of the government unit health projects, which appears in one of the documents that I have. At the right time, I will request you, Mr Speaker, for an opportunity to lay these documents on the Table. The committee also undertook a field site study to selected regional referral hospitals to assess the state of the health service delivery in these hospitals and the functionality of the referral system.

With me, I have other documents like the artistic impressions of the 320-bed hospital that we are talking about. I also have documents with the clarifications on issues raised by the Members of Parliament during the sittings that we had. I also have a document which has the minutes of the committee meetings held on 26 June 2012 from which this report emanated.

On page 2, we have the background but before that, I think it will be very important to inform this House that the regional referral hospitals that were visited by the committee were in the districts of Masaka, Mbarara, Kabarole, Mubende, Jinja, Mbale, Soroti, Tororo, Hoima, Masindi, Lira and Gulu.

Background 

Uganda continues to be under considerable pressure to increase spending for health. This is driven primarily by the rapid growing population and the need to adapt more effective health technologies and service delivery standards to combat the high disease burden. Worldwide, over 350 women die due to preventable causes during pregnancy and child birth.

For development to be sustainable, health and economic growth must be mutually reinforcing as focusing on economic growth alone is not sufficient for the country to realise its Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Health is an essential pre-requisite as well as an outcome of sound development policies. Without good health, individuals, families, communities and nations cannot hope to achieve their social and economic goals. 

Most importantly, as a background, Parliament on 15 February 2012 approved the African Development Bank and Nigerian Trust Fund loans for the improvement of health service delivery at Mulago Hospital and in the city of Kampala. As a follow-up on these two earlier loans, Government was to partner with the Islamic Development Bank to construct and equip a women’s hospital in Mulago National Referral Hospital for this specialised facility to take care particularly of maternal and neonatal healthcare at Mulago. This effort will complement Government efforts to enhance the public health system and infrastructure in Kampala with particular attention being accorded to investment requirements of de-congesting and improving the quality of clinical care at Mulago National Referral Hospital, as the designated national centre of excellence for health.

Specifically the project aims at:
(i) 	Establishing by 2016, a functional tertiary referral 320-bed specialized maternal and neonatal healthcare unit at Mulago Referral Hospital;
(ii) 	Easing the financing gap in the health sector; and
(iii) 	Enhancing Uganda’s capacity to attain the objective of improving the quality and access to publicly funded health services supported by a referral system.

The project is composed of the following three components:

(a) 	Improvement of access to specialised maternal and neonatal healthcare services;
(b)	 Improvement of the quality of services; and
(c) 	Support to project management.

On page 6, we have a description of the project components. They are clearly and elaborately laid out in table 1. On page 7, the project beneficiaries and the project costs and financing are elaborated. The total cost of the project stands at US$ 34.1 million of which we have US$ 30.28 million coming from the Islamic Development Bank as loans and the Islamic Development Bank grant of US$ 0.44 million plus a Government contribution of US$ 3.42 million. 

On page 8, we have a table with the project cost estimates by component and plan on financing. Down in table 3, we also have a summary of disbursement projections.

Terms and Conditions of Financing 

The Islamic Development Bank financing is to be provided under a loan operation and instalment sale financing through the following three modes, with the following terms:
(i) 	The ordinary IDB loan which stands at US$ 19.77 million.
(ii) 	The Islamic Solidarity Fund for Development is giving us US$ 2.2 million.
(iii) 	The IDB instalment sale financing is US$ 8.31 million.
(iv) 	There is a grant of ID 0.28, which is an equivalent of US$ 0.44 million for financing specialised training of medical and paramedical staff of the maternal and neonatal unit. In total, all the above comes to US$ 30.28 million.

The conditions are the usual ones that are embedded in the memorandum of understanding between the banks and the Government of Uganda.

Project Implementation 

The project will be implemented over a 48-month period, that is, four years. The project will be implemented using our country’s systems, with the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health being the project accounting officer for the project. He will designate a coordinator for the day-to-day implementation and functions of the project. Overall supervision of the project will be guided by the Ministry of Health project steering committee, chaired by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health. The project steering committee will serve as a platform through which the Ministry of Health will align its oversight.

Observations and Recommendations 

The committee observed that the level of dilapidation of the existing reproductive health infrastructure at Mulago National Referral Hospital was shocking. The existing maternity wards and operating theatres are no longer able to accommodate the ever increasing numbers of patients. The maternity wards also surpassed their official bed capacity and as a result, mothers who have delivered and those waiting to deliver have continued to lie on the floor due to the limited space available within the maternity wards.
 
The committee also observed the limited availability of a number of reproductive health equipment like incubators, examination coaches, delivery beds etcetera. Lack of equipment, among others, has hampered the provision of Emergency Obstetric Care (EMOC) services that play an important role in the mitigation of the maternal mortality rate, which currently stands at 453 deaths per 100,000. Mr Speaker, when we talk about obstetric care, we are talking of medicines and surgery in the areas of child birth.

The committee further observed that there have been significant delays specifically in the implementation of the civil works for the construction of a number of health facilities. Such delays in the implementation of key project activities have affected the timely achievement of the intended project goals. The delays are partly attributed to the delays in the procurement process and to the slow pace of works by the contractors who were engaged on many other sites.

The committee thus recommends that the Ministry of Health should constantly review the operational processes of construction projects in the sector to ensure that such delays are avoided in the implementation of this new project and other on-going projects. The practice of allocating so many construction sites to one contractor should be avoided in future as well.

The committee further observed that financial management remains a challenge facing government programmes. Slow release of counterpart funding is often cited as one of the causes for low disbursements of externally borrowed funds. Under this project, Government of Uganda will contribute 10 percent of the total project cost as counterpart funding. 

The committee thus recommends that Government should ensure the timely allocation of adequate counterpart funding for this project, beginning in FY 2012/13 and thereafter, for the efficient implementation of this project. The parliamentary sessional Committee on Social Services should also follow up on this matter.

The committee further observed the limited availability of specialised health staff to handle maternal and neonatal care services in the country. Lack of medical personnel is one reason given for the non-utilisation of some of the newly constructed health centres across the country. It is envisaged that on completion of this project, additional human resources for health, that is, doctors, nurses, paramedics, technical and other supporting staff will be required to handle the increased demand for maternal and neonatal care services.

The committee recommends expeditious undertaking of the required operational and sustainability measures for the project by the Ministry of Health before and after completion of the project. The recruitment of the required additional staff and skill mix as well as creation of effective motivation and retention mechanisms for the maternal and neonatal medical staff should not be under looked.

The committee also observed that the financial impact of the project on government’s health spending will be felt mainly in terms of additional resources for maintenance of renovated facilities and repairs and replacement of medical equipment.

The committee recommends that government should scale up its commitment to increased health budget financing if the project benefits are to be sustained beyond the project’s lifespan by ensuring that the recurrent costs due to the project are timely absorbed into the national budget. Furthermore, Government should consider clearly earmarking a budget line in the Ministry of Health towards reproductive health and give it the necessary attention it deserves in order to make big strides towards achieving MDG 5, which is improved maternal health, by the year 2015.

The committee also observed that under this project, the current staff of the maternal and neonatal departments and those that will be recruited will receive further training in maternal and neonatal care according to need. This is recommendable as in-service training plays an important part in the development of human resources for health. However, it is important that this training be systematically planned as lack of systematic training programmes has resulted in most staff remaining untrained in the required medical disciplines, and in the duplication of training efforts, which leads to wastage of resources. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Health ensures that the proposed training under this project is systematically planned and implemented with limited disruption of health service delivery. 

The committee observed that civil works towards the re-modelling of a number of infrastructures in the regional referral hospitals were being undertaken by the Ministry of Health. This is commendable. Good quality civil works towards the re-modelling of Masaka and Mubende regional referral hospitals, exhibited under the Government of Uganda and that of Japan through the JICA collaboration, was further observed.

However, the committee observed that some of the constructions at health centres, though complete, had been poorly done with a number of defects ranging from sagging ceilings to big cracks in the walls. Unsatisfactory works are mainly attributed to inadequate supervision by the Ministry of Health supervisory unit and poor selection of contractors.

The committee further observed that a number of regional referral and district hospitals are still operating in dilapidated buildings due to lack of adequate funds to maintain them although efforts are being made by the ministry to set up new structures, especially under the Uganda Health Systems Strengthening project being funded by the World Bank. 

District hospitals are in desperate need of additional infrastructure improvement in order to cater for the ever increasing patient turn up. In all the referral hospitals that were visited, patients’ wards were found to be very crowded with some patients sleeping outside on verandahs. Overcrowding in the regional referral hospitals is mainly attributed to the low functionality of the lower health units, that is, the general hospitals and health centres.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health expedites the rolling out of the implementation of the Uganda Health Systems Strengthening project in the beneficiary referral and general hospitals plus the targeted health centre IVs in the beneficiary districts, so that health service delivery in these health facilities can be improved. 

Ministry of Health should also solicit for more funding to urgently support health infrastructure development in other districts that are not benefiting from the Uganda Health Systems Strengthening Project.

The committee also observed that there were few available staff houses in a number of regional referral hospitals. Less than 20 percent of staff in the regional referral hospitals were being accommodated within or nearby the hospitals. Even for those who were accommodated, the houses they were living in either required renovation or were in a dilapidated state and not fit for habitation. The lack of staff accommodation has been cited as a major cause of failure to attract and retain staff at health facilities.

Lack of accommodation also makes it difficult for staff to attend to critical patients on time and created low staff morale and lack of an enabling environment.

The committee recommends that Government urgently provides better accommodation facilities for medical workers at all health facilities in order to attract and retain medical personnel.

Funding

The committee observed that the majority of referral hospitals have major problems of under-funding. Funds allocated are inadequate to cater for the core functions of the hospitals in the face of the increasing number of patient , increasing fuel costs, and prices of other commodities. This has resulted into arrears for utilities (water and electricity).

The committee recommends that Government urgently increases funding for hospital programmes in order for them to be able to close their funding gaps and improve health service delivery.

The committee further recommends for Government to explore the possibility of subsidising utilities for health facilities.

The committee also observed that there are some health facilities that were elevated to higher service delivery status by the Ministry of Health, that is, from health centre IV to general hospital; or from general hospital to regional referral hospital; or from regional referral hospital to national referral hospital; but the legal statutory instruments to designate them had not been issued. This has hindered the restructuring of these health facilities to the new status and getting the required funds among others to be able to fulfil their missions.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health urgently works with the affected health facilities to ensure that they are issued with the required legal instruments to enable them undertake the necessary measures that will enable them access the required funds and, therefore, fulfil their missions.

Drugs, supplies, medical equipment and safety of health workers

The committee further observed that the mandate of National Medical Stores (NMS) now goes beyond supply of drugs to also include other medical equipment. However, the capacity of NMS to fulfil this new mandate is low. Furthermore, the push system of supplying drugs by NMS has faced a number of challenges that have led to the ineffectiveness of medical services in the regional referral hospitals. It was observed that in most cases what is supplied is normally not what has been ordered for.

The committee also observed that the level of protection for health workers in nearly all health facilities was significantly compromised. This is a direct result of persistent stockouts of safety gear such as gloves and other protective equipment. The most exposed cadres are laboratory technicians/assistants and midwives.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health streamlines procurement of drugs in collaboration with NMS and all health service delivery agents in the country with greater emphasis on exploring the establishment of regional drug and equipment centres by NMS. All challenges identified in the current drug and equipment procurement systems should urgently be addressed by the ministry in collaboration with all health service delivery agents.

Attraction, retention and remuneration of health workers

The committee further observed that most of the established vacancies in the regional referral hospitals were not filled up, hence, leading to a high patient: medical worker ratio. The mostly affected staffing positions were medical doctors, clinical officers, enrolled midwives and laboratory staff. The problem of limited staff numbers is not only due to lack of funds to recruit staff, but also poor manpower planning, deployment, training, transfers and retention.

The committee recommends that Ministry of Health expedites the process of recruitment to fill vacant posts in all health facilities, in order to improve the medical worker ratio. 

The lack of staff accommodation and poor remuneration which are major factors in attracting and retaining of medical personnel, should also be addressed as a matter of urgency.

Effectiveness of the referral system in the regions

The committee further observed that regional referral hospitals and general hospitals in the country lacked reliable transport means to enable them carryout evacuation of emergency cases, provide outreach services and delivery of supplies. The referral system from lower units was very ineffective. Transport availability is an essential requirement for health service delivery.

The committee recommends that the effectiveness of lower health units (health centres II, III and IV) is heavily dependent on the functionality of the referral system. Therefore, the Ministry of Health should provide health centre IIIs and IVs with functional ambulances, and push for a special budget to cater for their fuelling and maintenance. Health centre IIs on the other hand should be provided with at least two functional motorcycles and their maintenance should be provided for as well. These will be used to extend services to the communities and for emergency evacuations. 

At higher levels (district, regional and national referral hospitals), the Ministry of Health needs to consider a special budget to cater for maintenance of available ambulance services, which have largely been neglected.

In the long-term, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Health seriously considers the establishment of a holistic and well coordinated national ambulance system to guarantee the success of the national referral system. A national ambulance system is necessary for effective coordination of ambulance services in all the regions of the country.

Lastly, the committee further observed that blood transfusion services in the regional referral hospitals were terribly lacking.

The committee recommends the expeditious establishment of regional hubs for blood transfusion in all the regions of the country.

In conclusion, the committee has noted the government efforts to address health systems bottle-necks to improve effectiveness of the health sector, and especially in setting up a specialised maternal and neonatal health care unit at Mulago National Referral Hospital. This will contribute to the attainment of Millennium Development Goals targets for the health sector such as maternal and infant mortality rates.

The project will facilitate accessibility by women to specialised health services including those that address complications of people living with HIV/AIDS, emergency responses to cases of gender-based violence, increased demand for early intervention of cancer care, which has more than doubled in the past five years, and diabetes, which has a higher incidence among women. 

Generally, service utilisation rates are markedly expected to improve with the project as services will be brought closer to the community to meet the high demand for reproductive health and new-born services as a result of high fertility rates.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the committee, therefore, supports and recommends to this House to approve the government request to borrow $30.28 million from the Islamic Development Bank for financing the construction of a specialised maternal and neonatal health care unit at Mulago National Referral Hospital. I beg to report.

Mr Speaker, I do request that you allow me lay on Table the documents that I referred to earlier on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, Chairman.

MR MBAGADHI: I lay on Table a document dated 16 February 2012, and this is the brief to Parliament by the Minister of Finance. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MBAGADHI: I also beg to lay on Table the minutes of the meeting of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on National Economy held on 26 June 2012, and these are the minutes that gave rise to the report. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MBAGADHI: Mr Speaker, I also beg to lay on Table a document with the clarification on issues raised by members of the Committee on National Economy plus the responses therein.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From who?

MR MBAGADHI: This one is from the Ministry of Health, dated 1 March 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MBAGADHI: Mr Speaker, I also request to lay on Table the draft loan financing agreement between the Government of Uganda and the Islamic Development Bank. These documents are dated 27 March 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was that not laid before the House already at the time the loan request was made?

MR MBAGADHI: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, then let the records capture that.

MR MBAGADHI: I also beg to lay a document from the Ministry of Health with the artistic impression of the 320-bed hospital that we are talking about. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MBAGADHI: Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And the report itself because you did not read the entire report.

MR MBAGADHI: I also beg to lay on Table the report from the Committee on National Economy on the request by Government to borrow $30.28 million from the Islamic Development Bank for the financing of the construction of a specialised maternal and neonatal health care unit at Mulago National Referral Hospital dated June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MR MBAGADHI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairman, for this report. We will defer debate on this matter to next week on Tuesday when the minister will make some responses on these issues if required, and then we will see how to move forward.

Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have teachers and students of Entebbe Christian School represented by hon. Muhammad Kawuma, Member of Parliament for Entebbe Municipality. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. You are very welcome. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

3.04
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity to justify and clarify one thing. As Government Chief Whip, and because we have visitors in the Gallery, it is extremely important that they are informed that the House is normally full in terms of numbers except that we lost a colleague and that is why the benches appear to be empty. Nobody should go back to their constituencies thinking that once Members of Parliament get to Kampala, they do not attend to the business of the House. I thought I should make that clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Government Chief Whip.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 74.1 MILLION EQUIVALENT OF $120 MILLION FROM INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO SUPPORT THE ELECTRICITY SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

3.05
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, on behalf of the Committee on National Economy, I beg to present the report on a request by Government to borrow SDR 74.1 million equivalent to $120 million financing from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group to support the Electricity Sector Development Project (ESDP).

The request by Government to borrow the SDR 74.1 million financing from the IDA of the World Bank to support electricity was presented to this House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and accordingly referred to our committee for consideration in line with Article 90 and Rule 144 of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure.

The committee considered and scrutinised the request and now begs to report.

Methodology

Meetings were held with:

•	The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
•	The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. 
•	Technical staff from the UETCL.

The committee further studied and made reference to the following documents:

•	The project appraisal document.
•	The project implementation plan.
•	The draft loan financing agreement.
•	The minister’s brief on the loan request to Parliament.

We also undertook a field tour to Bujagali Hydro Power site where the power is being evacuated from. We looked at the resettlement sites at Kanyogoga and Magada, but also the completed Kawanda site where the power will be connected to Masaka.

Background

Uganda is currently faced with an acute electricity supply shortage and like any other country, an adequate supply of electricity is a necessary condition for continued development. Access to electricity enhances the socio-economic development of the population through better access to education, healthcare and personal security, as it facilitates development of small-scale industrial and commercial enterprises thus providing an added incentive to larger scale industrial and commercial investments in the country. 

Despite the substantial power resources, Uganda’s capacity to provide reliable, cost-effective electricity is still very low vis-à-vis the growing demands of the economy. 

The installed generation capacity of Uganda is about 580MW, with two major hydro plants at Nalubaale - 180MW and Kiira - 200MW; and the three thermal plants aggregating 170MW, mini-hydro plants of about 16MW, and co-generation from bagasse of 12MW.

The power sector of Uganda was unbundled in 2001, with the formation of three separate corporate entities: Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited, Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited and Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited. UETCL is responsible for construction, operation and maintenance of high-voltage network of 66KV and above and carries out the functions of a system operator providing bulk supply to the distribution concessionaire, UMEME. It also carries out a bulk supply tariff to the distribution concessionaire which is not cost reflective. As a result, direct and indirect support from the Government of Uganda is provided to UETCL to keep the retail tariff affordable.

On the other hand, an independent regulatory company, Electricity Regulatory Authority (ERA), has been operating since 2000. The Rural Electrification Agency (REA) was established in 2003 as a semi-autonomous agency, to facilitate achievement of the government’s targets of rural electrification.

In the background, we are attempting to explain the unbundling and the different organs, which are responsible within the framework. 

Nevertheless, the sector still faces some significant challenges which include, among others: 

1.	Lack of adequate and reliable power supply.

2.	Weak sector finances.

3.	Lack of institutional capacity to deal with such issues as integrated least cost system planning, increased access and sustainability of hydro resources. 

4.	Low level of access to electricity, at less than 10 percent overall. 

5.	High distribution system losses of more than 30 percent. 

Failure to meet the above-mentioned challenges has led to poor performance and unsustainable operations, though Government is undertaking various strategies to try and mitigate the challenges through:

1.	Continued support to both the public and private institutions.

2.	Increased electricity supply through investments in renewable and energy efficiency.

3.	Development and implementation of an updated rural electrification strategy to increase electricity access outside major urban centres. 

4.	Development of a more diversified generation mix, as well as a strong interconnected national grid with links to neighbouring countries for ensuring security of supply.

This particular loan is to do with a transmission line. Possibly next week, we shall be coming with another report, specifically on rural electrification, which is of most interest to Members. But we cannot distribute power to rural areas without having the central grid evacuation through the transmission. I know Members will be more interested in knowing what goes to particular regions. But we have another report which we will come next week, for another loan request. 

Rationale for bank involvement 

IDA has been closely involved in the development of the power sector for many years. It has supported the –

i.	Institutional strengthening and investments of the original integrated utility and subsequent unbundling of the sector;

ii.	Development of the regulatory authority;

iii.	Financing of the government investment in the sector infrastructure; and 

iv.	Helping to bring together as well as participating in major public-private partnerships such as Bujagali hydro electric power project and other areas of transmission and distribution development. 

Project development objective 

The project development objective is to improve the reliability and increase access to electricity supply in the South-Western region of Uganda.

Beneficiaries 

Residential, public, commercial and industrial electricity customers who are currently served by the existing transmission line to Masaka West sub-station, but who experience frequent and prolonged service interruptions owing to the poor condition of the line. 

I have to state that unlike earlier transmission projects, the cry in Parliament and from the public before has been the complaints by communities where the evacuation lines go through without getting any service from the project. This project will attempt to try and take care of the community’s challenges. This is why Masaka is going to benefit from the sub-stations I am going to read. 

New customers in the South-Western region of Uganda, who without the increase in transmission capacity by the construction of the 220 KV Kawanda–Masaka transmission line will be unable to receive power from the grid. That is the point I have been making. 

Potential new customers in peri-urban areas along the transmission line route, who wish to, but cannot presently be connected to the grid primarily because of high costs of connection.

Direct beneficiaries though will include:

i.	Current customers who are supplied from the Masaka sub-station and receive only intermittent electricity supply; and
ii.	New customers who will be connected on account of additional supply to be made available.

The total number of new consumers expected to be connected at the end of project implementation is estimated at 1,000 representing about 7,800 persons, of which about 3,978 are estimated to be women. So, there is a gender aspect in it. 

The project

The electricity sector development project will finance Uganda transmission sector expansion plan, focusing on priority investment needed to upgrade and reinforce supply to the south-western region of Uganda. It will finance the Kawanda-Masaka transmission line, which is an important segment of the network proposed to evacuate power from Bujagali at the same time serving as a basis for the proposed transmission interconnections to Tanzania and Rwanda, and forms part of the ring around Lake Victoria for interconnection with the East African Community grid. The proposed project fits very well within the bank’s overall engagement sector.

As the committee reported earlier that it is now fashionable to have interconnectivity between countries and because of the East African Energy Master Plan; it is important to start looking at our project not only as a Ugandan, unilateral single user, but also the possibility of interconnectivity with neighbouring countries. 

Project outcomes 

The key results of the proposed intervention are expected to be –

a.	Improved reliability of supply in Masaka on account of reduction in average transmission line outages per year and investment demands of existing customers;

b. 	Increase in supply through the Masaka sub-station as a result of the increased capacity of the transmission grid; and

c. 	Increase in the number of project beneficiaries measured by increase in access on account of the projects.

Project components 

Component A of the project will involve complementing and ultimately replacing a crumbling and unreliable 132KV transmission line between Mutundwe substation and Masaka West substation with 137Km of the new double circuit 220KV transmission line between Kawanda and Masaka West substations. 

The existing 132KV substation at Kawanda will be upgraded to 220KV to accommodate both the incoming lines from Bujagali and two outgoing lines to Masaka. At Masaka, a new substation will be built adjacent to the existing one and land for the new substation has already been procured and fenced off.

The estimated cost of this component, including resettlement, is US$ 128.3 million of which IDA financing is US$ 95 million. The other becomes counterpart funding by Government of Uganda. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, do you intend to read the entire report? 

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I can take your guidance and switch to cost financing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you do - the chairperson presented the first part - it would be helpful to the House. 

MR MUKITALE: Most obliged. I was doing it because the debate was deferred. But I can take your guidance. So, component B is 7.6 million and it is fully financed by IDA. There is a component I must mention here, the reinforcement of the transmission network, specifically the 132 KV Lira-Gulu-Nebbi-Arua transmission line. I have to mention this because the West Nile area has been in an eclipse for a long time. You have heard the complaints about the problems they have had with WENRECO. Now that Nyagak is getting ready, it is important that we mention the importance of this component. 

Component C will finance investments that are to be implemented by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. The component includes community support projects that will benefit communities and households.

Specifically the investment sub-components consist of:

a) 	Street and market place lighting in Masaka Municipality;
b) 	Peri-urban electrification along the line route, and affected areas of Kawanda and Masaka; and
c) 	Establishment of a Power Sector Information Centre (PSIC).

Others include:

a)	A review of the Power Sector Reform Programme – the technical assistance component at the bottom of page 6. You will see the consultancy support for the design and implementation of the investment sub-components;

b)	Support for the Energy and Mineral Development Sector Working Group (SWG); and

c)	Capacity building and training at the ministry.
 
The estimated cost of this component is US$ 11.8 and is fully financed by IDA.

The table on page 7 tabulates the project costs and financing. And on page 8 is the project implementation. I think I should read the sustainability, 8.0 – that is on page 8. Sustainability of the project depends on UETCL having the technical and financial capacity to meet the demand for electricity in project service areas. This requires that the Bulk Supply Tariff (BST) fully covers the cost of purchasing power from generation companies plus the prudently incurred costs of operating the transmission network. You are aware of the current cost recovery being implemented. There will be sufficient power available from the generators to supply the customers’ needs and utilise the network capacity made available by transmission components. Bujagali has since reduced that challenge. The distribution companies are able to connect new customers, collect user fees for services provided and remit payment to UETCL for wholesale power supply. And in that, the prepaid meter system becomes a commendable initiative. 

On page 9, we have the loan terms and conditions - SDR 74.1 million which is equivalent to $120 million including 10 years grace. The service charge as usual is 0.75 percent per annum and commitment fee is 0-0.5 percent. This is largely a concessional facility as per the World Bank IDA family.  

I can now read the observations and recommendations 

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that the Bujagali Hydropower Station was scheduled to start power generation on its Commercial Operations Date (COD) of June 2012, but power generation had already started prior to the COD. This is commendable. 

The completion of Bujagali Hydropower Station and the Bujagali Interconnection Project (BIP) is expected to increase electricity generation and distribution by 250MWs, hence lowering the cost of electricity, which in turn would increase the population’s accessibility to electricity. This will further boost production, create jobs, increase Government revenue, provide a clean source of energy, and preserve the environment.

Second observation

The committee, however, observed that the first phase of the Bujagali Interconnection Project (BIP) was characterised by the slow construction and installation of the power lines. This delay compromised power evacuation from Bujagali Hydropower Station due to its early start of generating power prior to its COD of June 2012. 

This negatively impacted on the benefits that would accrue to the public from the timely completion of this first phase of Bujagali Interconnection Project (BIP) as aforementioned. The major causes of the delays were attributed to the untimely handing over of the power line corridors to the contractor caused by delay in commencing the payment of compensation claims to Project Affected Persons (PAPs), increase in the number of Project Affected Persons (PAPs), delays by the office of the Chief Government Valuer (CGV) to approve valuation packages and compensation disputes arising from PAPs, disputing the compensation amounts/packages offered by UETCL.

We had earlier reported here in another phase of UETCL, when we visited the area and found that areas which had been valued at as low as Shs 300, the new owners of the titles were claiming billions. It was a very big challenge and we did condemn the speculation on Government utility, and it is already happening in other projects, including the Entebbe express highway. The moment a project is announced, speculators go for it and it disturbs the implementation. 

The committee recommends that for future projects, including this one, UETCL should ensure that it complies with its resettlement obligations by promptly compensating Project Affected Persons (PAPs) before handing the transmission corridor to the contractor.

Government should also consider recruiting optimal staff for the office of the Chief Government Valuer so as to ensure timely execution of valuation duties. For future projects, Government, in conjunction with other agencies/bodies, should plan ahead and secure corridors for transmission lines and other investments like oil pipelines and communication networks.

The committee recommends further that UETCL and NEMA should in future projects (this inclusive) strengthen the coordination capacity so as to expeditiously handle cases of PAPs claiming 
ownership/interest in the land in wetlands, to avoid stalling of projects. 

The management of UETCL should adequately sensitise PAPs on the benefits of exploring all the available grievance-solving mechanisms specified in the project design before resorting to the courts of law. Compensations should be promptly paid to PAPs to avoid rejection of packages offered due to changes in economic factors such as appreciation of values of assets and inflation.

Mr Speaker, this is still a very sensitive matter. Just last week, we were discussing the pipeline challenges as it comes to Kampala; it is also a related problem. 

Another project this Parliament passed is that of Kampala Water, where land already earmarked for a Government project, is given away by Uganda Land Commission or the District Land Board to another person and it causes conflict, and you find that projects are delaying. So, there is need to reconcile this challenge. 

The committee noted that a number of activities were taking place on the right of way, right below the high voltage electricity lines. This is caused by failure by UETCL to monitor the right of way to ensure that no activities are taking place on the secured right of way. 

Section 87 of the Electricity Act of 1999 prohibits persons without lawful permission of ERA or UETCL to work or engage in any activity within the vicinity (way leaves) of any electrical installation in a manner likely to interfere with any electrical installations or cause danger to any person or property. These activities will in future jeopardise the safety of the installations by weakening the tower footings and also endanger the lives of the people engaged in the illegal activities. Carrying out of activities by intruders in the right of way amounts to trespass and yet UETCL seems not to have taken steps to mitigate this, and yet the said activities take place during the day. There is also a risk of these intruders vandalising tower materials.

Mr Speaker, you recall that just few days ago, you guided when hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi raised the issue of CHOGM trees under electricity lines. These trees were planted by Government and yet the way leaves belong to Government; how can we have that kind of mix? It took your guidance to help people realise that these are actually way leaves, but the trees were also planted by another arm of Government. So, who is responsible for this?

The committee recommends that UETCL should strengthen the monitoring of the right of way on all its installations to ensure that no activities are undertaken in them. 

The committee observed that under this project, the Government had taken into consideration and implemented its earlier recommendation of extending benefits to the communities through which transmission lines were passing even though they were not direct project beneficiaries. I have already mentioned that this is highly commendable. We do not want a repeat of Nakasongola barracks that got power in the 1970s and the communities only got power in 2000. This is commendable and we hope that this continues to be the trend. 

The committee further noted that Uganda has one of the highest electricity tariffs in the East African region. Uganda’s current challenge in this sector is availability, cost and quality of power. The sector collects sufficient funds and yet it is unable to fully finance itself, raising reservations on UETCL’s ability to repay the loan credit to be advanced to it through the Government of Uganda.

It is recommended that UETCL uses funds generated from revenues charged to UMEME, export revenues and Government of Uganda transfers to cover its debt obligations. The maintenance of a debt service coverage ratio of 1.0 throughout the project period is recommended.

It was also noted that some projects were either disrupted or delayed due to political interference and conflicts with the technical personnel. Recommendation was made to the effect that consultation between the local leadership and technocrats be enhanced before initial negotiations of the projects takes place as this will enlighten all sides on the requirements of the populace to be served. This will lead to a reduction in conflicts. 

Here, we are highlighting a case where the technocrats of the contractors go on the ground without even informing district leaders or Members of Parliament. When they are in friction with the communities, then they want the leaders to explain. We condemn that. We would also like leaders to popularise this project and more so the distribution lines where there is no compensation.

The committee further noted the energy sector’s consistent expenditure in replacement of power lines and refurbishing of pylons due to vandalism and yet this money could be channelled elsewhere for better use. The committee recommends that the energy sector considers welding the pylon joints instead of using screws that are an easy prey to vandalism, and also sensitising the community about self policing and responsibility for public utilities. 

Honourable colleagues, this is a very big problem. We were actually told, when we were completing this report, that even when you weld they come and cut them with gas. The problem is very big. We need people to respect what we call Government property, which is also our property. It is the same with roads; wherever you put anything metallic, people want to take it for their personal use.

The committee observed that though power supply has increased considerably in the last five years, Government’s major priority in the energy sector remained focused on increasing generation and transmission capacity through construction of large and mini hydro power plants. However, power supply needs to be in tandem with higher growth rates translated into higher levels of demand for electricity.

The committee urges Government to encourage and promote the use of other energy mixes like solar and biogas especially for domestic users. Government is also urged to enhance the production and presentation of the Public Private Partnership Bill to the House in order to streamline the operations of the PPPs and promote their use in the energy sector. You realise that when we are looking for money for generation, it is big money. Bujagali was over US$ 700 million but here for generation we are talking of US$ 120 million. When it comes to distribution - that is important - we are talking of US$ 10 million. The committee finds that disturbing. We are saying that Government should do more as far as that is concerned. 

Also, if we did more biogas and solar generation, not everybody would have to be on the grid. We would then keep the other power for heavy commercial and industrial users and target people that are scattered with a self contained energy solution. 

 The committee observed that in the schedule for the proposed project financing, there seems to be duplication between the unallocated funds and the physical and price contingencies. This may lead to the abuse of these funds especially in this case, the unallocated funds. The committee recommends that in future loan negotiations, clear terms of reference be used for each item in the cost schedule to minimise on fund abuse and hence unjustifiable accountabilities.

Conclusion

Rt. Hon. Speaker and honourable members, in conclusion, the committee agrees and appreciates the Government’s need to increase access to electricity by the people. Increasing energy efficiencies in energy distribution by making improvements to the aging network is pertinent. This will improve electricity accessibility to the population’s ever increasing demand. The committee therefore recommends to this House to authorise Government to borrow Special Drawing Rights 74.1 million, equivalent to US$ 120 million, financing from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group to support the Electricity Sector Development Project (ESDP).

Mr Speaker, I want to thank you so much and I beg to move. I now wish to lay the committee report on the Table. I would also like to lay on the Table a brief to Parliament by the Ministry of Finance. I would also like to lay on Table the project appraisal document by the development partner dated May 31, 2011. I would also want to lay on the Table responses from the ministry and detailed project descriptions. I would also like to lay on the Table the loan financing draft agreement and a map of the transmission lines, which are intended to be implemented and those which are existing. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the map, the loan financing agreement, the brief to Parliament and several other documents presented by the Chair. 

Honourable members, part of the reason we had to sit today was to deal with these matters because they are urgent. They are supposed to feed into our budgetary requirements. These matters should have been dealt with before; the deadline was 7th of this month and this is the 26th	. We are late, and that is part of why we needed to handle this today. Hopefully, we will be able to pass these loans requests by next week. This has been a major step in the direction of facilitating this process. 

The two sectors are critical; electricity is critical in the development of our country. Statements have been made by the Government about some delays that have caused this shortage of power, and it is the responsibility of this Parliament to try and improve this sector. The other loan request is on maternal and neonatal care, which is critical, and the expansion of Mulago Hospital. This loan request has been outstanding. 

I am very happy that you have been here to receive this report. The debate will begin in earnest as soon as we resume next week when the House is properly constituted and we proceed with the business. The next item on the agenda will also be shelved for next week. This House stands adjourned until Tuesday 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 3.41 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 31 July 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)

