Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Tuesday, 30 July 2019

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to welcome you to this sitting. You may be already aware of the passing on of various dignitaries:

Mr Charles Byamukama, a former Resident District Commissioner and District Chairperson for Rukungiri District was laid to rest on Saturday, 27 July 2019 in his ancestral home.
Similarly, Mr Kaaya Kavuma, a former minister in the Government of Mengo, a coffee trader in Uganda and internationally, also passed on. The late Kavuma’s contribution, in the development of the kingdom of Buganda and Uganda in general, is commendable.

At the East African Regional level, Rt Hon. Dr Joyce Cherono Loboso the former Deputy Speaker in the National Assembly of Kenya and the immediate former Governor of Bomet County passed on, on Monday, 29 July 2019.

I served with Dr Laboso; she was my Co-president of ACP-EU (African Caribbean and Pacific - European Union Joint Parliamentary Assembly.) Her contribution to the socio-economic development of Kenya, Africa and indeed the developing countries, will always be remembered in the annals of history.

Kenya and the region have lost a dynamic and resourceful personality. It is strange. Maybe that is part of what life is. Dr Laboso, many years back, came through a by-election after her sister had died in office. She became the Member of Parliament for Bomet. Now she has also passed on.

On behalf of Parliament and myself, I wish to convey our heartfelt condolences and pray that the deceased secure eternal peace.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Committee on Appointments is set to meet tomorrow at 9.30 a.m. to consider nominees of the President to the Equal Opportunities Commission. 

Members of this committee should come and we finalise this business as quickly as possible. There are two members; one of whom is a continuing member. We would like to finish this business such that the Equal Opportunities Commission can be properly constituted.

Those of you who know members of the committee, who are not here, can alert them so that we have this meeting tomorrow.

Honourable members, you have seen that there is some business, which is not on the Order Paper. We thought we could schedule them properly so that we can sequentially handle most of them. The two Bills that are appearing have been on the Order Paper for a long time. I thought that we could start and finish them today so that it paves way for other business of the House to be handled. That is why some of the matters are not on the Order Paper this afternoon.

However, we shall see how to schedule such matters either tomorrow or the day after, which is mainly private members’ time.

There is a matter that the Member of Parliament for Kassanda County North would like to raise.

2.11
MR PATRICK NSAMBA: (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are experiencing serious land grabbing and land evictions in Kassanda resulting from the rush for land, which is common in the country.

Previously, as a Member of Parliament, if a person put your people on notice for eviction or sharing of land, I would run to the regional land registry and verify whether this was the right landlord so as to begin negotiations.

I have got two cases in my constituency; Lusaba and Lwantale parishes. There are two landlords who have put my people on attention that they either pay or they get evicted anytime. Unfortunately, since January, land titles were withdrawn from the regional land registry by the ministry. The officers were informed that the titles were being taken for computerisation. The period given was three months.

However, seven months have passed yet it is very hard to verify land titles especially in Mityana Regional Land Registry. When you ask the officers when they hope the land titles would be returned, they say that they do not know.

Land grabbers have used this as an opportunity to do all sorts of things. You might be aware that we have so many fictitious land titles. The only way we can verify these is through the ministry.

My prayer is that Government should respond by telling the country when the land titles are to be returned.

In the meantime, Government can put up some interim methodology of verification of titles so that everybody gets to know how to verify a given land title. Thank you.

2.15
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I am going to instruct the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to make sure that she handles the case immediately and if possible, to report to this House tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what we also need to understand is whether, if the process is computerised, we need hard copies of the land titles in the regional offices; or the computer would be able to tell the person searching on the ownership and related matters.

Also, how long will the computerisation process still take? He is presenting a kind of a stalling situation across the country.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development will inform this House tomorrow whether the computerisation exercise is completed or there are areas where they are still using the old system. I think she will be able to tell us this tomorrow because it does not require a lot of time.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My point of procedure is in respect of rules 25 and 26 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. 

At its last sitting last Thursday, the presiding officer directed the Clerk that my motion regarding seeking of leave of this House to bring a Bill titled, “The Constitutional (Amendment) Bill” be put on today’s Order Paper. Unfortunately, it is not.

I seek to know whether you cannot use your discretion and indulgence to put me on the Order Paper since I am ready to present my motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought I contained that in my communication. I said there were matters that should have been on the Order Paper which are not because we wanted to schedule the Bills, which have been pending for a long time; we finish with them and then we see what comes tomorrow. I communicated to that effect.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

2.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Mr Haruna Kyeyune): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Is it supported by attendant documents?

MR KYEYUNE: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Certificate of Financial Implications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for expeditious handling within the framework of the rules and reporting accordingly.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE PARTICIPATION OF THE NATIONAL FOOTBALL TEAM, UGANDA CRANES, AT THE 2019 AFCON (21ST JUNE TO 9TH JULY 2019) IN  EGYPT

2.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Mr Speaker, on 9 July 2019, you asked the Minister of Education and Sports to make a statement on Uganda's participation at the recently concluded Africa Cup of Nations (AFCON) in Egypt and Netball World Cup in Liverpool.

I wish first to thank the Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable members for the great support and interest that Parliament has been providing towards the development and growth of sports in Uganda. 

Members of this august House have consistently supported my ministry and the sports’ bodies through budget appropriation, interactive discussions and moral support to our sportspersons in their different sports activities.

Many colleague MPs were also in Egypt and Liverpool to support the Uganda Cranes National Football Team at the AFCON and the She Cranes at the 2019 Netball World Cup in Liverpool.

Africa Cup of Nations (AFCON) 2019, Egypt
Management of the National Team - The Uganda Cranes
The Uganda Cranes National Team is managed by the national sports governing body, Federation of Uganda Football Associations (FUFA), which is responsible for preparation of the team, sourcing of the coach, team welfare, and technical staff welfare and accrediting the team to the AFCON and other National Team engagements.

Performance of the Uganda Cranes National Team

For the first time since 1978 (when Uganda Cranes reached the AFCON Finals and lost 0-2 to Ghana), our team progressed from the preliminary group stage with 4(four) points as second best team to Egypt (9 points), after defeating DR Congo 2-0; drawing with Zimbabwe l-l ; and losing the last group game 0-2 to Egypt. This is a great achievement for which we all together should be proud to celebrate.

In the following knock-out stage of the AFCON, Uganda lost 0-1 to Senegal, a loss which for those who follow football, is not a bad one considering that Senegal is the number one ranking country in Africa in terms of football prowess. Senegal progressed to the final and lost to Algeria.

The team welfare at the AFCON was good with the team resident at the Four-Star Radisson Blu Hotel in Cairo. Accommodation and feeding was, therefore, excellent.

Team preparation was also very good; the team first camping was in Uganda (Kampala), then in Abu Dhabi for 25 days before proceeding to Cairo on 15th of June for the AFCON which commenced on 21 June 2019 and ran up to 19 July 2019.

Players Protest in Cairo

Mr Speaker, on 2 July 2019, I received a report through one of my officers, after waiting for the players to report for training at the Arab Contractors Stadium in vain that the players had not gone for training citing unpaid bonus allowances to them.

On Wednesday 3 July 2019, I moved to the team's hotel with two other officials of the ministry to meet the parties with a view to understanding the problem and reaching a resolution.

We separately met FUFA officials, the Uganda Cranes Coach, the Team Captain and other leaders, aiming at reaching an amicable solution to the issue. 

We established that the players did indeed protest, claiming FUFA had not paid them $6,000 which the FUFA leadership had pledged to provide if the team qualified to the knock-out stages, according to the players’ representatives.

FUFA maintained that it had paid out all funding due to the players including allowances in Uganda ($420 each for 14 days), allowances for Abu Dhabi camp $5,100 at $150 per day, DRC winning bonus of $4,000 and Zimbabwe game draw bonus of $2,000 per player. 

FUFA also maintained that there was no pledge or commitment to pay the players $6,000 as bonus for qualifying to the next knock-out stage.

The players’ position, through their leaders, was that there was an unfulfilled pledge and recommended that the players be paid or at least a written commitment be made by football authorities to pay them, for the players to resume training and proceed to play the next knock-out game with Senegal on 5 July 2019.

During our meeting with FUFA officials present, I wanted to establish facts about the problem, and I recommended to FUFA that if it was true about the unpaid bonuses as indicated by the players, in addition, FUFA pays the $6,000 if available to players considering the high stakes for Uganda at hand, or negotiating another lower figure to offer to the players or commit in writing to pay, which position I would have endeavoured to use to convince the players with to resume training and playing matches.

We continued to talk to the players and FUFA officials who were present in Cairo, and communicating to FUFA officials in Uganda, including the FUFA President. Following a FUFA emergency meeting in Kampala on the same day, FUFA resolved to pay the players the $6,000 and communicated through its official communication channels. The players resumed training late at around 10.00 p.m. instead of 7.00 p.m. Egypt time, and played the next match losing 0-l against Senegal.

During that period, I was already at the field trying to convince the security guards of the other side not to switch off the lights until 10 o’clock when my team came.
 
Government Funding to FUFA

Government through the Ministry of Education and Sports provided Shs 9,466,875,379 to FUFA in Financial Year 20l8/2019 as budget support for its activities, including support to the budget for the 2019 AFCON. The funds were disbursed as below - the report was uploaded to your iPads for you to look at the details of how the money was given.

The Uganda Cranes and delegation to AFCON returned on 8 July 2019 and were hosted to a dinner by H.E. the President at State House, Entebbe. H.E. the President at the dinner offered $l million to the team as an appreciation for the good job.

Mr Speaker, on the same day, my colleague, the Shadow Minister for Sports raised the issue of broadcasting AFCON games by Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC).

On this matter of UBC failure to broadcast the AFCON tournament, it was UBC's responsibility and mandate to broadcast such events. UBC is not an agency of the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

However, while in Cairo, I made effort with the FUFA President, who is a CAF member, to negotiate for telecasting rights for UBC. UBC was temporarily allowed to telecast the opening ceremony and two matches. After that they insisted that they wanted their money. 

I am however, aware, from UBC sources regarding AFCON that:

    1. UBC was not able to know in advance how much would be charged for telecasting rights. For 2017 AFCON in Gabon, the broadcast rights holder La Gardees charged US$1 million to award broadcasting rights to countries that wished to telecast.
    2. For AFCON 2019, the CAF Rights Holder African Union of Broadcasters charged 750,000 Euros which UBC did not have.
    3. I was made to understand Government approved Shs 600 million for UBC, which the rights holder could not take, as they required the full amount of 750,000 Euros paid up-front.

I would, therefore, recommend that Parliament appropriates adequate funds to UBC for such activities.

Netball World Cup 2019, Liverpool, England

The Uganda National Netball Team (She Cranes) participated in the 15th Edition of the Netball World Cup 20l9 on 12th - 21st  July at Liverpool, England.

Sixteen countries competed in the 2019 Netball World Cup tournament. The participating countries amongst others included: Uganda, Australia, New Zealand, England, Barbados, Jamaica, Northern Ireland, Scotland, Singapore, Malawi, Zimbabwe, South Africa, Fiji, Samoa, Trinidad & Tobago and Sri Lanka.

Government funding support to the She Cranes 

The She Cranes funding support towards preparations for the Netball World Cup started way back last year in 2018. Government supported the She Cranes in facilitation, their preparation and subsequent travel for the 2018 Vitality Tournament also held in Liverpool, where the She Cranes played five build up games in England from 23 November to 4 December 2018. All expenses were borne by Government from the subvention extended to the Federation totalling to Shs 1.3 Billion.

For the July 2019 Netball World Cup in Liverpool, the She Cranes was also facilitated by Government through the National Council of Sports to the tune of Shs 1,100,000,000, which catered for the team travel, accommodation and players' welfare and allowances. The money disbursed to Uganda Netball Federation for the Vitality Netball World Cup is as indicated below:

i. 	100,000,000
ii. 	350,000,000
iii. 	650,000,000
Total - 1,100,000,000

Management of the National Team - Uganda She Cranes

The She Cranes Team is managed by the Uganda Netball Federation (UNF), responsible for team preparation, welfare and accreditation to international competitions.

The UNF is one of the eight priority sports disciplines who receive direct Government budget support through the National Council of Sports. The other federations include; Athletics, Football, Boxing, Basketball, Paralympics, University Sports and Rugby.
	
Performance of the Uganda She Cranes Netball National Team

The She Cranes participated in the 2019 Netball World Cup in preliminary stage Group G, which included the following countries; Uganda, England, Scotland and Samoa.

The Uganda She Cranes qualified and proceeded to the next stage, which was a great achievement that needed applause by the Parliament, and played against Jamaica, South Africa, Malawi and Zimbabwe.

At the Placement stage, Uganda played Malawi and Zimbabwe and the results were: Malawi 55 – 44; Uganda and Zimbabwe 47 – 58 Uganda. Uganda then finished in the seventh position at the 2019 Netball World Cup.

This was a remarkable progress by the She Cranes who first made its debut in this tournament in l978 and finished in the 15th position, and then, in 20l5 edition, finished in eighth position.

Currently, Uganda Netball team is ranked sixth in the whole world, much as they finished in the seventh position. (Applause)- Yes, I was waiting for that applause. The next games will take place in 2023 and we aim to move into the top positions.

Team return from Liverpool

The team returned on Tuesday 23 July 2019 and on arrival, the First Lady and Minister of Education and Sports hosted the team to a welcome dinner at State House, Nakasero and offered each team – mark this, because it is not a bonus – transport back home of Shs one million.  The issue of bonus is something that we are still handling. 

Conclusion

I once again thank the Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable members who personally supported the teams in Egypt and Liverpool. We had more than 10 members of Parliament in Liverpool; majority of which were women, who came to support the She Cranes. That was a very good spirit led by their captain or chairperson.  

Also, in Egypt, equally, the members of Parliament were there cheering from the first whistle to the last one. Please keep it up. (Applause)

I would like to also thank Parliament for your un-wavering support to sports development in this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. This is a ministerial statement. It attracts a debate, but we need to agree that it will not take a full hour because I have two Bills, which I need to finish. Can we start debate on this ministerial statement? I will pick the members who are already standing now and then we proceed from there. Each member will take two minutes. 

2.34
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for coming up with this statement. 

It was very interesting to see the Uganda flag flying among the 16 flags of the entire world. As we were nearing Liverpool, there were very few flags and ours was amongst them. I would like to salute the She Cranes for taking Uganda up to this level. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, the game of netball is not an easy one. When you look at the entire continent of Africa, right from the East, North, Central and to the West, you will notice that it was only Uganda that really participated at the global level. The rest of the African countries were South Africa, Malawi and Zimbabwe. Hence, for Uganda to represent the continent right from the East, Central, North and then West, is something that I would like to say that the country deserves something a little better than this.

Much as the She Cranes have been putting in a lot of effort, I would like to speak with a heavy heart that the support given to them is wanting. We are in the era of gender parity but I would like, as the captain of the netball in Parliament here, to really –(Member timed out.)

2.36
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to extend my thanks to the minister and congratulate him for the efforts they have put in. Further, I would like to applaud our team; the National Netball Team or She Cranes - I used to belong to the national team but it was not called the She Cranes at that time. 

I want to supplement on what hon. Alum Santa has said about facilitation for netball. It looks like all women activities are underrated because whenever we go to the world, whether it is She Cranes or the Cranes team, we put our country on the World map. 

Therefore, I would like to appeal to the Government –(Interjection)– when they came back; they were given Shs 1 million each but what did members of the Cranes team get? The Cranes team gets more all the time. 

We were disappointed by either the Federation of Uganda Football Associations (FUFA) or the Ministry of Education and Sports because of the embarrassment that they caused us while in Cairo. I think that should never happen again. Why do we wait until the last minute? Why do we send our boys when they are not happy? That last game where we failed, I am sure the boys were not happy. If they did not do it, they would not have got their dues. Why should we be held at ransom?  

2.39
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister of Education and Sports for presenting the report. In a special way, I would like to thank the shadow education minister, who is equally very supportive whenever issues of sports come up. 

Further, I would like to add on from where hon. Rose Mutonyi stopped. When these boys do not get closer with the people – money cannot solve everything but if they can have that closer touch, they would play well especially when assured that they would be paid. 

Otherwise, late planning is the problem to our country because it is not only affecting sports but everything; we always have crash programmes. That is why these boys prefer to go when they are paid. The ministry should plan ahead if we are to effectively get a better position. 

Anyhow, I would like to thank the Cranes and the She Cranes, for the wonderful performance they exhibited. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

2.40
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also wish to thank the minister for presenting the statement. Also, in a special way, I would like to thank the education shadow minister for prompting the minister to come up with a ministerial statement.

We have always lamented that what is given to our players at different tournaments is very small. We need strategic planning. I was amazed when the players in Cairo rioted because they had not got enough pay. While they surely needed more, there was a bag in Kampala with $1 million waiting for them. Why was that money given to them after being beaten out of the tournament? 

I wondered why the President would wait until Uganda Cranes was out of the tournament to give them the money? They were complaining that they wanted money to play better but that money could not reach Cairo. What we need is strategic planning. Otherwise, we seem to be having enough resources to cater for what we don’t cater for.

Mr Speaker, the level of interest is only shown in the level of our participation. I was in Cairo; the highest ranking government officials were either deputies or state ministers yet we watched a football match with the President of Madagascar and Uganda Cranes were -(Member timed out.)

2.42
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, whereas we celebrate the achievements of our boys and girls, both at AFCON and World Cup, there are about three specific challenges that we need to address as a country in order for us to go higher.

When we talk about facilitation and you look at the boys and girls - the girls who are currently ranking No. 6 in the whole World, in my opinion, were less facilitated compared to the boys who even went on strike; the figures can show. That means that as a country, we need to prioritise certain disciplines within the sports subsector. 

Three disciplines have so far done so well - netball No. 6 or 7 in the World, football we are waiting for the latest ranking, athletics and boxing we are doing well. Why wouldn’t we prioritise where we have a continental or world prowess? 

The first challenge is funding. We are not planning for these teams. Under football, there are about five different teams; the senior team under 17, 20, 23 and the women’s team; they are many yet our funding is ad hoc; we need to fund these various disciplines in time.

The second challenge is infrastructure. We used to hear about Akii Bua Stadium, Bugembe Stadium and the famous Kakyeka Stadium in Mbarara. Where are they? Look –(Member timed out.)

2.45
MS ANITA AMONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will continue from where hon. Denis Obua has stopped. The issue of infrastructure in football is still a challenge. For example, instead of our people going to camp in another country, they would be camping in Uganda to reduce on the costs. See what hon. Moses Kasibante was saying about the representation we had in Cairo. 

We must thank Parliament for sending us to Cairo to represent the country but next time you send people to represent the country be mindful of the characters. We got a problem in Cairo where Members of Parliament lit fireworks and FUFA was fined $10,000 or else, not to play. 
I expected the minister in his report, to report about that. It was an embarrassment to the people who were there. Members who were there can bear me witness to that, which is really a bad thing for Uganda – (Interruption)
 
MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I led a team of members of Parliament to Cairo. The procedural matter I am raising is that our Rules of Procedure provide that when a Member makes a statement in relation to another Member, the name of the Member should be mentioned. It is true that fireworks were lit in the stadium but I think it is correct that it goes on record and I think that should have come from the minister. 

However, in the circumstances, we would want to know who the Member is and the implication on Ugandan football.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is proper. Would you like to give us details about what you meant, honourable Member?

MS AMONG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I even expected my brother, Odonga Otto, to bring it as the leader of delegation. However, since he has asked, the Shadow Minister of Sports and Creative Arts, hon. Allan Ssewanyana, is the one who lit the fireworks. It could have been in good faith but it did not go down well with the Government of Egypt and that is why FUFA was fined.

2.48
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to take this chance to thank the minister for the report. I think their emphasis on the lack of or inadequate funding for sports has always come on the Floor of Parliament. As Government, we need to see how to plan better – as somebody has already said.

Mr Speaker, when individuals perform and excel the joy is always ours as a country. Therefore, the country should really look into the issue of the funding for sports.

Last week, I came across some women who said they wanted to petition Parliament to raise the issue of Paralympics. Whereas other sports are being funded, Paralympics seems to be the most neglected. Those women even said that those who go for Paralympics games sponsor themselves. There was one who said she was trying to look for support for a 12-year old lady who is supposed to represent Uganda in Allianz in swimming. When I tried to interact with them, they said it is supposed to be individual effort. 

Therefore, I would like to take this chance to inquire from the minister; what is the status of funding for Paralympics sportsmen and sportswomen?

2.50
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister. We had some Ugandans who were not supporting our team and that was unprecedented. At least for me, I even predicted on radio that we were going to win the first match and we did so.

Mr Speaker, internationally, the reason teams go to camps is to avoid people interfering with their preparations. In Ugandan football, wherever the team goes to camp, you see people on social media meeting the team. Some of these people have bad luck. (Laughter) They meet the team and that is not fair. I pray that next time some of those people should not go. It is not anywhere but only in Uganda –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, do you have a list of all those people with bad luck? (Laughter)

MR SSEWUNGU I know them. 

Mr Speaker, on the issue of UBC, the accounting officer or the person in charge must explain better. UBC was going to make more money than what was needed by the Confederation of African Football (CAF) because we were going to run adverts. Imagine Ugandans missing to watch football because people failed to pay €750,000! This television station is not doing very well financially and where it was supposed to get opportunities, nothing was done. That was poor planning and hon. Frank Tumwebaze must come here and explain why we failed to watch football.

I would like to congratulate the ladies’ team. This was my first time to watch netball on TV –(Member timed out.)

2.52
MS JANE NABULINDO (Independent, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the She Cranes and Uganda Cranes for raising our flag.

Mr Speaker, the people of Busia are requesting the Ministry of Education and Sports to at least build for us a stadium in recognition of the work of our beloved goalkeeper, Denis Masinde Onyango, as they did for Akii-Bua and built a house for Inzikuru. Minister, please, respond. (Laughter)

2.53
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for the statement and congratulations to Uganda Cranes for reaching the last 16.

Mr Speaker, there are some areas for improvement, especially on the parts of Government and FUFA. There is need for motivation of our players, encouragement, morale boosting, teamwork, cohesion, harmony, cooperation and unity.

Mr Speaker, of late FUFA has been getting a lot of money. For instance, annually, FUFA gets Shs 739 million from CAF, Shs 5.5 billion from FIFA, Shs 10 billion given by Government and Shs 30 billion cash prize. These are the estimated total revenues that FUFA receives. There are also other corporate sponsorships from Star Times, Airtel, National Insurance Corporation, Stanbic Bank, Eco Bank, UTB, Bet Lion and so forth. Let the Government and FUFA harmonise issues related to football so that next time we can do better. 

Why did our best –(Member timed out.)

2.55
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank both teams that represented us in Africa and the world as a whole. We have about 43 disciplines in Uganda, which are supposed to participate in various sports. However, the Government budget is about Shs 14.2 billion. Out of that, Shs 10 billon goes to FUFA and the rest of the other disciplines share Shs 4.2 billion. Athletics takes Shs 1 billion and Shs 3.2 billion is shared among the other 40 disciplines. 

I request the Government to support sports more. To represent even your own village is a big achievement because you have about 100 people in the village and you should be proud to be number one in the village. That is why I am saying we should be proud of the Uganda Cranes and the She Cranes who represented us.

When these sportsmen and women are leaving, they should be told how much they will get because that is why sometimes they have ended up striking in foreign countries and shame us. 

Before they left, they were told that they would receive $150 in three days and later the promise was not fulfilled that is why it turned into shame.

Honourable minister, the athletes are leaving on 25 September to Doha Qatar; they should be informed how much they will receive and what they will achieve after winning so that we do not shame our country in a foreign land.

2.57	
MR ODONGA-OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Tourism, hon. Kiwanda Geoffrey, who alongside Uganda Cranes organised a big tourism expo for Uganda; all around the stadium was about the Nile, and for inviting investors and donors. I think that went a long way in marketing the country.

Secondly, I do not know who to tell but through you; the minister of education was not in charge of the delegation, by the time the strike was in the Cranes’ camp, hon. Bakabulindi was not there.

It took a lot of effort for us to persuade him to go and talk to the players; so this culture of picking any minister who does not know anything about sports -(Interjection)- yes hon. Nakiwala was the head of delegation, but she was not in charge completely and does not understand the psychology of players.

The appointing authority should be advised that next time when he is picking a head of delegation, it should be the line minister –(Interruption)
	
MS AMONG: Hon. Nakiwala was not there as a minister of education but as the Vice-President 3 of FUFA.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you; however, when there was a problem in the Cranes’ Camp it took the intervention of the minister Bakabulindi to solve the problem 12 hours later. By the time we entered our game I knew that we would lose because the players and the fans were not in the right mood.
 
We personally, as Members of Parliament, failed to seek audience with hon. Nakiwala because the way they positioned themselves in Egypt, you could not even say hullo to them. The closest I got was 20 metres; they just waved from a safe distance.

Lastly, to correct the information hon. Kasibante gave; the US$1 million dollars was given by State House before and after the match; that should be on record.

They gave the $1 million before going to Cairo and after coming back they gave a bonus of $1 million; I was personally present. Let us put the record straight; it is not that the money was given after the loss; we need to give credit where it is due, thank you, so much.

3.00
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. In whatever you do, when you are in bad mood, you will never produce anything good.
	
Remember we have been at school doing exams and when you enter an examination room when you are in bad mood the results will not be good. We should have avoided our players from going to the playground in bad mood. Why did they go on strike? They did that to put Uganda at ransom and we got embarrassed. 
	
They knew that if they had not done that they would not have gotten the money. Why do we wait until the last moment? We celebrated Kiprotich when he sat up there; we have celebrated and clapped when he brought in gold; but why don’t we prepare.

Look at these stadia in the country like Mbale Stadium, Kapeeka, Gulu, Aki-Bua Stadium, they are in terrible conditions.

How do we promote football when we cannot have any game in these stadia and you expect Uganda to go out there and do wonders? We have got to prepare.

Even the athlete’s stadium that was supposed to be worked on in Kapchorwa has never been finished. How can we wait until these players come with gold and we start celebrating, we must put in money. 

Honourable minister, you must get out of the office, tour the country, look at these stadia and make sure they are repaired and prepared for games in future. We cannot even host the East African Challenge Cup here because we have no stadia –(Member timed out.) 

3.02
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank my colleague the Minister of State for Sports, hon. Bakabulindi for the elaborate statement. Indeed, what you said was what happened apart from a few prayers of mine which you have not answered as well.

I asked for an investigation committee on issues of corruption allegations in the Federation of Uganda Football Association (FUFA) because the financial scandal came due to the corruption in the federation.
	
There are a few Members of Parliament here who have now taken over the Federation of Uganda Football Association - they blackmail FUFA for finances. One wonders why the Cranes were given US$1 million dollars and netball was given Shs 1 million for each player. 

There are members of Parliament here who connive with FUFA and blackmail Government in expectation of a kickback going through FUFA into their pockets.

In my substantiation –(Interjection)– it is not an allegation; I am very sure that hon. Anita Among has got something to do with FUFA finances. That is why in my prayers, I came up with a suggestion of a committee to investigate those corruption allegations in the federation –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order.

MS AMONG: Mr Speaker, I think the honourable member, I wouldn’t want to say that he is getting out of his senses, but I cannot state that the US$1 million that was given by the President was given by anybody else. They were given US$1 million when they went to Lesotho.

Secondly, when they came back the President invited the team for a dinner and they were still given US$1 million which was not paid by FUFA, but State House directly to their accounts.

Is the honourable Member of Parliament in order to say that we get kickbacks - because I am not a poor honourable Member of Parliament like anybody else that I would go and ask for a kickback.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is critically important that in whatever we say or do, we keep the integrity of this House and where it is not absolutely necessary, it is not proper to make allegations that dent the image of this House.

Unless you are absolutely sure that such a thing has happened you should never make such allegations - unless the member is absolutely sure with evidence, I ask him to withdraw that statement. 

MR SSEWANYANA: Mr Speaker, let me substantiate. I am not withdrawing that statement because I am the Shadow Minister of Education and Sports. I am concerned with every single coin that is given to the sports sector. I have to look at it with keen eyes. That is why I asked that since there are allegations of corruption in the federation – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, my request was very specific. Please, deal with it.

MR SSEWANYANA: I have the evidence, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then present it.

MR SSEWANYANA: Okay. When an investigation committee is set up, I will be ready to table that evidence before it. For the meantime, I withdraw the statement. Thank you.

Mr Speaker, -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA: Mr Speaker, hon. Allan Ssewanyana contested to be the FUFA President with Mr Magogo and he got one vote, which could have been his -(Laughter)- he then wrote a letter to FIFA, asking them to block any funding to Uganda because there was corruption in FUFA. Therefore, in the circumstances, is it procedurally right for hon. Allan Ssewanyana to continue submitting on a matter he has interest in? 

Basing on your guidance, at an appropriate time, I would like to move a motion that he should no longer be heard on this issue. I beg your indulgence, Sir. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know we should not abuse the privilege of the microphone and the speeches we deliver in this House. I know it is only us who can have that moment to address this House but each time one gets the privilege, they should use it properly and with decorum. 

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to hon. Ssewanyana with great concern. In his prayers, he wishes Parliament to investigate corruption in FUFA. However, even for us, as Members of Parliament, who belong to sports, we equally feel we need to probe how sports activities are run in this Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the procedure?

MR MBAWTEKAMWA: Okay, would it not be procedurally right, now that hon. Allan Ssewanyana is requesting that we need to investigate what is transpiring in FUFA, that we also investigate what is happening in the committee that chairs sports; how people are selected to go abroad and how money is being utilised? Would it not be procedurally right to combine the two? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have an institution in this House that manages the business of Parliament. It is called the Parliamentary Commission. Some of the issues you are raising, which relate to the internal management of situations would better be addressed by it. The Parliamentary Commission should never be moved by this House to do that. All you need to do is to raise this matter with the head of this institution, and then administratively, they will commission somebody to look into the concerns. That is not a matter for the House. 

Also, the way I understood hon. Ssewanyana - maybe he said it earlier - today, however, he said he had requested for an investigation but he did not state who was supposed to do the investigation. My understanding was that it should have been the officials from Government to do the investigation. I did not have a background. He did not; you specifically say Parliament should investigate. So, let us not move to where we should not or put words where they have not been made. 

MR SSEWANYANA: Thank you for your wise ruling, Mr Speaker. In the statement given by the minister, there were signs of unrealistic funding to the various sports priorities, in this case, netball. Earlier on, Government mentioned that netball was one of the priority sports in this country yet they, together with boxers, have been coming to my office to complain about the improper funding.

The spirit shown by Government in London was not the same spirit they showed when they came back to Kampala. The Government gave $1 million then but this time, they gave only Shs 1 million. It is not because they are women. 

For me, when we advocate for sports funding, as Members who are interested in sports, we think things should move well in all the various sports disciplines. I belong to the sports fraternity particularly football but I am equally concerned about the poor funding to the other sports entities. 

Mr Speaker, for your information, Mr Odonga Otto is right. I have interest to be the President of the Federation of Uganda Football Association because I own a football club. So, I have that right to be the federation’s president –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I think – 

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wanted to give a point of order when the Shadow Minister of Education and Sports said he has interest – he has just made a statement here - I have to put it on record here that I question his interest because when he went to Egypt, he was one of the people who caused disgrace to Government and other football lovers in the world by putting into question the integrity of Ugandan fans. He went with un-allowed substances into the pitch that led security to surround him.

So, is he in order to come here to insinuate that he has interest in football at even higher levels when he is a disgrace to the Government while in other countries?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it in issue or doubt that he has interest in football? Is there anybody doubting that fact? (Laughter)

3.15
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate the She Cranes and the Uganda Cranes teams. Just like other people have observed, let us not marginalise women. A lot of us are here in affirmative positions but we see this marginalisation taking place when we have very clear policies, which the Minister of Education and Sports should take on. The way you treated the She Cranes was not right. Do not -(Interjection)- Yes. You are the minister and you need to plan better.

I would like to observe that sports are not given the due attention it deserves in this country. I remember when we were in primary school, children competed in football and netball regionally and the rest of it. However, these days it is not there yet we know that God gives people different talents. There are people who are gifted around the area of sports. Therefore, if we can exploit the potential that they have, that is where they will always earn their living. Let us prioritise sports, especially netball and football.

Recently about a week ago, I went to close a scout’s camping and this is part of the extracurricular activities which have been abandoned in education. They do not fund scouting yet we have young girls and boys who should learn the skill of sacrifice and voluntarism from that kind of sport or extracurricular activities. Let us prioritise it but also have initiatives to fundraise for sports.

I would like to thank you but let us pull up our socks as Ugandans and help our people better. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers from Kitoogo Primary School in Kyamuswa, Kalangala District. They are here to observe the proceedings; please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are very welcome.

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. And I thank the Members who have contributed. I will try to be brief; where an issue has been raised several times, I will answer it once.

Mr Speaker, let me first put this record right. I am responding to a question that was raised by the shadow minister for me to come with the report. He was smart to give me the areas of my concentration but he did not put the behaviours. Otherwise I knew it would come up in the debate.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, allow me to thank the honourable members that have helped me to develop sports in this House. Sports are a matter of lobbying. Hon. Anite, hon. Obua, hon. Otto and so many have been participating. Therefore, I do not call it corruption. You cannot do without lobbyists. What they have been doing should continue to support them to carry on. We lobby for sports from different angles and I like that and will come in.

Mr Speaker, you have heard of the investigations as alleged. I do not deal with allegations; I deal with facts then we investigate. However, as far as the corruption in FUFA is concerned, I will wait for the opportunity when a body is put in place and maybe people come with their clear points about the corruption. I cannot stand here and accuse anybody of corruption.

Secondly, much as I agree with the Members about the support of the netball team not having been given a correct or right amount, I agree and we are doing our level best - however, when I was reading  some more, the eight - including Paralympics. When we are looking at some disciplines, some of us who have been in this arena for some time - because I was once a team manager - when you are looking at FUFA, you are looking at the national team alone and not the Under-17 and Under-21 yet all of them were participating in different activities. As we speak now, there is a team which has just come back.

Therefore, preparation of the teams is not one but a package of different teams. We had to consider that too. I totally agree with you that my budget is not enough; if we are to produce something better, we need more money and where I have to come is here in Parliament.

Secondly, hon. Kasibante said that when he was in Cairo, other countries came with people of high calibre and what have you. The head of delegation for the AFCON from Uganda was the Third Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, who went with me. Of course that is a high post and the minister in charge of sports.

Hon. Nakiwala led the team as the deputy president and we were in touch and collaborating. It should be clear because selecting the leader of delegation is the responsibility of Government and I was the leader after hon. Kirunda returned. Therefore, there is no question about that.

Let me go back to the issue of Paralympics. 

Mr Speaker, Members need to keep on checking with us before they raise an issue. Paralympics is one of the eight priorities. Secondly, my colleague you are right. You raised an issue of a swimmer of Paralympics, even the lady who is moving around was in my office this morning. 

I sent her to the National Council for Sports and she has just come from somebody with one swimmer. There is a way we are handling it because she is one. There is no way we can marginalise Paralympics because it is crucial and important. Under Paralympics, there are different bodies. It is not like football or netball. It is not one but they are different groups but we are handling.

My colleague from Mbale said that the minister should not sit in office but should move around. I do not want to say that I am rare because of that; you know how much I move around. Even before I came to this House, I was at Lugogo when the market footballers were playing against Bukedde.

We are identifying talent everywhere. These fields you are talking about in the country, there is no corner where I have not reached. I know. What is important is money and not seeing. You give me the money and we construct the stadium. Therefore, I am moving.

Mr Speaker, it is good that these issues have been raised so that we get more funding for different federations. Uganda is gifted with talents. You have now seen in netball that we are ranked No.6 in the whole world. My presence in Liverpool was crucial because I had several meetings with the girls to morale boost them so that they play the way you saw them on the television.

I do not want - hon. Kasibante let his issue about the one million dollars be clear. The facilitation for the players had nothing to do with the one million dollars on the second route. That was an appreciation from His Excellency which is so good –(Applause.) The issue that almost sparked a strike - and I had to come in - was not the issue that had been put down. However, when I realised that it is an issue we need to settle and we are liaising in Kampala, it was settled and they came for training.

Now, losing to Senegal, I was a footballer and a team manager –(Interjection)- was it a question mark to you? Senegal which qualified for finals and is No.1 in Africa? It was not because the boys got the money late. By the way, the leader of the team is here and can tell you; the players got enough money even before they left. 

These allowances stages should be understood. There is an allowance for a draw and that for a win. You cannot get an allowance for a win when you have lost. However, there was money which was given at the forefront. Therefore, you need to follow all this history so that you can understand. However, thanks to God, the situation was controlled by a competent person who is speaking -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please conclude.

MR BAKKABULIDI: Mr Speaker, I have heard the concerns of my colleague from Busia. Indeed, Mr Masinde Onyango is a great goalkeeper for Uganda. This is one of the issues my ministry will discuss and see how it can be handled. 

I can assure you that after welcoming the netballers, they got Shs 1,000,000 as transport back home. As for an appreciation for that game that made us proud, it is something that we are still organising - (Applause) - we know the role netball played. It made us happy.

Before I forget, allow me to state that on behalf of the Government of Uganda, I would like to thank the community of Ugandans in Liverpool and Manchester. You saw them on television; they were with us throughout. They even hosted the team. We got support from our sisters and brothers there.

I think this is the spirit that we should keep whenever we go out, to keep our flag rising.

I would like to thank hon. Kasibante; you supported and behaved very well in Cairo. I do not have any problem with you. (Applause) 

Hon. Odonga Otto and colleagues supported, danced and morale boosted the team. 

Dear colleagues, let us keep the fire burning. We have the potential in Uganda. Just release enough money and you will see everything moving on well. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members, for the good debate. Honourable minister, what I did not want you to say and for this country to believe you have said is that the Cranes cannot defeat Senegal. How can you say that?

MR BAKKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, I would like to apologise; the Uganda Cranes can even beat France, but we did not make it that day. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. We can get to the next item. 

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON THE NEED FOR GOVERNMENT TO SALVAGE THE SCHOOL FOR THE DEAF IN WAKISO DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this urgent matter arose under rule 46, by the Member of Parliament representing people with disabilities in Eastern Uganda. Therefore, it is a response under rule 46 but not a ministerial statement.

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I told you, before I came here, I was coming from the field. The technical people on that particular area were preparing a report for me, which I have not received up to now.

However, I promise that if they bring the report any time before the closure of this session, I will submit it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We do not require a report; we need to know if the school is revamped and it is up.

MR BAKKABULINDI: What I got from the technical people is that the Ministry of Education and Sports sent the technical people there and the situation is under our control.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: All we would like to hear is that they have fixed all those things.

MR BAKKABULINDI: They have gone there and are working on it. It is under our control. I will be giving the report to my colleagues who are representing the people with disabilities very soon; even by tomorrow. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION BY RESIDENTS OF KIRYANDONGO DISTRICT OVER THE UNLAWFUL EVICTION WITHOUT ADEQUATE COMPENSATION AND RESETTLEMENT

3.30
MS HELLEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

I am moving this petition to Parliament under Rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

The humble petition of the residents of Kibyama, Mpumwe, Kiroko, Bunyama, Nyamakere and Kibeka; all in Kibanda County Kiryandongo District, over the unlawful eviction from their ancestral homes without adequate compensation presented by myself: 

It shows and states that:
Your humble petitioners comprise of over 1,000 homesteads in various villages of Kingangara, Mpumwe, Kibyama, Kiroko, Bunyama, Kahara, Nyamakere and Kibeka; all in Kiryandongo District. They are aggrieved by the action of the Government of Uganda in evicting them from their land without compensation. 

Some of your petitioners had legal interests in the land comprised on present day Murchison Falls National Park, Karuma Wildlife Reserve, Ranch No.11 and used to derive their livelihoods therein.

Without any colour of right, in a bid to extend the game reserve and establish the former Palestinian farm land and the Uganda People’s Defence Force (UPDF) Kiroko Farm Land, Government unilaterally, without due consultation and compensation evicted them from their ancestral land.

That some of the Nubians who were displaced after the fall of Gen. Idi Amin migrated to Kiryandongo and have remained landless to date.

Your humble petitioners further state that over 350 families were brutally evicted from Karuma Wildlife Reserve in 1999 without compensation as required by the Constitution. (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. This House acquired and developed knowledge and mechanisms of presenting petitions where it is a specific requirement under the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. 

Therefore, are we proceeding well when the honourable member reads the entire petition contrary to the usual practice of stating the prayers and the names of those who signed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the member was proceeding properly because that is how we have been presenting petitions. (Applause)
You state the petition and the prayers.

MS KAHUNDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, let me do this recognition before you proceed.

Honourable members, in the Distinguished Members Gallery this afternoon is a delegation of members and staff of Parliament on the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Diseases from the Parliament of Zimbabwe. They include:

    1. Hon. Mkhwanazi Zama - leader of delegation.
    2. Hon. Angeline Tongogara
    3. Hon. Keresencia Chabuka and
    4. Mrs Edna Mufuruse.

They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Honourable, proceed.

MS KAHUNDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Your humble petitioners sought redress from the Office of the President, Office of the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development who acknowledged the problem and made proposals for resettlement, compensation and gazettement. However, they have not fulfilled any to date.

The petitioners contend that the Masindi District Local Government Authorities investigated this matter and established that the functional rights of the petitioners were violated. 

Despite several promises and discussions, Government has up to date failed to implement the proposals for swapping of the Nyamakere and Kibeka Forest Reserves for the resettlement of the evicted households to Ranch No.11 and providing adequate compensation to the victims.

The petitioners contend that the anticipated compensation following a promise by the President has attracted fraudulent people who are encroaching and claiming people’s land hence heightening tension and insecurity in their areas.

THAT your humble petitioners have since established that the alternative land available in Ranch 11 has been encroached on by veterans, who claim to have a certificate of title to the said land;

YOUR  humble petitioners submit that the Government has failed to apply equity in compensation and resettlement of the people in Bunyoro and as such, renders them with no redress and that the Government has failed to take into account that their grievances constitute a historical injustice which calls for national attention;

YOUR humble petitioners further contend that as a result of the above omissions, commissions, inactions, negligence and neglect by the Government, they have remained unprotected and discriminated against.

Mr Speaker, your humble petitioners pray that:

    i. Parliament directs Government to extradite the resettlement of the evicted residents from the Murchison Falls National Park and the swapping of Nyamakera and Kibeka Forest Reserve.
    ii. They also call upon the Government to expedite and streamline the compensation of the households affected by the unlawful eviction in Karuma Wildlife Game Reserves.
    iii. That Parliament directs the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the honourable Minister of Lands to provide a status report on the promises made by the Government in addressing the land wrangles in Kiryandongo District.
    iv. This Parliament directs the honourable Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to provide a status report on the registered owner of Ranch 11- the former Bunyoro Ranching Scheme.
    v. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister explains to Parliament the measures being taken to resettle the Nubian community and other landless people in Kiryandongo District.
    vi. That the honourable Minister for Defence and Veteran Affairs explains how veterans acquired land that was already identified and earmarked by Government for the resettlement of the evicted people. And
    vii. That this petition be dealt with immediately in view of the urgency and gravity of the issues raised.

And your humble petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray and here appended are their signatures as attached.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the copy of the petition together with the signatures on the Table.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, the petition stands referred to the appropriate Committee on Natural Resources to look at and advise the House.

However, I have challenge with some of the prayers in the petition. For example, the one that the Prime Minister should explain the issue of the Nubian community - would that require committee inquiry? 

Then the one on directing the Prime Minister to instruct the minister of lands - would that require a committee inquiry? I thought that would be matter of direct questions to the minister and a matter of direct question to the Prime Minister so that we do not have to burden the committee with those prayers. 

I think the specific prayers are the ones that require some investigations to be carried out. Therefore, those prayers that are about directives and explanations should not be sent to the committee. Only prayers that require an element of investigation are the ones I substantially refer to the committee to find out and respond. 

Now that the Member says that the matter is urgent, the committee should gear up and report to the House within 15 days. The rules say 45 days, but can we do this in 15 or 20 days? Let us make an exception because of the urgency of this matter. If they are not able to, they can make further request so that the period can be extended. Thank you. The petition is accordingly referred with those modifications. 

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I need an update on this Bill. Was this motion moved for second reading? 

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Mr Speaker, the motion was moved and the committee report was presented. What was pending was the discussion of committee report before we go to the committee stage.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was it for debate? The motion was moved for second reading, seconded and spoken too. Did we debate the motion?

MS NAMUGWANYA: No, we did not debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion was not debated. Did the committee report?

MS NAMUGWANYA: No, the committee report was not debated but it was presented.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was presented because we do not debate committee reports, but the motion. The report was presented therefore, to guide the House on how we conduct the debate - okay, can we start debate? Debate continues now on the motion for second reading of the Bill and the motion is - if I can remind you - the question that I propose for your debate is that the Bill entitled, “The Kampala Capital City Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read the second time and debate continues now. We will start from Buliisa.

3.42
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for presenting the report. However, my primary concern is that in 2010 when the Kampala Capital City Authority Act was put in place, from the stage of the First Parliamentary Counsel and this Parliament, we expected a Greater Kampala Metropolitan law.

Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) has had challenges to operate outside the old traditional KCC. Even when we attempted to improve transport, the buses going to Entebbe, Mukono, Mpigi had problems. 

Therefore, my first preliminary contention is that to just continue pursuing the smaller KCCA without looking at the greater bigger Kampala, we are going to have problems in terms of planning, collaboration with neighbours and this has even made it difficult for us to have the structural plan of the greater Kampala. This matter has also been in other committees.

Therefore, in line with the National Physical Development Plan, you will find that we cannot continue with the Kampala Capital City Authority Act which we are trying to amend without looking at the bigger intentions - you remember when we made that law in 2010, there was this contention of a takeover of Kampala as opposed to planning.

I would like to plead with Government and the Ministry to have the stamina and the courage so that we deal with the bigger greater Kampala Metropolitan because the development is natural and it is going on. Kampala is connecting with Mukono, Entebbe, Mpigi and even Bombo. Therefore, the earlier we deal with the greater Kampala law the better than just amending the old KCCA when we know that we have already had hurdles dealing with the smaller Kampala.

The issue of Mengo must be brought in seriously and we can talk to Buganda Government and agree because this is not only for Buganda but also for Uganda. In addition, Uganda being a Republic, we must have courage. If it requires national dialogue, why not? Can we dialogue on this matter? Thank you, so much.

3.45
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to make one comment. The minister has told us that the report was brought and everything ready. Maybe, I am the only one not seeing this report properly on my iPad. Members needed to internalize this report properly. There are pertinent issues – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that report was uploaded on the iPads last year; so please scroll down. 

MR AOGON: Okay, I will do that. 

Mr Speaker, there was one contentious thing; the issue pertaining to the election of the Lord Mayor. I read that report and I contained it in my brain, unless you have changed something. That is why I was complaining about this. 

In the report, the councillors are the ones to elect the Lord Mayor. My question was: If we are maintaining that position, are you not stamping the powers of the people, who should be electing their own leaders? It is a system that we cannot employ in only KCCA while the rest continue electing people in a different format. 

In my opinion, it would not be proper for us to subject the people of Kampala to that kind of treatment, where they elect somebody to go and elect for them another person. I do not think it will make a lot of sense. 

Mr Speaker, there are issues in KCCA. Recently, somebody complained about the staff resigning. We are told that in KCCA, the members of staff are paid well. How come every day there are those running away from it? There are problems there. Through this Bill, maybe this will be an opportunity for the ministers to help us treat the cause. What is the problem? Why is it that some members of staff are resigning? 

We have also heard complaints about staff members that work there and say there is a lot of tribalism. Is it true? Probably you know of it. When it comes to appointments and managing the human resource, who goes were? Therefore, this Bill should help us manage such issues.

There is an issue of roads. Mr Speaker, I stay in Wakiso and connecting the roads between the Kampala city and Wakiso -, like my colleague was trying to observe - is a big challenge. I thought that this Bill should bring all these issues on board. 

Namugongo, for instance, which is a tourist site, has roads that should help us at the time when the traffic is heavy so that people use them to relieve that kind of pressure faced on the key roads. For example, you could pass Mbalwa to Agenda. However, up to now, that road has never been tarmacked. What can this Bill do in terms of connecting and securing these tourist sites so that they are also brought on board? 

Beautification of the city is something of concern to all of us. Recently, I had an opportunity to travel to a city called Xiamen in China. I think they have put all their efforts in making sure that the city is extremely smart and beautiful. When you are there, you might think that you are in a hotel; even on a road. What is this Bill going to do to help us make sure that Kampala has that beauty, away from the dust that we are ‘enjoying’ every day?

Mr Speaker, away from those few points, I am here to observe. Thank you. 

3.49
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. About the issue of KCCA, I was of the opinion that people, who have different sentiments about Kampala city not being in Buganda, are just worried. It can be treated as they had suggested in the Bill; as a metropolitan city. They can render services to the outskirts of the original KCC. That will be better. 

I do not think there is any issue of altering boundaries so that the metropolitan area gets out of the Kabaka’s area. I do not think that is the end result. 

I have witnessed a lot of problems around Kampala. When you move to Busabala Road, you will notice that it is the dirtiest and dustiest road, yet it is within the periphery of Kampala. You would think it is not in Kampala. Therefore, rendering services, as a metropolitan city, is going to help us, if they can work on that, without altering boundaries. 

For example, if you enter Kireka, you will notice that it is just full of garbage and smelly, yet I would think it is within the city. I would like the Bill to come out and allay the fears of those who have sentiments of losing out on KCCA as part of Buganda. 

As one of my colleagues said, they need to sit and talk; KCCA and the Buganda Government. This is in order for us to get services as a metropolitan city, not as Buganda and KCCA, which is a central government. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of 122 pupils from Namasuba UMEA Primary School, Wakiso District represented by hon. Seninde Rosemary Nansubuga and hon. Edward Kigozi Ssempala. Join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.52
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker, once again for this opportunity to debate on this Kampala Capital City Authority (Amendment) Bill.

Those of us who come from other areas outside Kampala and ordinarily reside here, are already having enough political pressure just by living around Kampala. The pressure does not come from anywhere but due to a historical feeling that the central region is being marginalised from the national cake, and yet it generates over 64 per cent of all the revenues in Uganda. 

For you information, if you want to grow rich, you may have to consider opening a business within the central region, especially Kampala because 74 per cent of all the money in circulation in Uganda is here. You know you need to have all these statistics. 

Now, for anyone to bring an amendment that the Lord Mayor should be elected by councillors, this is a person who does not want us to have peace in Buganda here. In my opinion, that amendment is in bad taste. Why would a town like Pader elect a mayor then in a city like Kampala, you do not want the mayor to be elected by universal adult suffrage? What is the problem? 

Most cities around the world belong to the Opposition because they have easy access to information and they easily become disgruntled. It is urbanised so they have different challenges; Kampala should be no exception. Those who brought the amendment should not in any way think that by having the mayor elected by councillors, then, they can now probably have the person they like in that position. 

At this point, I would like to thank the committee. Members, if you read the committee report, they have asked this Parliament to drop that proposal. I will appeal to the House, when we go to the appropriate stage, to take the position of the committee. Let the people of Kampala elect the person they want. (Applause) If you want to be elected, go and mobilise the youth, do what you think is necessary and they will elect you. There is no shortcut. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker – because there are just basically four amendments – the position of a deputy speaker and a speaker is not controversial. However, what seems controversial is that in the amendment, they propose to give the minister more powers than the Lord Mayor. This is another time bomb. 

I was a member of the Committee on Presidential Affairs. Before there was an executive director of Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) the budget the Central Government was giving to KCCA was little. The moment we created the KCCA Act and put the position of an Executive Director appointed by the President, the Central Government support to KCCA increased by Shs 700 per cent. That means – (Interjection) – this is human nature, you cannot pump money where they do not like you. I do not know if it makes sense. 

The Central Government put more money when they got an executive director. When they had a Lord Mayor without the executive director, they put very little money, which politically means the Government would pump more money where they feel comfortable. 

Therefore, this Parliament has to trade very carefully because we are making gains. You can see the city changed a lot under the leadership of Jennifer Musisi. You can see physical changes; at least, there were certain things - and all this is because the Government of Uganda pumped a lot of money through the Executive Director of KCCA.

As we look through this amendment, I would like to appeal to my colleagues that we should not be extremists. If we take the radicalised view then the Central Government would not put all that money, it is putting. It is tax payer’s money but they can opt to use it to construct valley dams in Karamoja. 

Mr Speaker, I support the committee’s position and I would like to appeal to all Members; let us not disenfranchise Kampala. If we do not give them an opportunity to do what they want, you will get more problems. You can now see the pressure People Power is putting you on. (Laughter) All these are silent issues, which is lying with the Baganda. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

3.57
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee chairperson and Members for putting together a very good report. I would like to agree with hon. Odonga Otto, the committee did a very good job; promoting the principle of democracy. If you analyse the democratic path and achievements that we have gained as a country, it would be unimaginable for somebody to propose appointments to impose leadership on a very big city like Kampala. 

I found the proposal in the Bill, that the Lord Mayor be first elected by the councillors to be against the principles of democracy. I would like to agree with the committee and thank them for recommending that the universal adult suffrage be maintained to elect the Lord Mayor of Kampala. 

However, what I have found very contradictory is that the same committee recommended that the title for the Lord Mayor as the political head of Kampala should be repealed from the Principal Act, which I find contradictory. I would wish that every institution in this country, right from the districts and subcounties, we know that the person who is elected becomes the political head. Therefore, I would like us to maintain the Lord Mayor as the political head having been the person elected with the highest number of votes.

Secondly, I also found it interesting that there has been a proposal to create Kampala Capital City Council, which I think will address some of the challenges that have been happening at the city hall. The fact that there will be now, a separate person presiding over as the speaker and the deputy speaker, is in line with what is happening elsewhere with the local governments and this is something, we must support.

Thirdly, I think it will be called “City Executive Committee”. For example, in Parliament here, we have a Parliamentary Commission. I think every institution must have an executive committee to help the Lord Mayor in running the affairs of the city authority. I have found here that there is a proposal from the committee that there should be an executive committee appointed by the Lord Mayor and he can always reshuffle them as and when, he wishes. That makes this Bill very attractive for this House to support because it will bring clarity.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of removing the Lord Mayor, I think that the minister, who proposed this Bill, had bad intentions in trying to do away with the proper procedure for removing the Lord Mayor from office. This is one of the points where I thank the committee for standing strong. 

We are just lucky that in this NRM Cabinet, we still have Members from different parties who are groomed well from UPC and DP; who can stabilise the Cabinet. If at some point, we have purely Members, who have grown in NRM like the minister of ICT, Frank Tumwebaze and the rest, we would find the Lord Mayor being fired after every two or three months and you would see the cost of the elections that would be coming. 

Since we still have some stability and right thinking Members within Cabinet from the Opposition, at least we are going to be stable with this.

Lastly, we have the Physical Planning Bill, which is before the committee of Parliament. The Physical Planning Bill has a lot to do with how Kampala is planned. How I wish that some of these proposals about Kampala Metropolitan come after the Physical Planning Bill, has been passed by this House so that whatever is being planned whether it is going to expand to go to Wakiso, Mukono and Jinja it would be guided by that master plan that this House is yet to process. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.02
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a good report, most especially on the point of physical planning. They observed that there would be an authority under an authority; that is an authority in charge of physical planning under KCCA. 

It would be wastage of resources because an authority in charge of physical planning would need human resource as any other authority and they will be very many. Therefore, the observation by the committee that a department should be created or strengthened under KCCA, to make sure that physical planning is taken care of, is really a very good recommendation. 

In this case, I think we need to look at our resources as a country when we are creating these laws. Sometimes, we come here and create a law and at the end of the day, you find that the financial implication is really a problem to the nation. Therefore, I would like to thank the committee for observing that. I wish Government looks at these recommendations and takes it further such that when we are making other laws, we do not make the mistake, which was in that Bill as it was proposed. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.03
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee for the good work. I agree with the committee on the role of policy making to be left entirely to the councillors. However, when it comes to determination of service delivery and where it should go, we have areas, which are likely to be under Kampala Metropolitan City including Mukono, Kira and Nansana. 

These are already independent entities but when they were coming up with this law, they left them out as if they are not going to be part of the greater Kampala. When you say, “the determination of service delivery should be done by the executive” that means those other municipalities will no longer be independent as they have been. That has been their worry for quite some time. 

I think that should be noted and considered that, as we are going to be part of the planning authority of Kampala, those municipalities should remain with their independent executive powers. I submit.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

4.05
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, I do not know what the motive of this amendment Bill was. What mischief did we want to cure in the earlier law? If you look at this Bill, you realize it has ill-motives.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you know the rules; imputation of improper motives against other Members is not permitted. Please, stick to the rules.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am sticking to the rules. Hon. Odonga-Otto has said it and Jonathan has also talked about it. If a town council can have its mayor elected and we come here and say the one whom we call “Lord Mayor” should be chosen by a few individuals, not adult suffrage, then there is something wrong. There are people who make laws to suit their interests. For example, we have had ministers in charge of Kampala Capital City Authority who may not have had interest but maybe some want to become councillors with the intention of becoming the Lord Mayor and that is why they want to use this law in this process.

Mr Speaker, if it was not that, this should have been rejected from day one. To make the minister to be the overall – even if a resolution has been passed by the council, again the minister must be the one to determine; what is the purpose of the council?

Mr Speaker, I am yet to understand the motive of this Bill.

We now have cities coming on board. I would have been happy to say, “The City Authorities Bill” because you are not going to make authority Bills for Mbale, Gulu, Arua, Mbarara, etc. We need to make a law for the city authorities so that whichever becomes a city is governed by the law. For example, we have the Local Government Act and whenever you create a district, you do not have to go and make a law for it. If you make this law for Kampala, it means it will be for Kampala only and you must make laws for the other cities. This is what we should look at.

Mr Speaker, if we want to develop Kampala – I do not agree to the fact that Kampala is for the Baganda only because it is for all of us. Kakungulu came to Mbale and in fact the biggest land owner in Mbale is Kakungulu and it is Mailo land. It means that even in Mbale the Baganda are there. Therefore, it is not correct to say that Kampala is for the Baganda only.

Anyway, what I want to put across is that since it is our capital city, it would be illogical for us to make a law to destroy it. This city belongs to all of us. We all need its services. We need this city because it is even the gateway because from here to Entebbe you will be in the outside world and people who come to Uganda come through this place.

Therefore, let us make a law where we say “Kampala budget would be “X” amount.” I would have been happy because we would be giving them resources – maybe a percentage of something – so that Kampala develops for all of us to enjoy its services. Otherwise, given what we are looking at, we even want to disadvantage them with the little they have. I would be happy to look at the budget proposal in this Bill which says “Kampala will maybe take 10 or one per cent of the national budget for purposes of developing this area”.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like to ask a question: we have Kawempe Municipality and Makindye Municipality, among others; where do these municipalities fall? Are they not part of Kampala planning? If we are going to make a law – I am happy that they are saying that the councillors must be at least with a qualification equal to that of a Member of Parliament. If we are doing that, it means councillors in all cities - I am raising this because Kawempe Municipality is the same as Mbale Municipality, which will be elevated to a city status. 

If we are saying that the qualification for councillorship in municipalities should match that one of Kampala Capital City Authority - I think what they are looking at is that the official language in municipalities is English and to know English you must have gone up to senior six because you can interact with a Muzungu or an African from Nigeria who does not know Luganda. 

I was trying to find out, Mr Speaker, how we can bring in an amendment to deal with the municipalities, which are found in the city authorities. How do we handle them? They are a subset of the main city.

Mr Speaker, I ask colleagues not to make a law with eyes at one individual. Tomorrow it can turn against you and this will be determined as “Lukwago law.” You remember Grace Ibingira and Balaki Kirya were here - they even made a law for Mbabazi. Balaki Kirya said here that the law on detention without trial question should have passed yesterday and when it passed, the following week it was applicable to them. 

How sure are you that you – Betty Kamya, who wants to make this law, won’t want to become Lord Mayor one day? Are you sure that people like my brother Rukutana, who wants to make a law for Kampala Capital City Authority, would one day not want to lead the city? Let us make a law, which will stand the test of time.

4.13
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I have listened to my colleagues but the challenge I see with this law is that the principal law itself has a challenge. First of all, it creates two centres of power. In my language, we say that “two bulls cannot exist in one kraal” –(Interjection)- it is okay; the cows can be there. (Laughter) The law elevates KCCA to an authority level, brings in the Central Government with powers but at the same time leaves the powers that KCC had originally. That is where the real challenge is. 

We can talk of creating a law, but as long as we do not address that issue of two centres of power that are contradictory, there will be a problem. That is why you see that while the salaries are very good, the workers are resigning. This is because they find themselves held between the fire and the hot pan. They cannot be in either; the pan is very hot and the fire is even worse. What do you do? That is why people have been wondering that how come the pay is very good, everybody wants to work in this institution but they are resigning.

They would rather be unemployed or work where the pay is less but with a suitable environment; we must face the reality if we are to make a reasonable law.

Do we need to maintain these two centres of power, which are all contradicting? Hon. Odonga Otto was telling you here that if you remove the powers from the Central Government they will remove the money, and you go back to the days where we had KCC poor services.

We also have a challenge that if Central Government stays - now the people are also grumbling that they want the power to elect.
I think our responsibility, as the Legislature, is to reconcile the two positions. People must have their say but the Central Government must also have a say -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.16
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Mr Speaker, Rubaga is part of Kampala and I am very grateful for the chance you have given me to speak on this Bill. When Government compromised on having the Lord Mayor elected by the council of councillors, something new arose, called “political power”. 

However, we all know that we are here because of that political power. Now Government is saying that there should be no political head – that the Lord Mayor would be elected through adult suffrage. Meaning we are electing a political leader but again you are saying that there should be no political head. As the people of Kampala and Ugandans at large, we get confused.

The power we are talking about is clear in the Constitution, it is the power of the people of Uganda and it can only be exercised by the people of Uganda having their elected leaders; it is people power.

The moment you have somebody elected as the Lord Mayor, the political head is known. Now, somewhere something called the “political head” is deleted and that Kampala would have a Lord Mayor, a minister in-charge of Kampala, Executive Director but now without a political head.

When you read the Local Government Act, right from LC I, a village, a parish, a ward has a political head. But something is coming up to say that Kampala with a Lord Mayor, Deputy Lord Mayor, Lord Councillors and ministers should not have a political head.

Government should not hide; the Constitution is very clear - if a smallest village in Rubaga has a political head, how about the capital city of this great nation called Uganda?

Secondly, it is very difficult to legislate about something that we do not know where it exists. There are two Kampalas in the Constitution and we should be clear. 

There is a Kampala that must be curved out of the Kampala we know and some part of Wakiso to have Mengo Municipality but before that is curved out, we are legislating and have a law about a Kampala that is not yet properly there.

There is Kampala Metropolitan which is the third and not the other because it goes up to Mpigi and greater Mukono. I would like to ask – and this Government should answer: Why don’t we have the real Kampala and speak about it?

Lastly, somebody mentioned it and I would like to emphasise that Kampala City Council Authority is not the only authority in the country. We have Electricity Regulatory Authority, Rural Electrification Authority, and Uganda Coffee Development Authority; should we have ministers in each and every authority established? Why do we confuse ourselves?

If the Central Government is in charge, it already has the Executive Director, the Lord Mayor elected by Ugandans; they are part of the Government of the country.

The confusion at City Hall; the minister is there, the Executive Director says, “I cannot report to the minister or the Lord Mayor.” Then the minister also does not know where to go. She cannot even attend the council meetings but there are two ministers there. We have more than 20 authorities and commissions; should we be having ministers in charge of each of them?

There is no special Kampala, the Kampala spoken about in the Constitution that is special and with the Central Government is not yet there and it can only come up after curving out the Mengo Municipality of Buganda –(Interruption)

MS SSEWUNGU: Thank you, hon. Kasibante for giving way. What the honourable member is emphasising is very serious. As we are speaking now, KCCA has Government schools and when you see the mess about KCCA schools – the Minister of Education under the Education Act is supposed to supervise KCCA but when you want them in the Committee on Education, they say that they are under KCCA.

As a result, the confusion in KCCA – they are supposed to be under Local Government in education but they have directors of education while other districts have district education officers and as a result, performance in Kampala UPE schools has gone down.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you. As I wind up, the confusion may not necessarily be cured by any amendment of the current law that was created by the very people who were put there, save for those put there by the people of Kampala through adult suffrage. We need to cure from that area. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there any authority in this country that is not supervised by a minister? They are somehow supervised by a minister.

4.23
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. It is a principle of law that when you are making a law, it must be planned. 

It takes me to question some of the laws we pass; at one point I saw the President in Wandegeya and was alluding to KCCA saying that he will dilute the leadership at KCCA.

From that perspective, he was referring to the law in place and when we see an amendment, I thought that it was coming to cure the mischief and disregard it. 

It is as if the biggest problem has been governance issues. In my opinion, I have no doubt that in civilised societies, when there is an authority and there is an Executive Director as head of the technical wing, they must work together to serve the people but what was taking place in KCCA was laughable. 

If we are to go into the financial terms and look at the Auditor-General’s reports for the financial years 2016/2017 and 2017/2018, you would find we lost over Shs 100 billion in actions of an individual away from the council. My view is that any governance decision of an Authority of that nature must be taken by council where also the executive director would be the supporting wing of KCCA. 

We are talking about those two financial years where we lost over Shs 100 billion but there are a lot of litigations still in court over individual actions. I was even shocked when it came to retrenchment of workers that even council was not involved in the previous ones. When the executive director came, she thought she was everything. She retrenched workers without any due regard to the law and advice from the legal department of KCCA. Actually, we lost the case and she was told to pay each member of the 1,000 retrenched staff Shs 5 million including other costs, as a result. 

Therefore, these governance issues, in my opinion, would be worsened if you say the Lord Mayor is going to be ceremonial because when situations took this direction, the executive director fled. Some of her colleagues have resigned as well because there is a mess. 

Therefore because of this impunity of not allowing the Lord Mayor to reign in, it came to even recruitment. In my life, I had never seen a job advertised where someone is exempted from the qualifications. For instance, for the job of the Director Physical Planning, they said this person should be exempted yet the Act spells out very clearly the functions of that directorate. They appointed an unqualified person for that post. I have just seen something like this for the first time.

Therefore, we would like to see these positions harmonised. The committee did well to recommend for the dropping of – causing more confusion – but also on the side of the politicians, we work for the people. The people who elected the Lord Mayor knew what they were doing just like those in Government who were elected in whatever ways. That means we must recognise that we should serve the people. You cannot be fighting all through –(Member timed out.)

4.28
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by thanking the committee for recommending that the proposal that the minister be the political head of Kampala Capital City Authority is dropped and deleted. 

The requirement for one to be a political head is well stipulated in the Constitution. He or she must move around that jurisdiction and get the mandate from the people. If the minister wants to be the political head of Kampala, let him or her move throughout the city and get the votes of the people. Thereby, he or she will qualify to be the political head of the city. 

Secondly, the issue of the creation of the Metropolitan Authority Planning functions in clause 16 leaves a lot of doubt on my mind. It will clash with the roles of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development because they have the mandate to do the urban planning for this country.

Mr Speaker, it worsens when you go down to the local governments because I do not see a mechanism how the Metropolitan Planning Authority will reach the local governments in terms of planning in for example, Mukono, Mpigi and Wakiso districts. 

The Bill suggests that we have the Chief Administrative Officer as a Member of the Board but the Local Government Act provides that the district councils should be in charge of the planning of their respective districts. Even the urban councils have the autonomy and authority to plan for their jurisdictions. 

Therefore, if you had begun by amending the Local Government Act, probably, this suggestion would have come to pass as far as I am concerned. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to urge the House to let section 30 (3), which deals with planning at local government, remain as it is so that we leave central planning with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development rather than creating confusion here and there.

I would like to end by saying that when the electorates elect their leaders, it is a means of accountability such that they sit and plan. When they come up with policies, they are trying to account for their people and reciprocate the trust from the voters. 

When this power is snatched away, then the councillors will be reduced to the level of drawing only the allowances. The people elected them to speak, plan and come up with good policies for them. Thank you.

4.31
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Lord Mayor, the Mayor of London, and the Mayor of New York are big positions. The position of Lord Mayor is a pain in the flesh in this country because it does not belong to the side where they would want the Lord Mayor to be. That is why this law is coming up. 

This Bill is in bad faith. Sometimes, I pity the lawyers. Hon. Rukutana, when such a Bill comes and you ask yourself, “Should I really pen this down when it is not in my interest?” It is a bad law.

The mayor must be elected by the people. You cannot say you are going to manipulate the councillors. After you have manipulated them and they are in the council, do you think they are going to elect the Lord Mayor? The Lord Mayor must be elected by the people. It is really very painful for some people to say the Lord Mayor must be elected by the council. 

We have got a lot of problems. Mr Speaker, in 1962, Uganda had 8 million people and since the British left Kampala, as you see today, we have not added anything. It is a tiny and badly planned city. Buildings keep coming up here and there. Instead of putting up a modern city here, we would have moved out of this place like the Tanzanians went to Dodoma. We would have gone to Nakasongola, a big place where we would have had good planning for a city. Look at the traffic problem in this city. Getting to Kampala is a nightmare. The garbage collection and the roads are terrible. They should be thinking of these issues instead of creating a Minister for Kampala City. 

Look at the positions we have in this country and think of how to improve the city instead of amending the Bill to create positions for some people. It is not worth it at all. We should think of creating a proper city so that we move out of Kampala. How do people get to Kampala with the dirty roads and dust everywhere? I wonder what the British think when they come here. This is what they left and there is no change at all. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you. Honourable ministers, these positions are created for you. You can look at the number of the ministers we have. This is wasteful expenditure. You want to take away all the powers from the mayor so that you bring a minister to be in charge? We all know that the Lord Mayor is elected by the people and the minister is just appointed and taken there to be in charge. That is not fair at all. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We need to process this now. This is how we will proceed.

4.35
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I keep listening and at times I do not want to say a thing. However, this time I am tempted to think that the Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) Bill, like many of my colleagues have said, was brought in bad faith.

A part from that, we are creating another nine cities - I wonder what law we are going to use to manage those cities, if they will ever be. Otherwise, we had better polish our city administration and not just make a law because it looks like it does not annoy some people in the system.

The Attorney-General would advise us - and I wish he would stay a little bit longer – on what we are going to do with the new cities. Are we going to have Mbale City Authority administration and set a new law for it and do the same for Jinja, Gulu and Arua? I wish we would set our own game rules clearly? Are we going to have ministers in each of these cities because it creates jobs for the people out there? 

What I am looking at is that KCCA seems to be focusing on the Capital City of Uganda and I wish we would polish that and ensure it works for the country and not for the people. Somebody said that the laws we make should not be - actually, laws should be blind and operational for the good of the country and not for the good of a few of us.

I always look at Tanzania – the citizens of Tanzania have got it right. When they say it is ichi kwanza - the country first, it is the Constitution and then the country. However, here it looks like we are looking at the people first - some of us - and then we look at the rest later.

Honourable Attorney-General, I would like to hear from you on the rules or laws that are going to govern these new cities. Are we going to copy and transplant the KCCA Bill to all the other nine cities or are we going to make a new law for every city that becomes operationalised? I am very sure that all the nine will not be operationalised at the same time.

Therefore, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give the House now that the Attorney-General is present - the earlier request was that we already have the greater Kampala without the law because you have failed to bring it; it was the biggest problem. By now we should have had the greater Kampala law.

We now have nine new cities that are about to start, I am told Masaka and Mbale are coming on board - where is the law? We already have money in the Budget but you have not brought the law. I thought it would be wiser to recall these laws -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the information?

MR MUKITALE: The Information I am giving to the House in the presence of the Attorney-General is that can he do his work by giving us the two attendant laws - the greater Kampala Law and the other one?

MR GONAHASA: Thank you very much. You have made the point. Can we get the laws before we proceed to move without guidance? That is not what we do not have –(Member timed out.)

4.39
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the Attorney-General - who is not following and I do not know whether he will hear my clarification - Mr Attorney-General, what mischief did you see in the KCCA law that has prompted you to amend it again? I am asking this because what we see is that whenever you bring a law and it is targeting someone, that law will be null and void.

Secondly, I would like to caution members here: I recently heard that Gen. Tumukunde is interested in standing as Lord Mayor for Kampala. I would like to ask this; what if he wins? Will you amend this law again because you won’t have power and authority? 

Mr Speaker, in the current law - I was a teacher in Kampala from 1993 and I know how Kampala was being run. There was devolution of power that made divisions to run independently; that is why mayors in Kampala divisions were able to procure properties and construct division headquarters. Unfortunately, those properties have never been improved any further. I have prayed to see this report where you are giving power back to the divisions.

Let me give an example of Ian Clarke, who was the mayor of Makindye Division, where I stay. He once complained that he could not even procure a battery for his car. He had to go to KCCA, meet the executive director then, in order to have his car battery procured. All this happened due to lack of devolution of power.

In the education sector, which I love so much, these divisions were competing. You could find each division holding education sports day but all those things have collapsed. I said, when giving information to hon. Kasibante, that Kampala District had the best UPE schools competing with private schools. Last year, the best pupil came from Kitante Primary School with aggregate 6 but 20 schools came out without a single first grade because of the confusion that was brought by the law.

You made the Lord Mayor the Speaker without full executive powers. These are the areas we should be looking at. For example, how do we change the Lord Mayor from being the Speaker, get the full executive as it used to be during hon. Ssebaana and hon. Ssebaggala’s times and others? What we are trying to bring up is targeting an individual and it is very dangerous. 

Let me say that the former executive director - we have information that she spent nine months looking for the President and failed to get him yet the President was in Kampala addressing people with hon. Beti Kamya, the KCCA minister. Ms Musisi said she would always be told the President was not around even when he had just been seen at Kalerwe addressing people with hon. Beti Kamya or commissioning something for the boda-boda riders –(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Thank you so much. Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give to my colleague is that most often in Uganda today, there is failed service delivery because the technical officers of Government know that they are not elected yet if we empower elected politicians with resources, things can move because they are afraid of the power of the ballot; something always happens down there. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Therefore, as I conclude, Mr Speaker, let us look at the performance of KCCA now because ever since the former executive director left, the Acting Executive Director, Mr Kitaka, seems to be working well with the Lord Mayor. We have not heard of any wars lately. I have not heard of any wars about you, with the Lord Mayor; why? 

The honourable minister and the deputy minister - let me put this on record – I once spoke to hon. Beti Kamya about her having wars with the Lord Mayor yet the KCCA Act is very clear. It has duties that are supposed to be performed by the Lord Mayor and I asked her to always write to him on the basis of the sections of that law and when he refuses to adhere, the minister can act. I also told her that we should all work together because what was disturbing them are trivial issues that they shouldn’t be looking at.

The Lord Mayor is from Kalungu by the way and I am his Member of Parliament. So, when you talk about building a law that is going to attack an individual yet even Gen. Tumukunde is in the pipeline to come and stand - Mr Speaker, let us be fair to ourselves and look at this law again. Otherwise, I would like to still ask the Attorney-General, who has moved out, the mischief he saw in the old law. That could give us a starting point for curing that mischief.

We are suffering with Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) in the Committee on Education and Sports. Money comes from the Ministry of Education and Sports to fund the budget for education. However, when it comes to allocation and finding out performance, KCCA runs away. I would like to put this on record that even the teachers in KCCA have different identity cards from what is supposed to be given to them. They do not provide security of tenure to them. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the plea from the Member of Parliament for Kalungu County West. He says that whatever we do, we should not set up the Lord Mayor against him in Kalungu. That is a distress call from a Member of this House. So take that into consideration. (Laughter)

4.45
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think when deliberating on the Kampala Capital City Authority (Amendment) Bill as Parliament, we should have at the back of our mind the incident that took place around 2012/2013. That was when the Central Government tried to influence the councillors at KCCA to remove the Lord Mayor from his office through an open vote by show of hands.

I can see that this Bill is trying to legitimise that bad practice of governance by proposing that a Lord Mayor should be elected from amongst the councillors.

Parliament, as an institution of Government, is supposed to create harmony. I would be happy to see, in this amendment, the structure of KCCA being realigned to confer the powers of political administration of KCCA into its political heads under the Lord Mayor - since Government already has administrative powers through the executive director, who is appointed.

We are now looking at a situation where we have three power centres; the minister and her deputy will command from one point, then the Lord Mayor and the Executive Director from other points. Who will the technical staff listen to? It means that if we cannot create harmony in the law, we are participating in causing confusion at KCCA.

Therefore, I will appreciate if Government – I wish the Prime Minister was here; he could take my recommendation of abolishing the position of Minister for KCCA because it is part of the confusion there. It is even increasing the administrative costs. If they want, they can –(Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the honourable member on the Floor. My basis for seeking clarification is found in clause 5(4) of the Constitution of Uganda, 1995.

It states, “Kampala, located in Buganda, shall be the capital city for Uganda and shall be administered by the Central Government.” If you remove the minister from KCCA, how will the Central Government administer Kampala?

MR CENTENARY: Thank you. I would like the Attorney-General to distinguish between administrative and political power. Administrative power is already vested in the appointment of the executive director who is already representing the Central Government because it is an appointment by the President. (Applause)

Attorney-General, you know it very well that for you to wield political power, you must be elected through a popular vote. Therefore, Government should not fuse both political and administrative powers by trying to impose a minister on an Authority.

I think that it is a waste of resources facilitating two ministers in an Authority yet that same Authority still lacks resources to provide social services. If I may ask the Attorney-General, what is the value addition of the two ministers? (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, my brother. How many Authorities do we have? Does each one of them have a full minister? Do we have ministers for Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) or Uganda Revenue Authority (URA)? 

What is special about Kampala Capital City Authority but not URA, which collects all the taxes we use or Mbale District Administration or Luweero District Administration so that you can have only KCCA with two ministers, six cars, policemen and dogs?

MR CENTENARY: As I conclude, I think the honourable minister should be fair to Cabinet and withdraw this Bill as we wait for other cities that are coming up so that we come up with a comprehensive law that is going to govern our cities without the exclusion of Kampala City. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion we are debating for second reading is the Kampala Capital City Authority (Amendment) Bill. It is not the Kampala Capital City Authority, Bill. That means there is already a law in place and we are only amending it.

4.52
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. From the onset, let me say that I am lucky that I am going to make my submission when the Presiding Speaker today was the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs when this Constitution was amended to bring this impasse we are in.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not worry; I have forgotten everything. (Laughter)

MR KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I will start from where the Attorney-General tried to reach and trace the confusion. We will amend the parent Act a million times without ever addressing the crisis that was created.

We start from Article 5(4) where Kampala City is supposed to be administered – the law says, “Shall be administered by the Central Government.”

This section is subject to Article 178 of this Constitution, which set up Regional Tiers and that established the essence of Mengo Municipality, which mandated Parliament to declare new boundaries for the city of Kampala, which the Central Government was supposed to administer.

Now, the confusion came when we tried to mix in politics. We failed to implement the regional tier hence failed to establish Mengo Municipality.

In addition, going backwards, we annexed the powers which were with Kampala City Council, which was an LCV under the Local Government Act. The Chairman LCV then, the Mayor Ssebana, was first elected as Chairperson LCV then given a ceremonial function of the Mayor of Kampala. 

Now, this is where the confusion comes from. You came here made a law and annexed the entire territory because Government and the Attorney-General here has completely failed to advise Government. You failed to create the Regional Tier, the Municipality and you came along, tried to mix things and tried to annex Kampala.

Kampala was supposed to be a small area just like Washington DC, not the bigger Kampala with Nakawa etcetera. That small area was supposed to be directly administered by the Central Government. Now you made a law that took over the functions of the LCV and annexed Kampala and you created this confusion.

If we pay the Attorney-General smart money, let him stand here and say whether what we are doing is not contrary to the spirit of this Constitution. By essence - you can shake your head; you are simply failing to do your job. Promoting the incompetence of your office to advise Government and trying some way to mix politics. The NRM Government consistently lost election after election in Kampala; they tried to regain electoral losses through this awkward legislation.

Mr Speaker, my submission is very simple; even if you preside here for the next 20 years, there will be more amendments because now you are saying that the mayor will be elected but even if he is elected, what is he going to do? He is no longer chairing the council; he will come to open council and go home to sleep.

Therefore, my submission is that the entire amendment we are grappling with simply does not in any way mitigate the challenge we face as a city. It is simply politicking - day light politicking and wasting a lot of time.

Now the minister wants to take over powers and become –(Interjection)– right now, they want to administer KCCA as an agency of Government with some elected positions. The way you administer Uganda Revenue Authority, which does not have elected positions, is not the way you can administer KCCA. 

In some way, we need to take these ministers to school - actually, it is a subject in elementary administration of public governance. The way you administer a Government agency like URA or boards is not the way you administer one where people are elected.

I would like to take on the Attorney-General. Tell me whether what we are doing is what this Constitution envisages or you are simply subjected to politics. That is why the Office of the Attorney-General, when it was set up in the Constitution, was even supposed to be above partisan politics.

However, every single day, the Attorney-General politics and creates these lacunas that we grapple with - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of Order.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I have restrained myself from interrupting the honourable member on the Floor. However, I am now forced because of his consistent allegations against the Office of the Attorney-General.

What we are doing in this amendment is pursuant to Article 5(6) of the Constitution which says, “Parliament shall by law make provision for the administration and development of Kampala as the capital city.”

Making laws includes amending them. Government has come up with a law amending and improving on the provisions of the KCCA Act. Is it in order, Mr Speaker, for the honourable member to keep on saying that the Office of the Attorney-General has failed to do what it is supposed to do? 

The Bill is here; a Bill is a law whether it is for amendment or the original Bill and we are debating it. Is it in order for the Member to continue directly saying that the Office of the Attorney-General has failed when the office participated in processing this Bill to the level where it is?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi is debating two sets of laws, one of which has not been enacted. The one that has been enacted is within the provision of Article 5 of the Constitution and that is the amendment being sought to improve on that law - that one is clear.

However, the one that was supposed to have designated what in real terms should have been Kampala, that is the law that has been passed so we cannot be debating it because it is not here. Therefore, we are proceeding well and the point raised by the learned Attorney-General that there has been a failure to provide a law under Article 5(6) is not sustainable because that law is there right now, we are debating it.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, that is why I have issues with the Attorney-General. I thought he knows the law that is why I never read the entire provision. For your information, let me read it:

    i. Uganda is one Sovereign State and a Republic.
    ii. Subject to Article 178 of this Constitution, Uganda shall consist of the following; regional, Kampala -”, etcetera.

Therefore, there is nobody conversant with the law that can attempt to implement this section of the law without referring to Article 178. That is where I take on the Attorney-General and say, you are a key advisor to the Government. If you are an honest and good advisor to Government, you ought to have subjected whatever you do to Article 178.

Therefore, my submission is that even if we attempt to do a fine job here for a million times, the issues we are trying to address and mitigate are simply a failure of us to implement Article 178 of the Constitution. That is why I said that I am very lucky that if there is anyone in this Parliament that knows the spirit of all this, it is the presiding officer of this Parliament.

Mr Speaker, with due respect, my submission is that if for once we can stop politicking on matters that are critical and address issues squarely, the Government should humble itself and withdrawal this amendment. It achieves nothing, it is a bad law, it negates our Constitution and it is actually an affront on the Constitution. In addition, I assert, it is simply because someone paid to do a good job is doing shoddy work and that is the Attorney-General. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member is attacking the Office of the Attorney-General and Government for failure to operationalise Article 178 of the Constitution and he says we should have operationilised Article 178 and in particular clause 4. I invite you, Mr Speaker and honourable members, to read the provisions of Article 178, which provide for regional governments. It reads, “Two or more districts may cooperate to form a regional government to perform the functions and services specified in the Fifth Schedule to this Constitution.” This provision is discretional on the districts. It is not mandatory that “the districts will” because the Article says, “The districts may…” 

As we talk, for whatever reason, I am not aware of any district that has offered to cooperate with another so as to form a regional government –(Interruption) 

MR NIWAGABA: Can you read for us Article 178(3) of the Constitution and tell us whether the regional governments exist by operation of the law? 

MR RUKUTANA: Let me first finish my observation. For Government, and indeed this Parliament to operationalise Article 178(4), there must have been districts that have come together to form a regional government. In the absence of that, it would be wrong for anybody to say that we have not operationalised regional governments. 

Article 178(3) reads, “Subject to clause (1) and the provision of this Constitution, the districts of the regions of Buganda, Bunyoro, Busoga and Lango specified in the First Schedule shall be deemed to have agreed to form regional governments for the purpose of this article.” The interpretation of the word “deem” is that they have not yet done so but they are deemed. Up to now, they are still deemed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, Article 178 has not been operationalised and that is a fact that we should deal with. Article 178(3), as stated by the honourable member, is in the terms which were drafted, to capture the spirit that was in the debate at the moment. That spirit was that regional governments had been essentially agreed upon by the different regions and the members representing them in the House. 

However, after enacting Article 178(3), the realities set in; the regions that were deemed to have been most interested in regional governments rejected it. That is the truth, if you want the history on this. Issues of Acholi and Lango were actually added on the Floor of this Parliament but the original provision was to take care of the region of Buganda. 

What was the background? The background was that it was supposed to be a stop gap between the federal government that was being demanded as the ultimate and the republican thing that was initially adopted. Therefore, this was supposed to be a middle ground to deal with the concerns of Buganda, as a region but then eventually, they did not adopt it. That is why the provision of Article 178 could not have been activated. 

I am sure you remember that there was a Bill that was proposed and was all wrongly rejected by Buganda as a region. That is why we went back. If you saw, we went far in the Constitution to really provide guidelines in the schedules but all that was in the hope that the – that is specifically why the regions now are being the constituent parts of the country under Article 5 – now, you read Article 178 as if it was not yet there. It was still in its maturity and it has not matured. So, we cannot activate it fully. An argument that tends to sustain that it is actually active might not give the good guidance that we need at the moment. 

Can I now have the Leader of the Opposition? 

4.10
THE SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Wilfred Niwagaba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will begin from where you have ended because we always read the law as is, not as ought to be.

In looking at this particular Kampala Capital City Authority (Amendment) Bill and the Kampala Capital City Authority Act itself, I believe that as Parliament, especially the Executive, which brought this particular Bill, we have fallen short. 

Take a look at the preamble to this Constitution, particularly paragraph 4, which reads, “…exercising our sovereign and inalienable right to determine the form of governance for our country…” together with the democratic principles, particularly democratic principle (iii), which states thus: “The State shall be guided by the principle of decentralisation and evolution of government functions…” This particular Bill and the Act it intends to amend, in my view, falls short of the constitutional requirements. 

Article 5(2) of the Constitution is subject to Article 178; it mentions Kampala among the regions and districts. When you read Article 5(2) and go on to read Article 178, as is, whether operationalised or not; that is none of our business, it is what the Constitution says. 

Article 178(3) and (4) envisaged the creation of a municipality in Buganda called “Mengo Municipality.” After its creation, that is when Article 5 (4) on delineating the boundaries of Kampala should have come into effect.

Even when you read Article 5(6), as Parliament, we are only supposed to make two laws related to Kampala; delineating the territorial boundary of Kampala and making provision for the administration and development. 

Government has tended to make a law to mix administration with governance yet the two are exclusively different. The administration and development of Kampala is not what is brought in – (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed to conclude. 

MR NIWAGABA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. In my view, the Bill as it is, and even the Act itself, are incurably defective for offending the Constitution. When you put the law aside, the challenge we have had is that in most times, we have tended to legislate while targeting specific individuals and situations. When we make laws targeting individuals, unfortunately, they come again to haunt us.

If you look at the basis of this particular Bill, you realise it was to resolve an apparent dispute that existed then, between the Lord Mayor and the then Executive Director, who was in alliance with the then minister yet those situations have since changed. Instead of concentrating on making a law for the development and administration, we are looking at who has power in terms of governance yet who has power is constitutionally answered. 

If you look at Article 178(10), it tends to make a difference between executive and administrative powers vis-a-vis governance powers. Now, what development are we looking at in this particular Bill? The problems of Kampala are enormous but largely have to do with planning - sewerage and pollution. In the Bill, you are evoking a metropolitan planning authority. That cannot exist when we have a parent law called the Physical Planning Act.

Secondly, you have created very many municipalities and other local governments not only within Kampala but also surrounding Kampala. How do you marry the laws governing them particularly the Local Government Act vis-a-vis this particular law you want to bring and call a metropolitan planning authority? Where do you even get that metropolitan “thing” from? It is not envisaged in any law. 

Instead of looking at the development of Kampala, we are trying to look at various aspects. Stop creating numerous administrative units but consolidate them; abolish Mukono, Wakiso and Mpigi, then call it the metropolitan or the Greater Kampala as you would want it to be and we move forward.
You have also created numerous cities so far. Are you going to make laws for each and every city? Why don’t you come up with a law related to the development and administration of cities generally?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have to put this in actual context. I like the statement that “the laws are implemented as they are, not as they ought to be.” As we stand now, what does the Constitution say? The letter of what the Constitution says is actually not what the Constitution says. Yes, if you read Article 5(2), it is subjected to Article 178, which is not operational. That is why we need to direct our minds properly, if we are to find a solution. 

In the absence of Article 178, you have other provisions that are strong and operational. For example, if you look at Article 5(4), it says, “Kampala located in Buganda shall be the capital city for Uganda and shall be administered by the Central Government.” The other active provision to the law is Article 5(6). “Parliament shall, by law, make provision for the administration and development of Kampala as the capital city.” 

The reference is now being made directly to the capital city. However, in the regional government provision under Article 5(2), Kampala was not referred to as a city. We do not know what “Kampala” is because it was supposed to be delineated under Article 5(5). It should have been delineated by an Act of Parliament, which Act of Parliament collapsed. That is when it was supposed to have set up regional governments; there should have been Mengo Municipality, which should have been made by an agreement reached with Mengo itself to agree to the creation of the municipality. In addition, Kampala as Kampala would now be part of a regional governance system while the capital city would be a separate thing.

That is why I am saying that in the absence of Article 178(2) coming alive, you only have certain provisions of that Article, which are operational. That is why you are now saying, Article 5(4) and (6) are operational and that is where this particular law is being housed. Forget about the other implications; the politics and so on. I do not want to go into those ones. I just want to look at the law and whether we are proceeding in a way that does not jeopardise our relationship with the Constitution we swore to uphold.

The gaps in Article 5 are not futile because it leaves provisions that are alive and can keep Article 5 alive and operational. Therefore, we are proceeding well. On that note, I do not know who is going to start: Is it the Minister for Kampala or the Attorney-General? I think the Attorney-General will wind up.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to use this opportunity to thank colleagues for the contributions and observations they have made. We are doing this to get the best city for this country. On that note, I would like to make a few comments.

First, that the Bill was made in bad faith. I would like to inform colleagues that the purpose of this Bill –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, do not spend time on that. The rules do not allow honourable members, to impute bad motives. Any reference of bad motive is accordingly ignored. Therefore, deal with the substantive matters.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to ignore some parts of the contribution. I would like to comment on the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority, which is contained in the current law. The Government has since decided to regularise the ministries, departments and agencies to make sure that we create more efficiency and effectiveness and to also cut administrative costs. 

In that spirit, we agreed that we create a department in the Ministry of Kampala Capital City and do away with the Physical Planning Authority. Also, this department will have a coordination role to make sure that it coordinates the physical planning function in the metropolitan area. 

I would like to call upon colleagues, to support the concept of metropolitan development because this is the modern way to go. And internationally, this concept has helped very many cities to develop in a smarter way. The issues of having a dusty Wakiso and you come to a cleaner Kampala will be solved by this metropolitan physical planning function. When we go into the details of the report, we agreed with the committee that we drop the authority and maintain a department, which will coordinate the physical planning function in the metropolitan area.

We involved all the stakeholders in discussing this. Together with the technical staff, we realised that there are no overlapping mandates. I would like to inform Members that the Ministry of Local Government and the Physical Planning Board from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development were involved in this discussion. We realised that there is no overlapping mandate.

The second issue about Mengo Municipality; you articulated it very well and I will not go into the details of this. This was the reason we even had that side meeting with the Leader of the Opposition. We agreed that since Article 178 is not operationalised, then the issues of creating Mengo Municipality cannot suffice in this amendment. 

On the election of the Lord Mayor, as Government, we reconsidered our position and we said, the election of the Lord Mayor will be by adult suffrage. We are maintaining the position in the current law and it is even contained in the report of the committee. That was reconsidered in the spirit of not disenfranchising the people of Kampala, who elect their own Mayor.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of devolution, we are making it mandatory. In the current law, it is at the discretion of the Authority to devolve some functions to the divisions. We are replacing the word “may” with the word “shall” to make it mandatory. This is because since the Authority came into being nine years ago, devolution has not been operationalised and we realised that leaving it at the discretion of the Authority makes it next to impossible.

Mr Speaker, hon. Muyanja was concerned about the governance powers, especially when we are talking about the Physical Planning Authority. The physical planning department has nothing to do with governance and will have a coordination role only to make sure that KCCA speaks to Wakiso, Mukono and Mpigi when it comes to physical planning for the metropolitan area. The chairman of Wakiso will have his powers and the same will apply to the chairman of Mpigi and the mayor of Kira Municipality. They will just be in talks on issues of physical planning and I think this will give us a better, cleaner and organised city.

On whether to wait for the other cities, Mr Speaker, this is a Bill, which is amending an existing law and the cities we are talking about have not yet been approved. Therefore, including them here and deliberating upon them would be in anticipation. I request that we wait until we get to the bridge and cross it –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Speaker, I am sorry for interfering with the flow of discussion. On the issue of cities, there is a lot of anxiety and there have been many radio talk shows in Gulu, Arua, Mbarara and we, MPs, do not even have answers as to whether they are going to be cities or whether cities will be divided into constituencies. 

Therefore, can the minister or the Attorney-General inform us about when this thing is coming to an end because upcountry has become inhabitable for us MPs? They are asking us questions whose answers we do not know.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For purposes of correct information, this minister is only in charge of Kampala. Let us wait for the Attorney-General to pick this and advise us.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am a minister for the capital city, as you have put it. Therefore, I do not have answers for that.

Basically, most of the issues rotated around what I have said. I thank Members for their contributions and we shall get details of how we have fine-tuned this law when we go to the committee stage. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Any responses to the issues raised, learned Attorney-General?

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Government, in bringing this amendment Bill, is acting pursuant to its mandate granted by Article 5(6) of the Constitution. The provisions of the draft Bill, which are here for debate and enactment, are to provide for the administration and development of the city. All those issues of devolution of power, management and arrangement of administrative units are for the development of the city. The Bill is lawfully before this House. 

We should not consider activities which are not yet here. As my colleague, the minister in charge of KCCA, has said, we are precluded by rule 79 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament from debating in anticipation. The idea of intended cities is still being discussed. It is not yet – (Interjection) - well, it is in the budget but this House has not yet expressed itself on the matter – (Interjection) - you passed the budget but you have not made a resolution to pass those cities. You have the mandate. When we bring the proposal for the cities here, you could refuse them.

Therefore, considering them would be to debate in anticipation. Let us concentrate on what is before us since, in my submission, it is lawfully before the House. When time comes for the other cities, we shall cross that bridge when we reach there. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we have had a good debate on this matter of the motion for the second reading of this Bill, which was discussing the principles of the Bill. There have been a series of proposals for amendments and there have been meetings held. I do not know how easy it is going to be to process these various provisions that have been suggested for the improvement of the Bill.

Honourable members, if it is okay, I will put the question for the motion for second reading and we pose it here and get another time when we can process the Bill at committee stage.

Honourable members, I now put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Kampala Capital City Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As I said, we will reconvene for the committee stage of this Bill at an appropriate time and deal with the provisions of the Bill, amendments from the committee and all that has come from my left side of the House and we see how we can get a good law for the management of the capital city. Thank you. Next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LAW REVISION (PENALTIES IN CRIMINAL MATTERS) MISCELLANEOUS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, would you like to guide us on this matter?

5.31
THE CHAIRPERSON, LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS COMMITTEE (Mr Jacob Oboth): Mr Speaker, we were left with harmonising with the mover. We are lucky to have the Attorney-General here. I am not aware about what happened to hon. Sseggona today but last week, he was here every day and we lost that opportunity to debate the Bill – (Interjection)- he wants to give me information which might be useful.

MR SSEWUNGU: Since I am the whip of the honourable member, I can give information. Mr Speaker, hon. Sseggona is busy hosting the king of Buganda in his area and as you are aware, he is a former minister in the Buganda Kingdom. Actually, I called him when I read the Order Paper and he said he could not make it. However, he will be here on Thursday. That is the information I wanted to give, as the DP Whip.

MR OBOTH: Thank you. I believe that explains his absence from the House. He is very passionate about this matter and he had taken some serious steps. I hope the Attorney-General harmonised with him on the few areas to take aware the fears that we are abolishing the death penalty. Everyone should read that Bill again and the committee report. The mater has been resolved that the answer is “no”. If he is given another opportunity, I think the honourable member would be glad to come and be part of the process of the Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My issue is that I remember I proposed a question for this debate and you reported. Didn’t you?

MR OBOTH: We have reported. We were even processing it but we reached a point where –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We had even gone to the committee stage of this Bill. Correct? We had started processing and then at the second reading, there were issues of similar nature.

5.34
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, you may recall that on 24 May 2019, we tabled a Bill titled, “The Law Revision Bill, 2019,” which was read the first time. That law is still before the committee pending scrutiny and reporting because of the Bill we have in place, which could address the concerns of the honourable Private Member.

I wish to put it on record that we have strong reservations on this Bill and it is true that we are supposed to harmonise with hon. Sseggona for the reason I cannot explain. He has not approached us for harmonisation yet constitutionally, we are mandated to assist him prepare and process this Bill. I know the steps the Bill has taken but it is good to work in harmony.

The objects of this Private Member’s Bill fall within the ambit of the Bill that is already before this House. Therefore, isn’t it safer for us to save the time of Parliament; for you, Mr Speaker, to direct that we harmonise with the honourable Member and see whether we cannot accommodate the provisions herein within the Bill that is before the committee for consideration? That would be an orderly way of handling this matter, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, are there similarities or complete differences between the two sets of Bills, which are before you?

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, the Attorney-General is right to the extent that we are processing the Law Revision Bill and as it was directed, we invited the Attorney-General. He came and introduced and justified it.

Tomorrow, we shall meet the Law Reform Commission; they are revising all the laws of Uganda because they were last revised in 2000. I would not want to fall into the trap of debating the similarities but I think that the Attorney-General is acknowledging the fact that he has not met hon. Sseggona because even in the committee, we were advised that way.

Now that the Bill on law revision is before us and with the Law Reform Commission - they carried out a study and I think that if you were to give them time, hon. Sseggona would be able to meet them. It is not a question that hon. Sseggona looks for the Attorney-General; they should look for each other so that they meet and harmonise.

I believe that it is in the interest of this House, in that regard - Private Members are doing this because Government takes a long time to come with some of these necessary laws.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: A long time to bring Bills.

MR OBOTH: Yes, Mr Speaker, like a Private Member introduced here “The Succession Amendment Bill”, today, the Uganda Muslim Supreme Council came and they are in total variance with it. The Attorney-General came and was also in total variance with the Bill although he made undertakings that within two weeks, they would have a Bill here so that they see how to harmonise.

Therefore, I am speaking in the same direction; it is past two weeks. The pressure on us from the presiding officers of this House is that we should report on these Bills. Attorney-General, are you going to say that you have not met hon. Kajungu? Anyhow, we have concluded the hearing today and we are going to report and hope we shall not get into the same trouble.

Mr Speaker, it is within your mandate to make directives on this matter. The Attorney-General could be keeping away from hon. Sseggona or the other way could also be true. So, direct that both look for each other; somehow they will meet.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are two comments about this. First, there is a trend that is going to forestall business of this House and it is being set by the Office of the Attorney-General and which is dangerous to the operations of this House.

The Government brought a Bill; it was read for the first time and sent to a committee for processing. They have come back with a motion for second reading of the Bill and the motion is moved and even passed. After passing the motion, the Government asks that they need further consultation.

I am not talking about Private Members’ Bills but about Government Bills. Is it becoming a new procedure that is being adopted by the Government, that after your motion has been approved for second reading and we are going to process, you again withdraw the Bill and go with it back to Cabinet to start fresh consultations? That is not right.

By the time you come to the House, you must have finished your consultations. Parliament has handled the matter and there is no reason we should send back the Bill to Cabinet or anybody else to look at it again because we are ready to pass it.

It has happened to the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Bill and to so many other Bills; I can enumerate them. Either the Attorney-General is rushing here with Bills that have not been approved by Cabinet, which would be absolutely unusual; that is what you are beginning to make us feel. It looks like you bring some Bills here when Cabinet has not finalised. That might not be the right procedure. That is my first concern and I wish we could deal with this.

The second issue that I need to raise about this law revision and the penalties one, which is presented by hon. Sseggona, are the similarities that might be there but they are very divergent. I worked with the Law Reform Commission a long time ago as a junior Lawyer. The mandate of the Law Reform Commission is to reform laws not to revise them; law revision is a completely different ball game.

Revision, as I remember - and it was now the current secretary who was always chairing the commission for revision - we revised the laws and published them in 2000 - they had to create a separate commission outside the Law Reform Commission to do law revision.

I remember there was a lady from the United States and the current Secretary of the Law Reform Commission, Vestina. If you get those red volumes, you will find the names of the people who did the law revision; it had nothing to do with the Law Reform Commission.

The purpose for which this Law Revision Bill is being brought is to give the Law Reform Commission the mandate to do law revision and produce volumes like those that have been produced by the law revision people and secondly to have the mandate to take out laws that have already been changed, either by operation - I do not know whether it has extended to decisions to of court.

I do not think that it has extended there because the substance of hon. Sseggona’s Bill is that the highest court has made a decision that there should never be a mandatory death sentence in this country.

If it is going to be there, it should be discretionary and that is what hon. Sseggona was trying to deal with. So, would the Law Revision (Penalties in Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous (Amendment) Bill, 2015 give the Law Reform Commission the mandate to incorporate decisions of court? If it does not, Learned Attorney-General, you may have to assist this House so that we deal with harmonised things.

We do not have to say, “in accordance with the Supreme Court’s ruling in Kigula and somebody else, these decisions were taken...” Instead, we have to rely on the provision of the law that has taken away the mandatory death sentences from our laws now. 

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree with your observations. However, if hon. Sseggona’s Bill only intended to remove the mandatory nature of the death sentence, we would have no objection. That would be consistent with the Kigula case. We are not opposed to the argument that mandatory death sentence should be abolished.

However, hon. Sseggona’s Bill goes beyond that. In that case, it has not said that there should not be a death sentence; what the court overruled was the mandatory ruling, which precluded the discretion of the court. A death sentence can be there but it should not be mandatory. The court should use its discretion to decide when to impose a death sentence.

If that was the case sought to be achieved by hon. Sseggona, we would have no objection. However, he goes further into policy consideration. If you look at the Bill, he intends to completely abolish the death sentence by substituting it with life imprisonment. That one is a policy matter, which is not just a revision in accordance with the ruling given by the Supreme Court. 

Ugandans, through you, members of Parliament, should decide whether they would like to completely do away with the death sentence. That is our contention with hon. Sseggona’s Bill, which we think we can harmonise. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, to bring any law in tandem with the court’s decision is rightly the mandate of the Uganda Law Reform Commission. It revises obsolete laws; laws that have been overtaken by events and laws on which courts have expressed themselves. 

Now that we are putting this into place, we are pleading that hon. Sseggona should come to us and we see how to accommodate his draft. It is because you do not wake up without thorough consultation and decide on such a policy matter, which abolishes the death sentence. That is a policy matter, which requires a lot of consultation. That is the reason we are saying we should get time and harmonise with our friend. 

Actually, we had agreed the last time we were here but for reasons I cannot know, we never got to meet. It is presumed that him being the mover, he should seek to approach us. We have been here and we have not hidden like hon. Ssewungu was suggesting. Our offices are known –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let us not confuse each other. The issue that you are raising was raised by the presiding officer on that day, which happened to be me. You were not here. When we read the provisions of hon. Sseggona’s Bill, Clause 1(a)(iv) states, “substitute for the words ‘suffer death’ the words, ‘imprisonment for life’”. I pointed this out to him. 

I said, “You have presented a good argument around the Kigula Case and so on and so forth.” He said, “All we are trying to do is bring our laws to be in tandem with what the courts have decided.” I said, “This one exceeds it. It goes beyond what the courts have said.” That is how we paused the processing of the Bill and asked him to go and look at it again. 

The last time we met, he had agreed to change that completely. He said he is not continuing with the proposal to remove the death penalty and he would proceed with only updating what the Supreme Court said in the Kigula Case. That is the up-to-date position now. He is not seeking to abolish the death penalty. He is only seeking to deal with the court issue of removing a mandatory death sentence to leave the discretionary power of a death sentence to the courts that will handle the specific cases. That is where we are as Parliament. 

So, if that is the only issue, then why don’t we come back tomorrow or Thursday when hon. Sseggona is here and finish this Bill? This is a Bill of 2015.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, we have another concern. Hon. Sseggona seeks to amend each and every Bill – I think to bring an omnibus Bill. Our position is that instead of bringing one law containing omnibus appeal provisions, why don’t we go to each and every particular Act and amend it from there? In our view, that is neater and that is the reconciliation we want. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The title of the Bill is, “The Law Revision (Penalties in Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous (Amendment) Bill, 2015”. Substantially, it deals with all laws that have made provisions for a mandatory death penalty.

MR RUKUTANA: Well, I am not saying that Parliament cannot enact that. It can but it is not neat. The neater way is to go into every Act of Parliament and amend the provisions that are supposed to be amended. That is our position. 

5.51
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a feeling that after the Attorney-General appeared before the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, where they gave their position and it is captured in the report, they have had a change of mind. You have been commenting on that - where they come and make changes just to delay our processes.

I would like to concur with the Attorney-General. This Bill goes a little beyond that. It identified some of our statutes books, the penal codes, the UPDF Act and the Anti-Terrorism Act, and it went ahead to indicate all those other areas where offences attract a death penalty. We analysed each one of them in the committee report. 

If you want to refresh your memory again, you would have very little trouble. If you read the committee report, the only small area that needed clarification for Members here was that the way it was being debated by hon. Sseggona, Members in the House thought the death penalty had been abolished. That clarification is going to be made by hon. Sseggona when he comes. 

There are offences that were created a long time ago. Litigation has taken place under the UPDF Act in the case of the Uganda Law Society and another versus the Attorney-General about the execution of a UPDF soldier. It said it was in contravention of the – he was tried under the Court Martial but the Supreme Court said that contravened the Constitution because death has to be confirmed by the highest court.

So, some of those things are what we processed. Can anything come from the left hand side of the presiding officer? Yes, both hands are useful. Thank you very much.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I heard the chairperson of the committee state that hon. Sseggona is always here. A few minutes ago, the Attorney-General, who is my good friend, stated here that his office is there. I would like to know if it is not by hon. Sseggona - 

Mr Speaker, we have been here and you know how we suffer with these laws without the Attorney-General being here. Would it be procedurally okay for this House to know who is failing to meet who so that we can get a solution by your directive? I know hon. Sseggona as a flexible person and they are friends with the Attorney-General.

These are matters where Members can go behind the Speaker and sort out the anomaly so that the House can move. However, we cannot keep -(Interjection)– yes; just behind there. The minister and I can go there and we mitigate some issues.

Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that - hon. Sseggona is a shadow minister this side and you are a minister the other side and both of you are lawyers; we could be moving now but we cannot tell who has failed to meet the other because hon. Sseggona is not around. We were only saved by the chairperson who said that hon. Sseggona is always here.

I pray that procedurally, we know whether the honourable minister can assure the House that he is going to meet with his colleague and we move on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this Bill is of 2015; it has taken a lot of parliamentary work and resources. There is no way we are going to leave it at this. 

Therefore, learned Attorney-General, this matter is coming on Thursday and hon. Sseggona will be here to process it. One way or the other, we must conclude this business because it has taken quite some time of the House. 

Therefore, we will deal with this on Thursday; whether you are going to consult or not is now immaterial for our purpose because we will move whichever way and finish with this Bill. It might be in your interest to consult hon. Sseggona.

Tomorrow, we will deal more comprehensively with the KCCA law and finish it. Then probably on Thursday, we also finish with this law and other matters that we paused for handling on Thursday, mainly coming from Private Members as well.

Honourable members, the House is adjourned to tomorrow, 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 5.56 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 31 July, 2019 at 2 o’clock.) 

