
Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Tuesday, 23 July 2019

Parliament met at 3.41 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting and I sincerely apologise for the late start, which was due to an important visit from the African Union. We have just seen off the former President of South Africa, His Excellency Thabo Mbeki, who is here on an assignment of the African Union to consult the Government and the Parliament on regional integration in the horn of Africa.

Today, I learnt that we are part of the horn; I thought it was only the other countries but apparently, we are a part. He is going to meet the Committee on Foreign Affairs and I have asked that they bring a document here, which we can discuss and then take a position. I am glad that they have remembered that Parliament is a stakeholder in the issues of integration.

Secondly, I understand there has been a bit of “drought” in the vicinity but I would like to assure you that by the end of the week, there will be “good rain” and then on Tuesday next week, there will be very heavy “showers”. (Laughter) 

Thirdly, as you may recall, last financial year, a new District called Kikuube was curved out of Hoima, hon. Tophace Kaahwa has written to me that she has opted to go to Kikuube. Therefore, I have directed the Clerk to declare a vacant seat in Hoima District.

I also direct the Clerk to adjust the records in the House to indicate that the hon. Kaahwa is now the Member of Parliament for Kikuube. She will not be required to take another oath because she is already here. Therefore, Clerk, please, declare that vacancy.

Honourable members, I would like to also inform you that last week, I was in Morocco for an official visit and also in Egypt at the invitation of my colleague Speaker, Mr Habib El Maliki of Morocco. 

Morocco has been out of the African Union for some time and they returned in 2017. They are now seeking new partnerships within the continent. He will be visiting us later this year so that we can sign a Memorandum of Understanding between Parliament of Uganda and the Parliament of Morocco.

After Morocco, I went to the Arab Republic of Egypt again at the invitation of the Speaker, Rt hon. Dr Ali Abdel. Several interesting things were shown to us there. The most important in my view was the visit to the investment centre of the Government at the Ministry of Investments.

They have a one-step centre in reality, not in words. They have an investment map; you simply touch a button and it will show you the whole country; showing you where you can do mining, oil, agriculture and other things.

At that very place, you can register a company that very day. You can also apply for a work permit on the same day. On the same map, they show you the facilities like universities or a hospital so that as you are making plans to bring your family to Egypt, you decide based on the facilities there. I was amazed.

I hope that our investment authority will try to emulate this. I told the Speaker there that I was going to send our committees there, to study what is happening and see how we can borrow, it was fantastic.

After that, we were taken to a farm in the desert at the end of the country in a village called Fayoum, where the ordinary people are doing irrigation using solar energy and doing very serious farming. Their gardens are better than ours and yet, there is no rain in Egypt but they are doing irrigation through solar power. 

I agreed with my counterpart that I would send the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries because I was there for only one hour. I would like them to go and spend two or three days to study how these people are working and also the Committee on Climate Change to discuss on how to do conservation and environmental management.

I will be writing to the committees so that the Clerk can arrange for that. I also discussed with the Minister for Water Resources, who assured me they have training programmes in Cairo. The civil servants have been attending and I thought that our staff could attend to get more knowledge and if possible, the Members of Parliament as well.

They offered to train our Members and staff in diplomacy at the Egyptian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. All those are in the pipeline and we look forward to working closely with them.

Honourable members, you cannot believe that the bulk of Egypt is a desert but there is tarmac and power everywhere. I hope we can emulate and take these things to our people.

I would like to introduce a delegation of ladies led by Ms Kivumbi, who came to visit me and to see how Parliament works. They are very smart; welcome. (Applause)

On a sad note, you are aware that Mr John Kisembo, former Inspector General of Police 1999/2001 passed away. He was laid to rest on Sunday in Kagadi District. He served the Police Force with honour and distinction.

After the Police Force, he joined the United Nations as an International Public Officer and served as Director UN African Institute for Prevention of Crime and Treatment of Offenders, (UNAFRI) based in Kampala. He provided leadership both in Uganda and the region; he was also a Member of the Uganda Golfers Association.

On another sad note, our very own Kenneth Madete, Clerk to the East African Assembly lost his son, Roy Enock Madete. He was a Senior Five student at St Mary’s College, Kisubi. He will be laid to rest in Muyembe tomorrow 24th July, 2019. I invite you honourable members to stand up in memory of those two people.

(Member rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there were a few matters of national concern.

3.51
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I have a matter of national importance to raise. Yesterday, at around noon, Busia Municipality was shocked to see that one of my voters was shot by an anti-smuggling police officer. This person who was not a smuggler. He was just moving from the customs department, going on his way to look for survival. 

Madam Speaker, this has persistently been a very big problem to my voters and many times, I have called upon Government to restrict its officers to see how to differentiate between smugglers and non-smugglers. They are cross border traders. The challenge we are facing on the border is that we have cross border traders who are there through the East African protocols but our officers have not been sensitised about the protocols, which is causing a very big problem. They think anybody they see carrying a manufactured good from Uganda and taking it home is smuggling.

I, therefore, have a prayer that Mr Sowedi Sadick should be treated by the Uganda Revenue Authority. They should take care of his family because he is bedridden at the Health Centre IV in Busia Municipality. 

My second prayer is that our people who are on the borders, through the Ministry of East African Affairs, should be treated fairly. Not everybody who is moving on the border is a criminal. This has gone on for a very long time and moreover, our people have not been sensitised at all on how to stay on the porous border.

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, I request that the Ministry of East African Affairs should tell our people on the border about the trade agreement that Kenya made with Uganda recently because we are have a challenge. Since they deployed soldiers, they cannot differentiate – they do not work under the laws. Many times, they are causing conflicts between these two countries on the border and it is a very big problem to our people. Those are my prayers.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of East African Affairs here but we want to invite him to explain to us what arrangement he has made to sensitise the people at the border and the security agencies about movements there. He should come and give us his answer next Tuesday.

3.54
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Eight to nine years ago, the police units came to the assistance of the districts that used to move kilometres to access assistance from the centres. They established some police posts in busy towns, trading centres and small areas that had become risky to the community because of the crime rate that was high at the time. 

Recently, I think last year, the police personnel from those police posts were reduced and only one or two police officers were left on each police posts. The crime rate has again picked up. To worsen the matter, they have now closed those police posts in all the centres. The crime rate has even gone higher. The communities are now worried because murders and robbery are the order of the day. We have sent messages to the police stations and nobody can help. 

There was a time I had an issue in one of my areas and as a Member of Parliament, I called the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) and the police promised they would come. It took them six hours to reach the scene. Last week, somebody was killed in the nearby village. The call was made at 10a.m. when we discovered the body but the police from the centre arrived at 5 p.m. 

Therefore, our prayer is; can the police reinstate the police posts to help the community, – since people are used to these police posts? Otherwise, we are again bringing a situation where people- (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: These are the police stations at the centre? I know the Minister of Internal Affairs is not ready. (Interjections) He is ever ready? (Laughter)

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, you are absolutely right. I cannot answer that question immediately. However, because of the expansion of the administrative units and scarcity of resources, it has not been possible to maintain all the units that had been opened earlier especially the police posts in rural areas. 

You will also agree that in strategic deployment of these policemen, it is risky to deploy an armed person in a police post when he is alone because he then becomes a target of attack. However, I will find out from the Inspector General of Police? the details of those posts which have been closed. We hope that with the current proposal for us to start recruitment, we should be able to reinforce some of them and possibly improve the deployment in some of the areas. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you be ready next Tuesday?

MR OBIGA: Today is Tuesday – I would like to suggest you give me Wednesday because this involves countrywide data and we would like to give a comprehensive position. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Internal Affairs will come back to us next Wednesday on the issue of withdrawal of the police services from some areas. 

3.58
MS STELLA ATYANG (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. The issue of famine is worsening in the sub-regions of Karamoja and Teso. In my district, there are many cases of malnutrition and deaths caused by famine. So, I call upon the respective ministries to respond to that urgently.

Honourable Minister of Health, the worst scenario of Tuberculosis (TB) spread is in my district. There are many cases. For example, one health centre may be found to have 150 cases of TB. Added to the number of these cases are those others captured by other health centres that do the screening and treatment.

Much as Government is trying to provide medicines and requirements for testing, there is low adherence to treatment due to lack of food. You know the treatment of TB requires a patient to have eaten. So, people are not adhering to treatment because they have no food.

My appeal is for the Minister, Office of the Prime Minister (Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees) and Ministry of Health to place a special food support for these patients in order for them to adhere to treatment to get healed very fast.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Health is here to talk about nutrition. 

4.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the message that the honourable member has raised regarding TB. TB is a highly contagious and infectious disease and therefore, it needs to be managed well. Those who have been diagnosed and found with TB need to take the treatment as prescribed by the health workers or else they would actually infect others.

The medicines are available. However, I have taken note of the challenge that the people cannot take the medicine on empty stomachs. They actually need to be fed well but we also need to move in very fast because if they fail to take this medication, then the TB will progress into the multi-drug resistant TB and that becomes more expensive.

So, we will take up this matter and give a special support to this area to ensure that the Minister, Office of the Prime Minister (Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees) provides the food so that the people take medications. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.00
MS REHEMA WATONGOLA (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. I am sorry that my voice is not well; am sick.

On Wednesday 17 July 2019 at around 8p.m, one of my schools caught fire in Kamuli Town, near Kamuli Police Station. 

At that hour, the pupils were in preps and one dormitory of the boys caught fire. That dormitory accommodates 120 pupils but there were only two pupils who had gone to collect their books, which they had forgotten. They found the dormitory on fire.

The District Police Commander was contacted and since it is near the school, he came quickly and tried to call the fire brigade vehicle that is parked at Jinja Police Station. Unfortunately, the one who was concerned in Jinja responded that the vehicle was down and had no tyres.

It was terrible that the fire continued and spread to other buildings. However, if it were not for the community, which came and rescued the pupils, we would have got some deaths. We would like to thank God that we did not register any deaths. However, all the property of the pupils was burnt. 

My prayer is that the Government should wake up and buy fire brigade vehicles for these police officers at regional level; since Kamuli has a regional police officer. In the entire Busoga, we have only one vehicle, which is stationed at Jinja Police Station. When we get a fire in Kamuli, you cannot run to Kamuli-Buyende - Luuka- Bugiri with one vehicle.

The second prayer still goes to the Government. We request that since these pupils are still at school and were in boarding, they not have anywhere to reside. We request that Government comes up and assists us with building materials to reconstruct that building so that our children can continue with –(Member time out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we ask the Ministry of Internal Affairs to come and brief us on what plans he has to facilitate fire brigade throughout the country. 

Then, the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, please, assist and arrange to repair the township school. There are over 3000 children in that school. Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, please, support the school with materials and support the children too and report back to us next Tuesday.

4.05 
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance touching an announcement that appeared in the New Vision where the Minister of Public Service, hon. Muruli Mukasa was quoted to have told the nation that Government is interested in people of 60 years and above to stay in the civil service and that the retirement age in Uganda is going to be raised to 70 years.

It shall be recalled that there have been calls from our people especially the youths to decrease the retirement age from 60 to 55. To answer them back by way of increasing the retirement age to 70 is not only to show insensitivity to the needs of our people, but also to the fact that we do not respect that the power is derived from the people.

Madam Speaker, Uganda is the second youngest nation in the world and it is not tenable that such a country would think about raising retirement age. My constituents, especially the youth, would love to be clarified whether this is the position of Government that the retirement age is going to be increased to 70 years.

In addition, today in the New Vision, the headline read that the Ministry of Transport and Works intends to ban transport commuter taxis owned by individuals.

In preference for taxis owned by associations and companies. My people would like to know if this is true and if it true, the plans that Government is putting up to accommodate people with one taxi that helps them to earn a living and the fact that you cannot force people to associate.

If we want the Kenyan way, where they use SACCOs, what are the plans? Should the SACCOs be formed today or tomorrow? When is this thing going to start in view of the fact that when a law is brought here in Parliament, it is supposed to last for only 45 days? I beg to be clarified and guided on that matter. Much obliged.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the issue of retirement, we ask the Ministry of Public Service to come and clarify what his proposals are because the retirement age was 55 years and it was raised to 60 years. The country needs to know what this is about.

Can we ask the Minister of Transport and Works to come and let us know whether what has been published in the Government paper is true because it is a big headline on the issue of banning individuals? However, in a liberalised economy, I do not know.

Therefore, Ministry of Transport and Works and Ministry of Public Service, come and give us an explanations next week on Tuesday. 

4.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker, I rise to respond on the issue of retirement age that hon. Nambooze has talked about. The Minister of Public Service together with his Permanent Secretary were just trying to inform this House that the issue regarding retirement age arose when the Ministry of Health had presented to Cabinet a paper regarding the challenges that we are facing.

We are losing senior consultants retiring at 60 years and yet, they are still able to serve this country. They are very few in the country. If you look at the neurosurgeons in this country - at the time we presented this paper, the neurosurgeons in this country were only five and they retire at 60 years and get out of Public Service.

Therefore, the Ministry of Public Service was asked to come up with a paper so that Cabinet can debate it and pass it and bring to this House. 

That is the information I wanted to give this House.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, nevertheless, the Minister of Public Service should come here and explain to us about that issue. Thank you.

4.11
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (IND, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter that deals with these laws that we passed here; the Local Government Act, the Public Finance Management Act as well as the Appropriations Act, which we pass every financial year.

In exercise of its powers under the Local Government Act, Kabale District Local Government passed a budget, which was subsequently appropriated by this House, wherein it allocated funds to upgrade Kahondo Health Centre II to a Health Centre III status. The district did this in its capacity as one of the services decentralised under the Local Government Act.

Two weeks ago, we got information that the Permanent Secretary to the Ministry of Health, on her own and unilaterally, decided to reallocate the funds that had been appropriated to that health centre III to another called Buramba.

I have got information that the technocrats in the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education and Sports, Ministry of Water and Environment and Ministry of Local Government have usurped our appropriation roles. We appropriate funds to Local Government but from nowhere, these technocrats take over the role to reallocate the funds, which they go and share again. (Applause)

This is a very serious matter that is not only affecting service delivery but also a method that has been used to steal funds. If a district has already committed funds to a health centre and have the Bills of Quantity, where do you get new ones to construct a new one in a different place? My prayer is two-fold;
 
First, this reallocation of funds from Kahondo Health Centre by the Ministry of Health should stop immediately and funds be returned to the health centre for upgrading of its status.

Secondly, the Committee on Local Government starts investigating all reallocations that have been made from the monies we have appropriated to districts. 

I beg that this conduct of the technocrats must be condemned and should stop forthwith.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to advise us whether this reallocation was actually done after Parliament had appropriated funds?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: There are very many cases. 

THE SPEAKER:  Let us deal with this first.

4.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 is clear. If there is any reallocation, it can only be through a virement, which is restricted to 10 per cent. 

It is not possible, or if it were done, it would be wrong, for any accounting officer to be allocated money to do Activity A and they instead do Activity B.

Therefore, I would like to advise hon. Niwagaba to properly crosscheck the facts he is talking about because I am aware of these facts. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the House would like you to tell us whether or not the funds were reallocated from one health centre to another.

MR BAHATI: We will get the facts about that particular incident. Kahondo is in my district, Kabale and so is Bulamba. The latter is actually in my constituency.

I will get information –(Interjections) I will get information about this matter and report back to the House this Thursday.

We will get information about these two health centres because they are part of the loan that was approved under Inter-Governmental Fiscal Transfers Programme. We will get information about the health centres, which are supposed to be upgraded this year vis-à-vis what we appropriated. The House will be furnished with the information. If there is anybody who reallocated these funds, that will be wrong and can be reversed. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you say that there are others, put them in writing, bring them tomorrow and I will direct it.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, hon. Niwagaba drives the concern. However, there is a procedural matter that he raised. This Parliament, under the Constitution is the only institution mandated with adequate and only power to do appropriation.

Should this House find it a fact that after appropriating funds, there has been re-appropriation and re-engineering, it should not be taken lightly.

I believe that hon. Okoth would have talked about Namuwaya Health Centre III in Tororo. If we allow this to happen, this Parliament is losing its power. We are losing our constitutional mandate to do appropriation on behalf of the people of Uganda.

The ministries should be guided to take heed. Should we find this happening, what do we do? Some action needs to be taken.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what should be done is within the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. Let us hear from them before we take action.

Honourable members, in the public gallery are students of St Kizito Technical Institute, Madera from Soroti Municipality represented by hon. Ariko and Hon. Osegge. They even have badges; are you prefects? They are very smart. You are welcome.
 
4.20
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance to draw the attention of Government, specifically the Ministry of Education and Sports on the effectiveness and adequacy of Higher Education Students’ Financing Scheme across the country.

The scheme, coordinated by the Higher Education Students’ Financing Board, aims at increasing access to the higher education and improved skilling to the largely poor Ugandan children that could otherwise not afford tertiary education.

With the introduction and implementation of Universal Primary Education (UPE) and Universal Secondary Education (USE), many Ugandan children have managed to complete secondary education but with no corresponding absorption at tertiary level.

While addressing this Parliament earlier this year, the President mentioned that 68 per cent of Ugandans are still in the subsistence economy - living from hand to mouth.

Madam Speaker, it is common knowledge that competition for the State scholarship mainly favours children from high economic status, whose families can afford good secondary schools. Students who get Government scholarships mostly come from Namagunga, Namilyango, Nabisunsa, Gayaza, Buddo, Seeta High School, Kisubi, Namugongo, Ntare and others.

Madam Speaker, on average, these schools pay Shs 2 million per term and that is an average of Shs 6 million per year. It is these children that go ahead to receive free –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable member, what is the issue? 

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, the issue is that today - the other day, the honourable member from Rubanda asked the question to extend the application for the loan scheme. Apparently, we have received according to the Minister’s statement 7,000 applicants. However, the loan scheme is only able to absorb 1,500 students leaving a backlog of 5,500.

The issue is that the loan scheme has been given only Shs 2.4 billion and the students on Government sponsorship are getting Shs 72 billion.

Madam Speaker, what is the rationale if the rest of the people remain unsponsored and yet, they are not able to pay for tertiary institutions?

My prayer is - can the ministry organise itself and pull out the poor people because the 68 per cent is an issue that we need to discuss in this Parliament. The poor people of this country also need to access tertiary education.

Madam Speaker, I would like to draw your attention to the areas of Kamuli and Kanungu where I come from. I studied from Kihihi High School. They pay Shs 150,000 per term. That is Shs 450,000 per year. They cannot afford to pay the Shs 2,000,000 per semester in a tertiary institution.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that we increase the money - and in the last budget, loan scheme requested for only 7.5 to make sure they pay for 4000 students. Why can’t we increase this money for the Students’ Loan Scheme such that the poor people also access tertiary education?

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, in May, we did the budget and I think we also handled higher education financing scheme. Therefore, I do not think there is anything we can change now. However, the new budget cycle begins in October. Can you really rise to the occasion honourable members and fight for this money to increase in the next budget cycle?

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, we have been receiving many supplementary budgets. It is my humble appeal to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to bring a supplementary such that we augment the resources of the loan scheme now because the 5,500 students that are not going to access the loan scheme are too many.

THE SPEAKER: Where has the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development gone? Now, we are aware that under the law, you can raise a supplementary so long as it does not exceed 3 per cent; can you consider the children of Uganda in this proposal? Can the Minister of Education and Sports say something?
4.25
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, before the minister comes in, we also have issues concerning the Student Loan Scheme money. The students that are considered for this money are not seen in our constituencies. We wonder where they get them from. As we review and study this, we equally need to know the criteria they use to select these students. Otherwise, we are going  to raise the supplementary, raise money here but still the students that are benefiting from all areas will be the same students to benefit.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Ministers of Education and sports and of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

4.26
 MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my honourable colleague for raising this concern. It is true that the students who apply for the loan scheme are quite many. However, unfortunately, according to the available resources, the ministry can only afford to cater for 1500 students.

It is true we need the resources but like my colleagues are saying, unless the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Planning avails the money, we cannot afford this. However, the problem is, as we speak, we have already passed the budget. We cannot promise that we are able to increase this money.

Secondly, my colleague has also pointed out an important issue on the students that apply for the loan scheme. This scheme only benefits those students who are doing science courses at the university and for other diploma courses. Secondly, the students who are disabled are also given this opportunity. 

Madam Speaker, we have always given the public notice on how they can apply and when they apply, the Student Loan Scheme Board sits and does the selection- (Interruption) (Hon. Kasibante rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Order Members. Please, resume your seats, honourable members. 

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, on Thursday, my colleague hon. Karooro, presented a statement on behalf of the Ministry of Education and Sports on the issue of the Student Loan Scheme. I would like to promise this House that tomorrow, we could give more information on what the Members have raised on the issues of this scheme.

I would like to request that on the issue of finances, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development could clarify but we can provide information tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the Members would like to hear whether you would want to apply for a supplementary to support more students so that we ask the minister to give us money. Would you support a supplementary to give us more money so that we get more students and add on the 1,500?

MS SENINDE: We definitely support that, Madam Speaker. I would like to assure the house.

THE SPEAKER: So can you write to the Minister of Finance and ask for a supplementary?

MS SENINDE: I would like to request that tomorrow, we come and give information to this House and then we can be able to take that decision.

4.30
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was in Bungatira- a sub-county in Gulu District yesterday and met a boda boda youth group. They expressed fear about the allegation of recruitment of a rebel group known as B13. They said, “Tell us, are they not going to arrest us a?” The place is said to be called Bungatira. Then, I also watched a clip on YouTube where the RDC was talking about that rebel group.
 
You will recall that on this Floor, I raised an issue of our children, who might not have been brought up well, which is not their mistake, because it is the mistake of the parents that did not guide them well. In Luo, those children are nicknamed “Aguo” and they can cause some insecurity. However, I think that cannot be termed as the rebel group B13. 

Therefore, can the Ministers for Defence and for Security clarify on this? We do not want our youth to live in fear and run around. They have arrested many of them – I have some names here: James Olola, Godfrey Laroke, Denis Owuru, Christopher Oweka, Denis Opio, Maurice Oponya, Monday Okello, Walter Oketcho and Steven Ojok. 

As leaders, we have a task to explain to the people who ask us questions on this. Therefore, I am asking the honourable minister to let us know if there is a rebel group in Gulu District. If yes, where is their command post? Who leads this group? Otherwise, do not terrorise our youth. 

My second issue is on Kanungu where hon. Dr Baryomunsi comes from. In 2000, there was the Kibwetere Cult. There was supposed to be some investigation carried out and a report provided by Justice Augustus Kania, which I think was never received. 

There was also an indication that a place of about 200 acres was to be gazetted as a tourist centre. However, right now, there is a James Byaruhanga occupying that land - that is the name I got from the people who visited my office. They told me that James Byaruhanga does not allow the orphans of those people that were killed some 19 years ago to even visit the site of the tombs. 

What can the ministries of Gender, Labour and Social Development as well as that of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities say about this issue in Kanungu? These people were also supposed to be compensated and their children supported. 

This issue should have been brought to the attention of this House by the honourable member from Kanungu but these people came to my office. Nothing has been done so far. Can they explain to us and see how best to help those victims because they were left young? Their land was sold to the Kibwetere Cult and so, they are stuck. What can be done by the line ministry to help these people? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: This matter has been in the public domain for a long time. Actually, recently, I received another petition and even in the Ninth Parliament, people have been coming to inquire and I send them to the President. When I send them to the Prime Minister, I do not get answers. Can we task the Prime minister to come to this House next week and tell us what has happened to the report on the Kibwetere issues so that the country can come to terms?

Hon. Dr Baryomunsi, do you want to say something? Let us hear from the people of Kanungu. 

4.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for raising this issue.

It is true that there was a cult called the Restoration of the Ten Commandments, which was headquartered in Kanungu Town Council, which is in the heart of my constituency, Kinkizi East.

On 17 March 2000, they burnt people, as all of us know. It is true that there is a team of people who say they are orphans of the people who died in that inferno that occurred in Kanungu. They used to come to Parliament as well as State House and the President’s Office seeking Government compensation or support in terms of resettlement. 

They petitioned the Office of the Speaker. A petition was processed and I tabled it in Parliament. In the Ninth Parliament, I moved that petition myself here before it was sent to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to process. A report was brought here and the general recommendation in the report was that Government should study this matter and see how to support these people. 

Madam Speaker, the challenge was that it was not easy to verify and confirm whether these were genuine survivors or orphans. Like the Leader of the Opposition said, an investigation was not done when the fire happened and so it was not easy to establish who exactly died in the inferno. Therefore, it has become difficult to ascertain that these are genuine orphans or survivors of the inferno. 

Anyhow, I would like to inform the House that the matter has been handled by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. He constituted a committee, which is chaired by Gen. Moses Ali. It has a number of ministers, including the ministers of: Local Governments, Lands, Internal Affairs, Tourism and others. We have been meeting. 

The issue is that we have been examining the matter and the view –(Interjections)– yes, I am a member of that committee by virtue of being from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

We even visited Kanungu and we have done a lot of work. It is true that the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities has always wanted to build a monument in Kanungu in commemoration of what happened.

With respect to the ownership of the land - this land, where the church had been built, belonged to a one Paul Kashaku. He was the father of one of the leaders of the cult, Credonia Mwerinde and the land was titled. Before the people were burnt, the leaders of this cult handed over this title to the police and so, it has been in police custody. 

However, later on, two of the grandchildren of the late Paul Kashaku applied for the estates of Kashaku and it was granted. They took possession of that land and sold it to one Benon Byaruhanga. The Government is in the process of recovering the land from Mr Benon Byaruhanga with the view – (Interjections)– yes, it is in the process of acquiring. Once that is done, then the Government through the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities intends to construct a monument in Kanungu.

With regard to the petition of the survivors –(Interruption) 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. A question has been raised seeking clarification and a report of the incidence of Kanungu. I would like to request you to procedurally guide whether the minister is presenting that report or he is just having a conversation with the Members of Parliament. We do appreciate the conversation if we have the laxity of time. (Laughter) The Leader of the Opposition is specifically asking for a report. I would like to know whether the minister is proceeding right by involving us in a conversation, yet there is nothing even on our iPad to guide us on what he is saying. He has not even sought for the guidance of the Speaker in this particular conversation. Is he procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had already ruled that the Prime Minister should come here this week, give us a report and end this 19 years saga. I know Dr Baryomunsi has some information but we want an official report from the Government on what happened to the investigations. The Prime Minister should come and brief the country.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I windup, I would like to be captured properly. The subcommittee of Cabinet is concluding and the report will be submitted to Cabinet for the final decision of the Government. As you have guided, the Prime Minister will come and give a report to the House. 

However, you have benefited from the information, which I have given. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, can you explain to us the circumstances under which those mentioned names were arrested and whether there are rebel activities? 

4.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (VETERAN AFFAIRS) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Madam Speaker, first of all, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs is not aware of any rebel group in Gulu.

Secondly, recruitment of Local Defence Unit and Uganda Peoples Defence Forces is always done in consultation with the local authorities. I will take notes from the Leader of the Opposition, investigate the case and report on Tuesday next week.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, minister. Next Tuesday, we will get a statement concerning those people who were arrested. 

4.45
MS ROSE KABAGYENYI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance about the shootings and murders in Kisoro District. You have read in the media that last Saturday, we lost a young lawyer by the names of Isaac Sendegeya who was shot at his home. In the same night, one called Emmanuel Uwimana was also kidnapped and up to date, we have not seen him.

Since January this year, we have lost 13 people. Nine of them were shot and four of them were murdered in cold blood. Kisoro is a district bordering Congo and Rwanda and our borders are porous. There are many guns in the hands of wrong people and many of them are people who come as refugees. There are many illegal guns in Kisoro and the security reports revealed this. For example, when people go to dig in their gardens, they find guns hidden there.  Our prayer – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MS KABAGYENYI: We request the security agencies, ministries of Defense and Veteran Affairs and Internal Affairs, to come to our rescue because our people are living in fear. Today, many people have feared to go and bury the boy due to insecurity. 

The open border policy should be reviewed because there are very many people who enter into Uganda through Kisoro and they do not surrender as refugees but are loitering in the communities. We suspect that this is the source of insecurity. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama, can you explain the issue of Kisoro; the shootings and insecurity at the border?

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, the security agencies are working together to investigate those cases. Soon or later, we shall come with a comprehensive statement. Their concern is on the border areas.

THE SPEAKER: Can we expect a statement next Thursday?

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you.

4.48
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent and national importance. The subject headline is, shoot-to-kill; deployment of police and military personnel resulting into shutdown of Babughirana Abattoir, shooting and critically injuring three unarmed, law abiding, peace loving cattle traders, indiscriminate arrests, violent beatings of women and forcing them to knee-walk on the tarmac road. This happened on Monday 24 June 2019.

This has been going on and because it has taken a security dimension raised to the minister right here in the House, hon. Kania Obiga. Yesterday, at 1.45 p.m., I put it to his attention that I would raise this matter on the Floor. The minister responded, “thank you for alerting me.” I will prepare as you bring it to the Floor. I thought I needed also to bring it to the attention of the Minister of Security – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR KATUSABE: Gen. Elly Tumwiine. Madam Speaker, that was yesterday at 8.27 p.m. When I indicated to Gen. Tumwiine about the shoot-to-kill instruction in my constituency and brought to his attention that I would raise this matter on the Floor of Parliament and that I had already booked with your office, Madam Speaker. This is what Gen. Tumwiine said in my face.

“Who is the Speaker? Who is she? What is Parliament? The Speaker rules over Parliament. She does not rule over Uganda. This country was liberated by the military but not her Parliament. Do not tell me about your Speaker and about your Parliament. The army cannot be directed by civilians.”

This is critical. If this cannot worry anyone then I do not know the future and stability of this country. Specifically, the extremely unfortunate and unfathomable remarks from Gen. Tumwiine, the Minister of Security, is a direct attack on the Constitution of Uganda, specifically Article 79 –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Read that constitutional provision – put it on the record. I will give you two minutes.

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Gen. Elly Tumwiine’s remarks – and I documented them – were a direct attack on the Constitution of Uganda, specifically Article 79(1)(2)(3) –(Interruption)

MS SENINDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I respect my brother and honestly, I have been constrained to rise on a point of order. However, I have heard his statement and I find that the way he is proceeding, quoting somebody who is not here in the House without substantive evidence of what he is quoting, is not procedurally right. I do not think it is right for him to present it on the Floor and it goes into the Hansard. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Member who is being talked about is a Member of this House. If he was a Permanent Secretary or an Under Secretary, I would say “stop” because they cannot come here. I think the Member was continuing with his submission when you interrupted him. Complete.

MR KATUSABE: Thank you for your wise ruling. I would not like to repeat myself. I have made a citation of the Article of the Constitution that was attacked yesterday at 8.27 p.m., specifically Chapter Six, Article 79(1)(2)(3).

My prayers, Madam Speaker, are that:

This House directs the opening of Babughirana and Alisam abattoirs unconditionally and immediately remove the illegal cattle market shift enforcement, which are against our liberalised market economy and the Ease African Customs Market Protocol.
Denounce the illegal and forged directive from the Director General of International Security Organisation (ISO) – the dates are there. I will not go into the details but I will lay it at the Table to save time.
Demand for the immediate withdrawal of the shoot-to-kill military that the minister was justifying in his office yesterday.
Immediately stop excessive, ruthless, severer and violent use of force.
Government should accurately interpret, fairly enforce the law and stop selectively dispensing justice.
Identify, investigate and disarm any private citizens in my constituency with police uniform and guns to end gun deaths in my constituency. In the interest of time, Madam Speaker, I will lay this entire document on Table because I had 14 prayers.
The Government should compensate Babughirana cattle traders for the loss of revenue resulting from the illegal closure of their cattle business, which is their sole source of livelihood. They are already defaulting on loans, children are out of school and families are starving.

Madam Speaker, in the interest of time, I lay this set of prayers on Table. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, about a month ago, hon. Kiiza raised the issue of an abattoir in Kasese, which had been taken over by the military. Isn’t this the same thing? Has the minister answered hon. Kiiza’s query?

4.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (VETERAN AFFAIRS) (Lt Col Bright Rwamirama): Madam Speaker, first of all, the allegations are really unfortunate, if they are true. I do not believe that those were the words of Gen. Tumwiine.

Secondly, the security situation on that border is being handled by a joint team of police, ISO, Ministry of Internal Affairs and Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs. We are going to take up the matter and report on it, together with the earlier concerns of the killings on the same border.

THE SPEAKER: There is an abattoir, which I think has been grabbed. There is something hon. Kiiza raised concerning an abattoir in Kasese. Is it the same one hon. Katusabe is raising?

Honourable minister, it is not a border issue but about an abattoir, which has been either occupied by the army or something. Is it the police?

4.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, first of all, I have risen to acknowledge that yesterday, hon. Katusabe informed me about what had happened on Sunday in Kasese Municipality over the issue of cattle traders. There is a cattle market in that area, which is being contested by two companies. One is called Babughirana Butchermen Development Association and the other is Alisum Company Limited. 

These two companies initially used to trade together but at some point, they broke into two and established markets, which are about 2 Km from each other but within the municipality.

However, due to business rivalry because they are all trading in cattle; when they trade on the same day, there has been that problem of one group trying to divert the cattle traders to one market from the other and vice versa.

As a result, the District Security Committee, which comprises of the various organs met and on the advice of the Director of the Internal Security Organisation, they agreed that the markets be separated into two segments on different days or weeks. One company trades for two weeks and another for the next two weeks.

The issue here is not whether that is the right decision or not. I am just describing the events, which have led to the situation. Because of that, one company disagreed to this as unacceptable in a private market in our economy.

However, the District Security Committee said that it helps them to manage the conflict between the two companies; as I said, it is not a question of who is right or wrong at the moment.

Therefore, it is drawing in the Ministry of Local Government, which is responsible for the setting up of these markets together with the local district organisations, the security organisation under the Ministry of Security, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and other stakeholders, including the RDC.

The role of the police in this matter has been to maintain law and order; there is no policy of shoot-to-kill and good enough, nobody had been killed in the two incidences that my colleague hon. Katusabe reported about last Sunday and the one that was earlier raised in this House by hon. Kiiza.

Even when the papers reported today that somebody was injured, my preliminary information is that nobody was injured. Two people were arrested for the fracas; they have been processed this evening at 4.00 p.m. They will be taken to court tomorrow morning.

They were arrested on Sunday, which is not a working day and therefore, their time of 48 hours will expire but they will have been taken to court. (Interjections) As the Ministry of Internal Affairs, our proposal is that since it involves a number of agencies, we need to have a meeting; advice on this issue of the market because the current issue is not about anything else other than trading and the market.

I must also add that certain forces are also aligning themselves to the directors of these companies; tending to politicise the matter one way or the other.

This matter requires all the three or four agencies plus other stakeholders to come together, resolve whether that resolution of the District Security Committee was right or wrong and sit together.

In the meantime, I would urge leaders including all the elected leaders from Kasese to practise restraint and to appeal to people to cooperate so that we find a peaceful method of resolving this matter.

At the end of the day, if somebody is killed, they are our people. I am saying this with due respect. Since it is an opportunity to clarify, maybe my colleague can also clarify on this because the information I got is that on Friday, he addressed a funeral in which he raised this matter of the market.

He told the Babughirana Butchermen Development Association not to respect the decision of the District Security Committee and therefore, these people came and demonstrated on Sunday morning.

That is the information but it is possible that it may not be true. I appeal to all leaders not to politicise this issue, and to take security of the person and property as the maximum constraint that we should all be able to exercise. Thank you, very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when will this joint team of yours come back to tell us what is happening on the way forward on the market?

MR OBIGA: This morning, we had our own consultations with other security teams and we thought we would have a final meeting next week and move to the district. We can make a report next week but one.

This will be able to resolve the matter; being a border area, we all need to be careful so that we do not create a situation where any enemy may take advantage of what could easily be resolved. Thank you.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I listened with caution and interest as hon. Atkins Katusabe was relaying to Parliament a statement allegedly made by my brother Gen. Elly Tumwiine, who unfortunately is not in the House today.

I always believe in giving the benefit of doubt to anybody accused; if those words were truly said by Gen. Tumwiine, they would amount to contempt of Parliament pursuant to Rule 221 of our Rules of Procedure.

I am rising on a matter of procedure to seek procedural guidance whether this matter should not be referred to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline in accordance with rule 172 (i) (a) and (b).

Rule 1 (a) requires that committee “to inquire into any complaint of contempt of Parliament or breach of privilege or any matter of privilege, which may be referred to it and to recommend to the House such action as the committee may consider appropriate.

(b) to consider any matter of discipline referred to it by the Speaker or the House including attendance of Members at sittings of committees and to report its findings to the House.”

I do not want to be tempted as a Member of this House to stampede Gen. Tumwiine, where he is not in a position to be examined on his alleged statements.

However, I strongly believe that it is in the interest of the House as well as his that he be examined by the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline if he ever made those statements and what was operating in his mind. Perhaps, it is to educate him on what Parliament means in accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda since he appeared ignorant by asking questions such as, “Who is the Speaker” and “What is Parliament?” I think education continues in our lifetime. Perhaps the committee would take the occasion to take him through some form of induction but also to inquire whether he actually made the statements and examine the mens rea behind that. 

If it pleases you, Madam Speaker, I would move that our colleague be referred to the named committee for investigations on those alleged statements because they are very serious and they are already on the Hansard. I beg to move.

5.11
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. All along, I thought that the Speaker of Parliament is known. All along, I had also thought that hon. Gen. Tumwiine, who has been here since 1986, knew who the Speaker of Parliament is. If he can come ask and such questions as if he is Nandala-Mafabi who came in the later years, it makes us get worried. 
If this matter is referred to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, he would know who the Speaker of Parliament is. If he cannot know the simple one, what about the most complicated one? 

Secondly, these statements we make, sometimes people assume –(Interjections)– if you want to speak, you will come at an appropriate time – show that some of us think they went to Luwero to remove a bad Government, which was arrogant. Now after fighting, we are here and the arrogance is still continuing.

This country belongs to all of us. It is wrong for us to assume that a few people are the ones in charge of this country. If a Member raised an issue, it is because he needs an answer. If you are disagreeing with him, disagree with him with facts. 

Madam Speaker, given what I heard today, I think Gen. Tumwiine – by the way, in my culture, we say a kid can wash hands and eat with the king but if the king has dirty hands, they tell him to get off the table and wash his hands. The way Gen. Tumwiine is behaving, I do not think he deserves the title of a General. I also doubt he deserves the title, “honourable” because the way he talks is demeaning. He thinks he is very important.

Madam Speaker, I would like to second the motion that hon. Gen. Tumwiine be sent to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to be investigated and be further educated on who the Speaker of Parliament is. 

5.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (VETERAN AFFAIRS) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Madam Speaker, it is unfair to judge somebody before he defends himself because it is one to one. Those statements allegedly made are really not proper statements from a person who has been in this Parliament for a very long time. It is against this background that it is proper we give a chance to Gen. Tumwiine to come and explain himself in this House. I do not see how the Speaker comes into the issue of the markets in Kasese. That is why I would request that Gen. Tumwiine comes here – (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I do not know why my good friend, hon. Bright Rwamirama, who used to pay me some salaries some time ago, is taking too much interest in a person. You have ably elaborated how clear our rules are. This is a minister and an honourable Member of Parliament who is not insane. (Laughter) By the way, we also have more statements said by him on the Floor of Parliament. 

Therefore, is the minister in order to continuously defend someone where there is no fair hearing? We are saying we are sending him to the committee to find out whether he said such words. Some of us will go there and give more additional information about him. We know what he said here about this Parliament during the age limit debate. He only fears when they talk about the Nommo Gallery by the way. (Laughter) 

Let the minister keep off the fire, make a ruling and the matter is sent to the committee and if he is exonerated, there will be no problem. However, I would like to state here that we have more information than that. It is not you, Lt Col Rwamirama, who said these words. It is Gen. Tumwiine. So, is he in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: He was contributing to the motion. 

THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you. Madam Speaker, having listened very carefully to all the submissions made this afternoon and being in complete agreement of the gravity of the allegation, there is absolutely no doubt that the allegations are grave.
 
On the basis that they were made in this House and like hon. Sseggona said at the beginning of his submission that he did not want to condemn a person unheard though he again went ahead to condemn him – (Interjections) – well, the Hansard is there because I was listening very carefully and he is a colleague in the profession; I would not accuse him of what he did not say. 

First of all, I am in complete agreement that the allegations are grave. However, the rules of natural justice and therefore, of this Parliament have that since the allegations have been made in this House, and the Member, too, is a Member of this House, it is our humble view, as Government, that he comes to this House and be put through the same level of questioning as the honourable members have already said and be permitted to respond. Then, it would be quite in order, if you so decide, to send him to the committee. Otherwise, in these circumstances, he would have been given the benefit of the doubt, to be embarrassed, if necessary, in front of the whole House, if he did make those remarks. If he did not, he would say what he has to say. Madam Speaker, if you so please, you would send it to the committee. Thank you.

MR OUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I really concur with my colleagues that giving someone a fair hearing is good. However, before I take that direction, honourable colleagues, when we come to Parliament - we have been reporting issues here and it is very unfortunate that some time back, I reported a similar situation here. While we are responding to a Member of Parliament, there are several cases where sometimes you are hindered to even mention here due to threats. If we are not very careful, we are losing the meaning of being Members of Parliament.

Therefore, when an issue comes, whether that way or this way, that affects the integrity of this Parliament, we must stand up and say no to it. I even told you here; somebody asked me “who are you and who is that Speaker?” it is even on the Hansard. The issue is going on and on, today, tomorrow and the other day.

When we discuss here, we go out and issues escalate because we have discussed here. Therefore, if you hear something that is very important, I did this and the other, we are losing meaning of being Members of Parliament. We represent our constituents and talk on their behalf. When we talk like that, automatically people say that you should not have talked. We are losing out on what we say. Therefore, I am not judging my colleague on what he said but I suggest that something should be done for him to defend himself. Even the committee is part of Parliament and therefore, if somebody is referred to the committee, that is still within Parliament. Thank you.

5.21
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It should be recalled that originally, this House has refused to approve army men to become ministers. We thought then that we were working in line with the Constitution.

Since our colleague Gen. Tumwiine became a minister, at very many incidents and not once - at least no one doubts that I can listen and understand something properly, which is said over Central Broadcasting Station (CBS), at least no one doubts that hon. Betty Nambooze has capacity to understand the news in Luganda on CBS.

However, last year, while on CBS, Gen. Elly Tumwiine attacked you as a person and this House and questioned its authority. The fact that the report by the hon. Katusabe indicates that he also questioned the authority of Ugandans over the army -

Madam Speaker, when we talked about the issues on the lake, people started setting you up against the army in the same language. We have always thought that the army is subject to civilian authority. Some of us want to give testimonies in relation to this and it will be very difficult to do that here in this Parliament.

Therefore, I propose that the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline and in any case it is there for that very reason would be the fairest court where our colleague should go. If they say that we discuss that matter before you here, how will you judge and preside over a matter concerning you? (Applause)

The most appropriate place, therefore, is in the committee where there is another chairperson.  Let our honourable brother go there; he can even choose to ask the committee chairperson to hear him in camera, if he thinks he has some aspects with the security of this country, which he does not want the media to know. In that small committee, all us, including me, hon. Betty Nambooze, who overheard him on CBS radio will go and testify.

Madam Speaker, we should deal with impunity, with people who question Ugandans where they were when they were fighting. I was a young girl, how could I have fought in that war? My father did. Therefore, I stand here to support the motion by hon. Sseggona that this matter be referred to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to give our colleague a fair hearing and give some of us an opportunity to go before that committee and testify. I beg to submit.

5.25
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I am happy that Gen. Tumwiine is here. I would like to thank hon. Sseggona for his wise words of legal advice which has been supported by our Attorney-General that truly, Gen. Tumwiine being a minister in the Government of NRM, which I belong to, it is not good at all for him to come and defend himself in Parliament now. It is wise advice that he should go to the committee on Rules, Privilege and Discipline, where he can be heard very well in closed doors. That will give total respect to the Government I belong to, because many times, when people do things that are not good, they keep referring to the regime that I am in.

However, Madam Speaker, I have a question. When I was still growing, I had pride and admired the guerrilla war generals. Many times in the generation I am in, they say “let the issues of generals be handled by the generals.” I believe that the purpose of my beloved President Museveni, whom I love so much was to tame and control the army. That was his purpose of bringing the freedom of speech that we are enjoying and for Uganda to become a model by having the army in Parliament. Therefore, the army should lead by example.

However, what picture are we portraying to this country? What will the Machos learn from the generals? I, therefore, would like to agree with my colleagues and the wise advice from the Attorney-General that a committee is the best for the honourable minister to get a fair hearing. Thank you.

5.27
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I talk with pain and anger -(Interjections)- yes- because you are our own here and the head of this institution but also some us who belong to the ruling mighty NRM Party, you are a big person in the party.

When statements come against you - my father had twelve women. Eight of them died but the remaining four take you with high esteem. For record, those who did not know, when I came to swear in, my mothers said, “You go and vote for the Speaker; if Kadaga fails, stay in Kampala”.

Traditionally, we cannot wash our linen from here. Therefore, I would strongly recommend a committee because “mama”, you are sitting in the chair. If you judge or we take this issue to voting here, I know my side cannot win -(Interjections)- yes- therefore, I would request the House to send him to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline and I know we shall win. (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the matter we are talking about is Parliament and when it comes to Parliament, there are no sides. If you abuse Parliament, you have abused everybody in it. Therefore, is hon. Waluswaka in order to say that when it comes to voting,  there will be sides on issues concerning Parliament? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Obviously, honourable members have different opinions on this matter. He was representing the other opinion. 

5.30
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are faced with a very difficult situation of serious allegations against - a would-be - one of the most exemplary army generals in East Africa.

Hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine has history, which is part of the history of this country. He shot the first bullet at Kabamba Military Barracks against soldiers of a sitting government. Sometime last year, I laid on the Table a transcribed version of an interview on the Central Broadcasting Services (CBS) Radio station in which Gen. Tumwine attacked both Parliament and the person of the Speaker.

If I can recall and that was after this Parliament had directed him to vacate the Nommo Gallery - he said and I quote, “The Speaker is ignorant” and that Parliament is in cohorts with some unnamed people and wants to steal the gallery.

After laying the document on the Table, there was also evidence that when the General was summoned to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, he said he was above that. 

Madam Speaker, Parliament cannot only look on when this kind of impunity is escalating. 

MR ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was the Vice Chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development until last week. I remember that we handled the issue regarding Nommo Gallery, which my colleague is referring to. We made a request for the honourable to come and appear before the committee.

Twice, he could not appear but sent reasons and apologies. If he had refused to come, we had the powers granted to us to force him to come. He did not refuse to appear. Therefore, is the honourable member in order to allege that the General said he could not appear when the Member is not the chairperson of the committee?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not sit on those committees so I do not know who did what.

MR KASIBANTE: To wind up, I only stood up to support a motion that was moved by my colleague, hon. Sseggona. Anyhow, as you can see, the evidence about the General is diverse. We need a substantive investigation into his conduct.

We should also give him time to explain himself in a committee of Parliament. He should not come because he has been called on phone to hear what is being said about him. He should get time to consolidate his mind, prepare to come and substantively explain himself. Thank you.

5.34
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I would like to be on record that I regret having been arrested on 21 February 1981 when the Uganda Peoples Congress (UPC) sent army tanks to Makerere University for the first time. At the time, my sin was that when the soldiers came to my room in Northcote Hall, they found pictures of some of the 27 who had gone to the bush to fight and liberate this country. At the time, I thought that by all standards, they were doing the right thing.

However, with time, I am increasing beginning to know and see that they went for themselves. Yesterday, on one of the social media platforms, I had an opportunity to watch a video clip in which His Excellency; President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni was being sworn in; in the parking yard of the present day, Parliament. The humbleness and discipline as shown in pictures of the officers who are now army generals, who accompanied him that time to the swearing in ceremony, cannot be compared with the arrogance that prevails now.

Madam Speaker, Article 90 of the Constitution of Uganda creates committees of Parliament to carry out duties on behalf of the plenary and report thereto. In a plenary of this nature, I do not think that we will be competent enough to give scrutiny to each and every audience and evidence being adduced by a Member who has issues with the Parliament. 

It is only proper that the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, which is composed of people who understand the rules and laws governing this country, are given this responsibility to further give scrutiny to these allegations before Parliament.

We are all here in the institution of Parliament and so as Members, we need to hold it in high esteem. If we cannot, who else can do it on our behalf? 

Madam Speaker, this takes me back to the constitutional provision, which bars serving army officers from being elected and assigned duties on the Executive. I remember that some of us were here in the eighth Parliament when Gen. Jeje Odongo was nominated for a ministerial position. He could not step in this Parliament for nearly a year until he came with a discharge certificate from Bombo Army Barracks that he appeared before the Committee on Appointments.

However, over time, the Constitution has been looked at as a mere paper. I have seen serving army generals here but who at the same time are serving on the Executive. Where is constitutionalism? Attorney-General, what role are you playing as far as advising the Appointing Authority is concerned? Do you ever advise? This is what breeds impunity.

In August last year when some of us were arrested and detained in Gulu Prison, the same officer came here and said, “By the way, we can take over Parliament; it is useless.” This is on record. Go to the Hansard. It is one of the first things that I came to familiarise myself with in regard to what people talked about while we were being incarcerated. How I wish one could die and still be able to listen to what is being discussed on earth, is exactly what I thought. Therefore, if that kind of thing is able to prevail, where are we going?

Madam Speaker, you are the head of the third arm of Government. If you cannot be respected as the head of this institution, which is clearly defined with proper roles ascribed in the Constitution – we have been here and hon. Gen. Tumwine has been here since 1986. Some of you have just come; you are three or four years old here. Others may be 15 or 20 years but hon. Gen. Tumwine is the Parliament himself. How does he, if it is true the words that have been ascribed to him were aired by himself, surely who else should know constitutionalism and the rule more than any of us if not Gen. Tumwine?

Therefore, Gen. Tumwine, if the words, which were read to us here and attributed to you are true and from the way we keep appearing in court where our fate is being determined, I think it is only fair that you go to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline and defend yourself so that we see if you are innocent or not.

If it is found that you uttered those words, then recommendations should be made and we will pronounce ourselves as Parliament on the best way forward so that it also becomes a deterrent to some of the Generals and others who keep reminding us - where were you when we were fighting? We all could not go to the bush. Some of us fought in our own ways and that is the reason some of us were arrested in 1981 in Northcote Hall.

Therefore, I strongly support this motion by hon. Sseggona that our colleague, Gen. Elly Tumwine, goes to plead his innocence before the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. I beg to support.

5.40
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is clear that this is not the first, second or third time that allegations are made against our colleague. 

Secondly, as a Parliamentary Commissioner, I must protect the members of Parliament but also the institution. Therefore, in the interest of justice and fairness, I would like to support the motion that our colleague is asked to go and appear before the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline and explain so that we know whether he made the allegations or not. Otherwise, for now, it is very difficult for us to take a decision or even ask him to explain himself here.

We may need to - because most Members have said they have more information or they have heard him make similar statements elsewhere; during the discussion when the army was taking over - I think it was raised by the honourable colleague about the army and fishing, we were told he made similar statements.

He attempted to intimidate our Speaker; so, we cannot take these matters lightly. That is why we want to be fair to him by referring him to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline so that he can go and explain himself there. I would like to support the motion.

5.43
MR SILAS AOGAN (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Tumwine, before you came in, I was actually praying for you. (Laughter) You know, it is unfair sometimes when people speak about you when you are not there. It is good that the Holy Spirit guided you to the right seat so that you hear this.

This House is like a holy temple and those who come to this temple come with clean hands. Nobody should dirty your hands before you have dirtied them yourselves. Personally, I do not know whether they are dirty - maybe that is why they are speaking the way they are speaking this afternoon.

Madam Speaker, I have always respected hon. Gen. Tumwine. First, he is a very calm General; even from the way he is seated today, you can tell that he is very humble. I guess he will even be found innocent.

Madam Speaker, I have always admired the General. On Heroes Day, he is the one who carries medals to award the people who are exemplary in this country. Therefore, I believe his character is not far from the people that he helps to receive those medals. How I only wish that we accept that he goes to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline so that he clears his name. 

Madam Speaker, I am not happy. Gen. Tumwine, before you came here, people spoke a lot about you. If you do not go to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, the world will believe that you are dirty. Therefore, it is only proper that you go to the committee so that you clean your image. They have already dirtied your name before you came here and they said many things about you. It is on the Hansard. I pray for you. This House needs unity. We should speak with one voice.

The Speaker is our Speaker. The Commissioners are our Commissioners. The members of Parliament from whichever side are our members of Parliament. It is high time that we gathered our strength and moved towards one direction so that we take this country to the next level - (Interjection) - Let me take information from the Member from Ngora for just one minute. I always find it hard to work without that man; he is my brother.

MR ABALA: Thank you, hon. Aogan. One thing that I would like you to know is that Gen. Tumwine is a practicing Christian. He is a man who understands the Bible. That is why I just want to read one verse from the Bible that he normally reads; Proverbs 25:18. It says, “A false accusation is as bad as a sword, a club or a sharp arrow.”  My colleagues, since the General is a very good man and to prove whether or not these allegations are true, the only medicine - even the Bible is clear - is the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, I trusted hon. Abala because I knew he would give me the right information. I really want to believe in my heart that there is no short cut but the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline will be the only fair place for justice for our colleague.

I would like to request the Members here that if the allegations about Gen. Tumwine are true, like they have talked about Nommo Gallery, hand it over and then we see what happens. Every day people are talking Nommo Gallery; why don’t you just hand it over so that we stop talking it.

I really feel the pain. I cherish you more than the Generals in Sudan - those who have been fighting in these wars in Sudan.  I wish you could hand over Nommo Gallery and we forget about these issues. 

Madam Speaker, I respect you and I respect that the Chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline will do a good job. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before I invite hon. Tumwine, join me in welcoming students from Kangave Primary School in Makulubita. Please stand up. They are represented by hon. Nakate and hon. Ssembatya. They are very smart in their uniforms.

Join me in welcoming in the VIP gallery two visitors - Mr Zhang Bin and Mr Wang Renwen of Guangdong of Nana New Material Uganda SMC Ltd. You are welcome. They were invited by the honourable member for Busiki, hon. Akamba and hon. Naigaga of Namutumba. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, Gen. Tumwine arrived here midway the debate and the motion. The persons who moved this issue first was an honourable from Kasese and then followed followed by a motion by hon. Sseggona. 

Is it procedurally right for hon. Gen. Tumwine to respond now at this moment, when he has not appreciated what transpired before him? I thought he would take time to read the Hansard and see all the allegations. One of the allegations was that you asked, “Who is the Speaker?” The Speaker is here –(Laughter)- probably you can now know that. 

There were a number of issues raised. You have not acquainted yourself with what has been said here. Are we proceeding right by Gen. Tumwine responding to the allegations before appreciating what has been stated? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know what he was going to say and I do not know what he is going to say. So, let him speak and then we shall take a decision.

5.50
THE MINISTER OF SECURITY (Gen. Elly Tumwine): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish you could say to your neighbour, “Peace be with you.” 

First of all, I was meeting the former President of South Africa, His Excellency Thabo Mbeki, who had just met you. That is why I was not here. As you have been told, I am a disciplined UPDF General and a born again Christian. 

In my language, we have four words: kasangwawo, kahakaira, mukuru w’egyi and kabandize. They mean; the one who was found here, the one who was first here, the one who is an elder here and the one who has been here longest. 

I am part of the people who originated the NRA code of conduct, which is very strict. I am a disciplinarian. You would not have had the UPDF if we were not as strict on discipline as we are and as it is. I have been part of this Parliament in making its rules.

To give you history, I have been sent out of this Parliament three times, over issues that are similar to the subject you are discussing now. The first time was over the dress code and it is very relevant – (Interruption.)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I feel very restrained to put my brother in the Lord to order at this material time because he is a born again Christian just like me. We have been very close and I think, just like the Members have been discussing, he is very conversant with the Book of Isaiah 33:22, which says thus, “For the Lord is our judge, the Lord is our lawgiver, the Lord is our king…” Therefore, when the Speaker is in this House, he or she is acting on behalf of God, whom you and I worship. (Applause) 

Consequently, we are discussing a very serious matter, which touches the authority of God and the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, we have handled this case very softly and I personally did not want to make any statement. Nevertheless, I feel my brother, in humility, should have agreed to go to the committee, other than open a rather uncomfortable debate by trying to defend himself. It would be most appropriate to face the committee and give it the details of all these things that you are talking about and indeed, you are right. 

Do you remember when we were in the Speaker’s Dining? You actually pulled a pistol at me and I reported you to the Sergeant-at-Arms. I did; it is on record. At the time we were discussing the DDT for spraying mosquitoes in Uganda but let the sleeping dogs lie.

Madam Speaker, I seek procedural guidance - is hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine, who is a General in the army, in order to defend himself, when the subject matter is that this debate should be taken to the committee? 

Is he in order to attempt to defend himself when we are anxiously waiting to debate the issue after the committee has tried him, listened to him and compiled a report? Is he in order, as a General, to even not show discipline to the institution of Parliament? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you have anything to say about what was said? Forget the dressing. We are talking about the issues that were raised; that is what we want to hear.

GEN. TUMWINE: Madam Speaker, I was telling the House how I understand the Rules of Procedure of this beloved Parliament that is like my home now because I have been here for 33 years. If anybody loves this Parliament, loves to defend it or would like to die for it, I am one. 

As a Christian, let me first do what my sister hon. Cecilia  Ogwal would expect me to do, by saying - and this is from the bottom of my heart - if there is anybody in this Parliament who feels I have injured him or her, forgive me. (Applause)

Secondly, Madam Speaker, you know how many efforts have been made to get leaders to collide over the period. When they talked about Nommo Gallery, the point that was brought here – I came to your office to explain that they did not complete the sentences on Nommo Gallery. They just go - you know how Bishop Hannington was killed? They said “Bamutte or Bamute?” How you use the word can have two different meanings. 

I first came to your office and explained about Nommo Gallery. I also made a statement to Parliament and the matter was complete. 

Concerning the issue of Kasese, which is on the Floor, I spent three hours with my brother, he is a “Lumumbist” and I am the patron of the Lumumbist Empire and it is known to those who are here. We had a wonderful time discussing the subject of Kasese, which is a security matter and we are handling it. We are trying to find the best way to conclude it harmoniously. The usual method we use of engaging anybody in conflict slowly until we find harmony – sometimes people are not patient enough like some of us have been. 

I said and I would like to repeat how I brought it. I said the Constitution is a very interesting Constitution. Article 1 states that all power belongs to the people and that power will be exercised in accordance with this Constitution. It then starts giving the powers of the Constitution. It gives the powers of the President, Parliament, Judiciary, Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, Police and it gives the powers in the process taking away much of what would have looked as if it was absolute -(Interjection) - I am repeating what I said. Can you allow me to finish - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Point of procedure.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, by character and training, I am a restrained person. I am also an ardent reader of these rules. When Gen. Elly Tumwine stood up to speak, my honourable colleague, hon. Moses Kasibante, whispered, “What is he going to say?” I said that he is a Member of the House and he is entitled to debate. 

What is on the Floor is a motion to be debated by Members of the House. Gen. Elly Tumwine reserves all the rights to defend himself when the question of where he is going to defend himself has been settled. He is not entitled to make a personal statement in accordance with rule 54 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda at this moment. He can only debate to the extent of opposing or supporting the motion.

Once the question of where he is to be heard has been settled, he will provide his defence in and before that particular chosen forum. I am not one of those that would stifle the right of a Member to be heard. I find mysterious objection to a procedure where a person who is the subject of discussion authors a defence before the forum is determined. Are we proceeding right?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the design of Parliament was not stated to conduct hearings in the Plenary. That is why in the Constitution under Article 90, the Constitution says,
“(1) Parliament shall appoint committees necessary for the efficient discharge of its function. 

(2)Article 90(3)(a), Parliament may call any Minister or any person holding public office and private individuals to submit memoranda or appear before them to give evidence.”

Honourable members, today, I am not happy to be in this seat because part of the issues raised concerns the Office of the Speaker. I think the only fair thing to do is to establish whether you actually said those things; and this is not the first time. 

I would like to remind the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline that the issue raised by hon. Moses Kasibante some six or seven months ago about his utterances was referred to them and they have not reported. The allegations and utterances were exactly similar to what has been said today. That matter remains outstanding; there is no report from that committee. 

Honourable members, I think it is important that the honourable member be given an opportunity to explain whether he said or did not say these things so that we put this matter to a close. I now put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this matter be referred to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE TEDIOUS AND CUMBERSOME PROCESS OF REPLACEMENT OF NATIONAL IDENTITY CARDS

6.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, last week, hon. Odonga-Otto, Member of Parliament for Aruu County, raised an issue as a matter of national importance regarding the delayed processing of National Identity Cards (NIC), particularly relating to the replacement of the lost identity cards. 

I, on behalf of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, undertook to make a comprehensive statement so that Members can understand why some of the delays occurred and also give some synopsis of what NIRA plans to do in order to alleviate some of those problems. This is the statement. It is a bit detailed and it is on your iPads. I will summarise the points, which can answer those questions, which are paraphrased. 

In 2010, the Government of Uganda contracted Muhlbauer High Tech Security Company of Germany, to develop a system for registration of persons, issuing them with National Identity Cards and establishing a National Identification Register (NIR). 

The company developed a National Security Identification System (NSIS) and registration of persons was done using this system under a multi-sectoral project where about 15 million persons of 16 years and above were registered and NIDs were issued in 2015.

In the same year, the Registration of Persons Act, (ROPA 2015) was enacted and established the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) with the mandate to take over the system and continue with the registration of persons, among other functions. In other words, the system of registration that was taken over by NIRA was what was established in 2010.

The National Security Identification System is a robust registration and identification system with embedded steps and processes to ensure the credibility and security of the data capture, processing and storage. 

The system has two modules of data capture; the offline system where data is captured using a stand-alone kit and this is what has happened in subcounties, and the transfer of the data to the district server using an encrypted flash disk and further transfer of that data from the district server to the central server at the headquarters at Kololo for final data processing using encrypted external hard drives. This is the system that is currently being used for registration of persons for the National IDs. 
Therefore, it involves registration and transfer of that data from the subcounties to the districts and from the districts to Kololo using hard drives, which are carried physically.

There is a second module, which is being developed and this will be online; it is expected to start this financial year. This will use automatic data transfer from the registration point to the server in Kololo, Kampala.

Madam Speaker, we have talked about NIRA’s registration mandate many times. I do not need to waste time on that matter.

I would like to go to item 2.2, which is about the ID registration process. This is important for Members to understand because it is here that you will get a number of the delays, which occur.

The ID registration process includes the following: 

a) 	First time registration for persons 16 years and above; 
b) 	First time registration for persons 0-16 years;
c) 	First IDs for persons turning 16 years and already registered; 
d) 	Issuance of IDs for those eligible – 16 years and above; 
e) 	Replacement of lost or damaged IDs;
f) 	Change of information in the National Information Register. This particular item is important because many times, it is changed either because people have changed their names, they were initially wrongly registered, they have lost the data or in one way or another the data is being corrupted and, therefore, needs a correction;
g) 	Rectification of information which does not comply. For example, you may have poor images from the registration centre, poorly scanned document and correction of errors in names; and
h) 	Review of applications with insufficient documents to confirm their citizenship. One or two documents may slip through the process in the lower ranks and end up at the final stage. These documents are referred back to the centres where they were registered for purposes of correction.

Registration for a National Identification Number (NIN) and/or a National Identification Document (NID) starts by applying at any of the NIRA registration centres. Currently we have 117 registration centres, including 112 districts and the divisions of Kampala. You will note that these 112 districts are fewer than the number of districts we have currently because some of these districts were created later.

The data is captured using an enrolment kit and then saved on the district server. The data is then transferred to the central server at the headquarters using encrypted external hard drives at least once a month. Let me also explain that statement. There are some districts where the volume of daily registration is very high. They may register 20-30 people per day. Therefore, in a week, they may find enough data to transfer to the server in Kampala.

However, there are other areas where you may find that in a week or two, they have registered one person or two people and it is not economical to physically transfer that data from the district headquarters to Kampala. Therefore, they tend to accumulate. Nevertheless, we are saying that whatever the case, in a month every district must bring their data that has been registered.

For the period February to June 2019, NIRA has processed over 111,000 applications per month mainly due the recently concluded subcounty-based registration exercise. Under normal registration process at the respective districts headquarters, over 12,000 applications are processed monthly. However, because of the excess registration, which was done recently, it is now 111,000 per month. 

The Authority has, however, had a shortage of staff to immediately process all the received applications with only one Data Import and Export Officer to handle the above applications and minimal staff for data processing and card production. 

There is somebody we call “Data Import and Export Officer” at the headquarters in Kololo. He is one person and he has to receive these 111,000. Why is he alone? It is because NIRA has not had the money to recruit the number that they would have required. This has created a backlog and increased turnaround time to between 3 - 6 months, on average. 

The current status of the registration 

The following information was in the National Security Identification System (NSIS). Some of the applications, however, are still under process and are yet to be assigned NINs. The total number, as of today, is 28,451,957 information data on the national security system.

The registration of learners commenced on 5 May 2017 and ended on 31 December 2017, while data processing was completed on 31 March 2018 with 9,635,913 learners registered against the targeted 10 million learners. The Registration of Learners' Project was not a standalone project but simply a targeted strategy to work with key stakeholders to take advantage of a school-controlled environment to register as many people as possible. 

We, therefore, believe that the recorded 9.6 million persons out of a target of 10 million was an achievement since a similar number could only have been achieved in over 5 million using the normal registration process at NIRA-(Interruption)-

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry to interrupt; we have been here discussing the issue about the utterances but what has happened when he walked out is disturbing, again from the same person. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was seated and was confronted and threatened to be beaten. 

This type of conduct from a colleague should cease; it was very unfortunate but I thought that I should put it on record. Hon. Ogwal and hon. Lucy Akello here can give us more information. It is not about targeting the man.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you, so much hon. Okupa. Indeed I was seated next to hon. Cecilia Ogwal, hon. Lilly Adong, hon. Lamwaka Margret was also seated and we were discussing something small; when I saw the General walking straight to Mama. I thought he was just coming-because I was not in the House, I did not hear what had happened.

I saw him walk straight to Mama and immediately said, “I did not pull a gun at you; you are a liar. I will show you.”  We all got scared; we did not know what was happening. I calmly said that it is good that the cameras are capturing, if you do anything – so, it is very unfortunate. 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the House is aware that prominent Ugandans have been killed in unclear circumstances and here is a General threatening my life in the presence of my colleagues because of the statement I made in the House.

I can say it with all the confidence, with God as my evidence that Gen. Elly Tumwine a couple of years ago when we were discussing about DDT, we members of Parliament from Lango and Bundibugyo objected to the use of DDT in preference of the organic agricultural activities.

Gen. Elly Tumwine pulled a pistol on me from the Speaker’s Dining but that is a matter, which was buried. As a Christian, I forgave him and did not want to raise it but today I had to raise it. 

Now that he has raised the issue again and he has actually come as a General pointing at me, almost poking my eye with his finger; I do not know what will happen to me from now on. Let this House know that if I or any of my children, husband or close relatives or friends is gunned down, we know the person responsible.

Let it be on record; let no body see my coffin here and say that they did not know because I have been threatened by the General. 

The Speaker here knows some of the circumstances; I have survived several assassination attempts in this country. For all that I have done for Uganda, do I deserve to be threatened by the General and in Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the complaint has been noted.

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, having heard testimonies from our colleagues who have seen these things face to face and they are still in the House handling matters of this country; now that the situation seems unpalatable, will it not be procedurally right for us to adjourn this House so that this matter is put to rest?

6.25
MS JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I am a Mumasaba who has faced the knife and normally in a number of life threatening situations, not even a strand of hair can be shaken on my head but today, I am scared.

This General has exhibited all manner of arrogance even in the lecture that he delivered to us. He was talking about power; purporting that power belongs to the people. However, the person who coined that adage that power corrupts but absolute power corrupts absolutely - one of the institutions that had secured a reputation second to none in Uganda in discipline was the army.

Now that the fish rots from the head, by virtue of his office -literally speaking, he is at the apex of this institution. He is the one perpetuating this culture of impunity, demeaning the Speaker who presides over this important institution.

Madam Speaker, you are No.3 according to the Constitution of Uganda; you are not a small person. Secondly and most importantly, even after Members had laboured that the principle of natural justice should be accorded him by having his statements subjected to scrutiny by the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges.

He has again exhibited arrogance by spewing venom and even threatening the life of hon. Cecilia Ogwal. It is my considered view that I concur with hon. Abala. A person who claims to be a born-again Christian and God fearing has proved to us that he is a ravenous wolf in sheep’s clothing and therefore, you locate the basis of adjourning this House until when we have received a report from the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. I beg to move.

6.28
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is quite embarrassing to see the honourable minister ask for forgiveness from honourable members and on moving out, he reversed his statement. To let the honourable member continue living in fear is very dangerous.

Right now what hon. Cecilia Ogwal raised has made this Parliament look at Gen. Elly Tumwine upside down. It means that asking for forgiveness, he was just blindfolding Parliament. He went ahead to question the integrity of the Speaker. I think we need to take this matter very seriously. The army general is so arrogant and rude. He pretends to have read the Bible but he is doing all that to blindfold the Members.

I concur with the previous speakers that you adjourn the House until we clarify on the conduct of hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine because Parliament needs not to be undermined. You are the supreme head of this august House. It means he is doing everything in a foolery manner. I beg to move.

6.30
MS DOREEN AMULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The whole House and the country know I chair the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. It is really painful, as a young cadre and a Ugandan woman who cherishes the history of my country and the achievements that the NRA/NRM has made in this country, to bring us from where history states that my country, perhaps when I was not there, was on rampage. 
 
Today, as we talk about peace, we should also talk about integrity. If today we talk of wealth creation, we should also mind of our emotions and behaviours to one another. 

This Parliament may not know but hon. Cecilia Ogwal is on the Opposition side and I am on the NRM side but that that does not deter me from giving her the due respect as my grandmother. I think that if fate took hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s life today, I would not forgive myself. 

It is because when she first walked outside, I came with my wings flying to hug her. We made jokes and she was supposed to go to the washroom but she said, “You are still young and productive. For me, my bladder has no use now because I can no longer produce children. So, go first.” Heaven bears me witness and hon. Margaret Lamwaka was there. We were speaking in our local language.

Therefore, if fate was to take her life, I would not forgive myself because she had to let me go into the washroom first at her age. She respected me, sat down and carried my bag. The cameras can show that this handbag of mine was on the laps of hon. Cecilia Ogwal. So, it beats my understanding. 

Three days ago, I called one of the topmost soldiers who is a serving army officer to ask him for clearance as far as the suffering of my people in Amolatar is concerned. The man told me he did not ask for my permission to deploy in the lake and that he was tired of answering the same question, day in day out. I chair the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and I was talking to the soldier, whom I supervise. 

I represent the people of Amolatar and so, when I see this happening, even in this House, I think we have lost it. I am speaking as a young Ugandan cadre who must carry the mantle from the people who should leave leadership to the young. However, what sort of integrity can we emulate from the army generals and officers of today? Leave alone the so many complaints that we get.

Madam Speaker, Uganda looks at us as Parliament. I think time has come that we should not only speak but stand for the helpless wanainchi of this country. If a Member of Parliament can be attacked – and honourable colleagues, I think you can invite one another to your offices, share the differences and iron them out amicably. 

I respect my soldiers because they created who and what I am, most especially the peace. However, there must be psychological peace that they are creating to the other Ugandans. Thank you.

6.35
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, it is disappointing that I am talking at a time when the representatives of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces have run out of the House. I know the military in our country are here for historical reasons but an attack on hon. Cecilia Ogwal by hon. Gen. Tumwine is an attack on the women of this country. 

I would like the women of this country to stand with one voice today and denounce what hon. Gen. Tumwine has done to an honourable lady of Cecilia Ogwal’s age. If he can get a lady younger in age, he can crash her. As I talk, when the female journalists saw him get out of the Chamber, they ran away. It means his attack on hon. Cecilia Ogwal is an attack on the women of this country. 

I call upon all the women activists and organisations in this country to stand up and denounce this; this is not a joke. I do not know why and where all the army representatives have gone. People are crying and lamenting in this country. One of the factors that led me to join politics was because of the pride of the NRA. That is why I am an NRM member. 

However, when you go to the lakes where the UPDF are, people receive you with tears. Around Lake Victoria, people are crying. Around Lake Kyoga, people are lamenting like the chairperson of a committee of Parliament has put it. This cannot happen in Kenya or Tanzania. The fact is that this cannot happen in Rwanda where we exported democracy and peace. 

I believe this is too much. Why don’t we bring sanity not only to Parliament but in the leadership of the country? When you try to trace the people who are chasing people from their land, it is always the UPDF ahead. As I talk, I believe our lives as members of Parliament who are positive talkers on issues concerning this country - therefore, I would like to support hon. Abala that we suspend the House. 

I also call upon the Minister of Internal Affairs to give hon. Cecilia Ogwal a special escort before she leaves here because her life is in danger. I beg to move.

6.38
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was there and I almost shed tears to see a general disrespecting an old lady and Member of Parliament. I went there such that if the general tried to box hon. Cecilia Ogwal, I would be there to assist her.

I remember very well, he said, “You lady, you are a liar. I have never pulled a gun on you.” He was standing near her and pointing at her. 

I remember when a person in Katerera was beaten with fish and the buttocks were bruised, I came and told Gen. Tumwine but he said, “Ah, do not disturb me” as a Member of Parliament; about a person who was beaten.

I looked for the President; the President called me early morning asking about what had happened. Can you imagine this is a general and the other one is the President? The President cared and called me asking about the people who had been assaulted by the UPDF.

I tried to explain to him and I said, “Your Excellency, it is good to protect the lake but beating people is not allowed; you cannot allow your soldiers to beat up people”. Can you imagine spoke to the President on the phone but Gen. Tumwine told me to go away. Can you imagine?

Therefore, Madam Speaker, if we do not stop this – and I will not say that all generals are bad; some are good. However, for such a general, I even suggest that he is stripped of the rank of general because it is not the first time he is doing this.  When I saw him approaching mama, an old lady - when I find a man beating or quarrelling with a woman, I know he is a bully and nothing more; he is not a man.

Therefore, I would like to suggest that we should not stop at this. If we are to investigate, you will find that there are people who have been beaten up by the same general. As a Member of Parliament, I know that the UPDF has kept its reputation as a peaceful and well behaved force. Why should we allow someone in Parliament to misbehave?

Madam Speaker -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: What do you want us to do? Because-

MR OUMA: I would like to say something.

THE SPEAKER: With what view? There are those who are saying that we adjourn the House and we go home.

6.42
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Islands, Namayingo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I was in Jinja from 1983 to 1986. What brought problems to the Obote Government was the arrogance of the soldiers. Personally, I was a victim and three people were killed in my sight at Jinja Secondary School.

We normally talk and when an individual makes a mistake, we say it is not the whole institution but the individual. However, when you talk of a soldier misbehaving on the lake and mention them by name, they say you are attacking the UPDF. If an individual has made a mistake, hold it to that person. If a general is arrogant - to me if we adjourn the House, the man will think he is very important –(Interjection)- I am just getting to the point.

We can discuss here, Parliament should not be threatened. Let him appear before the committee as we said and the issues will come back to Parliament. You cannot be a minister and be so arrogant; we cannot be threatened that any time we talk, you remind us that we did not fight or that we did not bring peace to Uganda. The peace we are having today is for all of us.

When we go to our places, including my islands, we talk of that peace. There are myriads of instances where this gentleman has threatened people. If we simply leave it and keep quiet, I may be the victim tomorrow. Therefore, if the victim is here, going out to that old mama and pointing at her and making such utterances, I propose that this gentleman should go to the committee. If they find him at fault, then automatically, he is not even fit to be in that position.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have already sent him to the committee on the other attacks – 

MS NAMBOOZE: This is another matter – this is another offence and I am a witness. Madam Speaker - 

6.45
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Janat Mukwaya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to assure this House that there is nobody above the law in Uganda. Secondly, it is very unfortunate to hear what happened outside this Chamber.

However, I would like to appeal to you, Madam Speaker and I agree with the honourable member who said that we should not adjourn the House. I would like to assure you, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, that your life is in God’s hands and so are all of us. I would like to assure you that there is no general who can take your life.

Colleagues, the general did not defy the decision of the House. Therefore, all these issues should go to the committee and we continue with business. That is my request, Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I am aware that all of us, whether old or young, women or men are protected by the almighty God and it is very important for us to know that the people who are killed in Uganda everyday are also God’s people.

Therefore, having heard of what the general had done to hon. Cecilia Ogwal, as a young person and as a woman, I cannot entertain it - that is abuse to the rights of women. Probably, he is undermining hon. Cecilia Ogwal because he is a general.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, whereas the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development was bringing that in good faith, is the honourable minister, my senior colleague, in order to come here and say that hon. Cecilia Ogwal is protected by God yet she does not even have a gun? 

The Bible also says that God protects those who protect themselves. I wondering whether the honourable minister is in order to come and say that we should not adjourn the House and that hon. Cecilia Ogwal should stay calm because she is protected by God. 

That is obvious; people are being killed daily on the streets of Kampala and different areas. We have lost colleagues even in this very House. Therefore, is the minister in order, when we are discussing such a pertinent issue?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are two views; the view that says that we stop work and go away and hers is that we do not stop; we handle the other matter in the committee but we continue with work.

6.49
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to submit on only two points because a lot has been submitted by my colleagues.

Whereas this matter has been forwarded to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, something was missing in the instruction. We did not indicate to them the urgency and time limit within which we should expect this work to be done. It is my humble submission that this committee be given two weeks within which they should complete the investigation and report on this matter.

Secondly, I would like to agree with my colleagues, hon. Terrence Achia and the minister on the issue of not putting off work of this House. This is a serious matter and we all appreciate it but we must also appreciate that this country should not be held at ransom by the acts of the army general. The country is watching us handling other issues that affect them.

Therefore, whereas we do not undermine the significance of this whole matter, we should not put off all other national matters because we are waiting for the report. It is my submission that the committee should be given a time limit within which to submit the report. Parliament should carry on with business as we wait for the report. Thank you.

6.51
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What I witnessed this evening reminds me of an incident in 1985 when I was young and the soldiers of Tito Okello came to rob our home. One of them pocked a gun at the head of my aunt. The behaviour of some Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) soldiers needs to be scrutinised. 

Parliament has lost respect in the public. On Sunday when I was coming from my constituency back to my home in Mbalwa, I found the road that links Namugongo Road to Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS), which is under construction, closed. The people guarding it are soldiers. 

Whether you explained yourself or not, it did not matter. Our children cannot go to school. When you say that you are a Member of Parliament, they say, “So what? I am on my duty.”  
Our children have to go to school on boda-bodas because the soldiers guarding the road do not allow vehicles to pass. Even if you explained that roads under construction are never guarded like that, they would not listen to you.

We need to find ways of getting ourselves out of this situation because we are at a point where the soldiers no longer respect anybody. I think there are few people who are supposed to be respected yet we also deserve to be respected as leaders.

I am still quaking; supposing hon. Ogwal had high blood pressure, she would have collapsed in the corridor. Everybody who was there, including hon. Mawanda, was scared. I thought he was coming to fight.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, he almost knocked me. I witnessed that. It is a serious new matter –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do you also propose that we send this new matter to the committee as well?

6.53
MS VERONICA ERAGU (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I feel the pain of what we have been going through this afternoon more so, to the Speaker and hon. Cecilia Ogwal, the senior Member who experienced what she went through.

There are two sequences of events; we dealt with the first and sent it to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. No sooner had we sent that one than another incident followed. The matter was then brought back to the House. 

My submission is that we also send this to the committee and we continue with other matters of the House. However, like my colleagues said, we need to give the committee a timeframe; I totally agree with the two weeks.

In the meantime, can sanity prevail? Hon. Cecilia Ogwal refers to me as her daughter alongside being my neighbour. Who among you can point a finger at hon. Cecilia Ogwal? For her seniority – (Interjections)– I am talking about sanity. Can we do what brought us to Parliament? Can we stick to the rules of this House? I beg to move.

6.56
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was pleased at the beginning by the two statements that were made by Gen. Tumwine. The first statement stated – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Point of Order.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda allow a Member of Parliament to raise a point of order where necessary. 

I find it very relevant to raise a point of order against my brother. We are dealing with indiscipline and according to me, the Member is not dressed to the satisfaction that this House deserves in terms of decorum. Is it in order for a Member to find himself to the position he is seated, in the manner he has presented himself?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you had been in a safari suit, you would be decently dressed. However, I am sorry you are not visible. (Laughter)

6.57
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Madam Speaker, it seems the House is becoming very strict on discipline. I got out a while ago and it surprised me when I met Gen. Elly Tumwine in a very compromising and combative position against Mama Cecilia. What Mama Cecilia might not have observed - I observed because I was coming from behind and Gen. Elly Tumwine had bent. 

I have all reasons, from what I saw, to believe that the General was also armed - (Interjection) - yes, Madam Speaker. I have reason to believe because one of his arms was touching here. In fact, I saw that there was a swelling of some sort.

Madam Speaker, it should be recalled - (Laughter) - let us not laugh about this matter. I do not want to remind my colleagues of what happened here in 2017. You and I were debating and I do appreciate that we lost the debate. However, in the process of losing that debate, some of us also lost our spines.

Madam Speaker, if it hadn’t been you to come and order that I be taken to hospital immediately, most probably, I would have died. I do not want to remind this House of the ugly scenes. However, hon. Tumwine on that day did not enter these Chambers. He sat up there as if he was a guest and he commanded the forces that descended on us. He was seated there, I saw him with my eyes.

Today when he descends on an old woman like Mama Cecilia and threatens her, I do not take it as a threat. I came to this House able bodied. I lost my ability to walk in this House.
Therefore, Madam Speaker, what am I trying to say - (Member timed out.)

7.00
MR JOHNSON SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono South County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I also agree with my colleagues that the two should be combined and let the General answer to the rules committee.

However, we should also invite the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs. Some time back in the 1990s, the UPDF was a well-known disciplined army. However, lately, you have to give way when you come across any registered vehicle with UPDF number plates. That means there is a problem somewhere because moral decay cannot be within - even vehicles of military people.

Madam Speaker, try asking civilians; you have to give way, be it small or big - when it comes to their heavy trucks, you wonder! One time on my way from Seeta, I almost fell into a ditch because I was giving way to a UPDF vehicle and the person inside was not even a Major. I realized that it was just a driver.

The minister of defence must come and tell us what he is going to do to improve the discipline of the UPDF. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, we had two complaints and we dealt with the first one. Can you move a formal motion so that we can adopt the procedure?

7.00
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, rule 58 of the Rules of Procedure permits a Member to bring a motion without notice. Owing to the situation that has arisen after the first referral of the hon. Gen. Tumwine to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline and the events that have been explained to us - I personally did not witness but I am interested in knowing what exactly happened. 

The rules of fairness and natural justice require again that the honourable Member be heard not under any emotions but in accordance with our Rules of Procedure. I, therefore, with humility move a motion that this particular matter involving the conduct of our own be again referred to the rules committee to investigate and make recommendations and report to Parliament.

I also move that the committee reports within two weeks owing to the urgency and importance of the matter and considering, perhaps as an option, closing down work. 

I want to conceive that the Member who moved the motion of closure was not ill intentioned but was concerned about safety.  In addition, safety of Members is paramount. Therefore, to bridge the gap between closing down and having a report, I propose that a specific timeline be given and in my humble view, two weeks would do to give us a report and then we are able to decide. Thank you and I so move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kibalya, amendment?

7.04
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I second the motion. My area of amendment is that in those two weeks, hon. Cecilia Ogwal will be afraid to look at Gen. Tumwine when they meet in the corridors. That is the area of amendment where I wish us to amend so that in the two weeks - what is in between hon. Cecilia Ogwal and Gen. Tumwine?

7.05
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, looking at the matter of urgency connecting our own to the Speaker and the head of this institution, I would like to propose that the committee works and reports on Thursday next week because some of the things here, the cameras are there, they can show. 

Madam Speaker, two weeks are too much and in our culture, when things delay, they are forgotten. I would like to propose that they report on Thursday.

7.06
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is the Leader of the Opposition. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for having a listening ear and ready to take the issues of Members as a priority. Sincerely, we were debating the issue of the national identity cards. 

However, when the Member raised the issues of arrogance that happened within the precincts of Parliament, you suspended and allowed us to debate this. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

Before this particular incident, at least we were discussed a situation where a Member of this House undermined the integrity of the Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. It is abominable. 

We respect you. You are the third in command in this country and second in the NRM. We respect you and know your integrity and the whole world knows your integrity. I wonder why a Member of the House would stand in public and question your integrity. We condemn that as the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.

I appreciate how we resolved that he be taken to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline because rule 54 of our Rules of Procedure would not even allow him make a personal explanation simply because if he had to it, he should have notified your office earlier. 

The security of members of Parliament is paramount. Appendix F (3)(g) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament talks about how leadership should be exercised. As leaders, we have to lead by example. What kind of example is the army general exhibiting by beating up a senior Member of Parliament, who is a respected woman? In fact, name it all; that is unacceptable.

Madam Speaker, from his utterances or statements, he has been in this House for over 30 years. However, the fact that a Member has been in this House for over 30 years does not give them the right to undermine the integrity of Parliament. I appreciate the decision the House has made but I would also like to add that the arrogance of this army general should be referred to the appointing authority. 

In my language, there is a saying that says that one frog can spoil all the water. One may think the army generals and the army at large in this country are arrogant, disrespectful, can beat anybody anywhere at any time and can undermine the Speaker in the way they wish; this should be referred to the appointing authority.

Speaking in the capacity of the Leader of the Opposition, I feel so much about the security of members of Parliament, irrespective of their political affiliation. None of us is safe. Judges, army generals and members of Parliament have been killed in this country. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Cecilia Ogwal has already been threatened. The mover of the motion is already in fear and a few members of Parliament, who have debate in this House, are already in fear. Witnesses are also living in fear. 

Madam Speaker, I feel that as the Speaker of Parliament, the law provides that you make a statement on the safety of the members of this House. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal has already stated that in the event that her life or the life of any of her relatives, friends or husband is taken, then, we should see the person who has been responsible for this.

It is unfortunate that we are pinning a colleague but I feel if he so wishes – (Interjections) - yes, he apologised but we are not taking that apology because he went and did something else, which means he was fooling this House. 

Madam Speaker, it would only be double jeopardy. Otherwise, in your capacity, the law provides that you even stop him from coming to this House until his case is disposed of. Nevertheless, I pray that the security of your members, Madam Speaker, is taken care of. I rest my case. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it would be difficult to outlaw the arrival of the honourable member here because the rules committee sits here; so, he must come to Parliament in order to present his evidence. 

However, I would like to direct the Clerk to immediately give security to hon. Cecilia Ogwal. We shall also call on the Prime Minister because he was instructed by the President that any Member who is threatened should be given additional security. Therefore, Clerk, give her security for today and we also get from the Prime Minister so that hon. Cecilia Ogwal can go about her business. 

Honourable members, I would like to put the question that the question be put to the second motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the directive is that the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline further investigates the second complaint, which occurred within the precincts of this Parliament and report back within a fortnight. The old report must also be handled and report in two weeks.

Hon. Kania, I am sorry we could not continue with your business because of what has transpired but let us give you time to handle it tomorrow. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 7.14 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 24 July, 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
