

Tuesday, 31 July 2018

Parliament met at 3.16 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I have been attending many activities in different constituencies. The issue of the tax on mobile money and social media continues to be a dominant issue that people raise wherever we go. 

There is also the issue of airtime scratch cards; I have been told that the ordinary people, especially in the villages, are not able to use their phones now because there are no more airtime scratch cards. They cannot go to the city. I do not know whether we took into account how millions of users would be affected by that decision. However, we have asked the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance to come and brief us. I hope that he can do sooner than later.

Secondly, honourable members, last week the Minister of Public Service requested us to set aside some two days to go and attend a very big meeting - the Global Peace Foundation meeting. This is where the people of Uganda and the Government are being recognised for their work in the region and for issues of refugees, among others. Unfortunately, it will involve both the Deputy Speaker and I. We are therefore proposing that tomorrow and Thursday, the committees sit and work on their action plans so that by Monday, we submit them to the Office of the Speaker. Therefore, on Wednesday and Thursday, we shall not be able to sit but we shall resume next Tuesday.

There are some matters of national concern. Honourable members, use two minutes, please.

MR WILFRED NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am afraid the machines indicate that there is no sitting. They also indicate that nobody has signed in. I am worried that even the Hansard may not be capturing what is being talked about here. Would it not be important that you direct the Clerk to ensure that the information technology in the House is functional as a matter of privilege?

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, who is addressing that situation? Actually, we are all not present. 

Before, I call up hon. Stephen Kangwagye, there is something else I want to communicate. Last week, we designated Members to different committees but certain decisions have been taken to ensure that Members are distributed to different committees. I have written to the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) Whip, the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces (UPDF) Whip and the Government Chief Whip to relocate hon. Franco Centenary, Lt Gen. Ivan Koreta and hon. Michael Timuzigu. Please, do that so that we can complete this next Tuesday. 

Hon. Hood Katuramu, who is the coordinator of the independent Members of Parliament, has been allocated to two committees, the Committee on Foreign Affairs as chairperson and the Committee on East African Community Affairs as a member. Government Chief Whip, please correct that. 

Also, today, we are marking the silver jubilee of ascendance to the throne of His Majesty Kabaka Ronald Muwenda Mutebi II. On behalf of Parliament, I extend congratulations to His Majesty, the Nnabagereka and the people of Buganda on this auspicious occasion. Today, it was clear that the cultural institution of Buganda has mobilised a lot of Baganda and Ugandans to attend the cultural activity. They have also been – Yes, the Kyabazinga was there and Osei Tutu, the Asantehene of Ghana, has also come. 

We want to thank the Buganda Kingdom for the work done in mobilising on issues of health - they have participated in the Cancer Run - economic issues and many other issues. We wish His Majesty the Kabaka and the people of Uganda wonderful and happy celebrations. 

Unfortunately, honourable members, today I understand 25 lives were lost along Masaka Road and on Kabale-Kisoro Road. Only last week, the honourable member for Lugazi Municipality was on the Floor of this House talking about the same issue, and hon. Muyanja Mbabaali had also come up to speak on the same issue. The other week, we also discussed it. However, it seems we raised it here but nothing has happened. We thought we would hear about Fika Salama back on the roads but I do not hear about it. In the meantime, people are just becoming part of the statistics. It is extremely sad. Let us stand up and observe a moment of silence in memory of the deceased persons.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the gallery, we have pupils and teachers from St Benedict Grade School, Jinja. They are represented by hon. Nelson Lufafa and hon. Joy Katali. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.23
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in respect to the rising number of arrests, arising from the patrols meant to restrict the movement of cattle in Isingiro District, by armed personnel from the ministry in charge of security. The affected people are mainly cattle traders from Bukanga, areas of Rakai and Kyotera, among other areas. These traders carry out their trade in livestock in the area and they derive their livelihood from trading in livestock. 

Madam Speaker, it is a cause for deep concern that the arrests that have been prevalent for several weeks are now being carried out without the knowledge or involvement of the local leadership, like the Local Council V (LC V) chairperson, the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO), the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) and even the area Members of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, we appreciate that over 10 years ago, animal markets in Isingiro District were closed down by the Government and remained closed for the entire time following the outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD). However, this has been eradicated. As I speak now, it is on record that in Isingiro, we do not have a problem of FMD.

However, inappropriate enforcement is happening at a time when the district and subcounty veterinary officers are issuing permits and licences to move cattle, only for owners to be arrested during the patrols.  Madam Speaker, you can imagine the traders are given permits –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, use one minute to conclude. State what you want the Government to do for you.

MR KANGWAGYE: Madam Speaker, as citizens of Bukanga, I would like to give our prayers: We pray that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries or the Government gazettes loading sites where cattle will be assessed, and also provides sufficient vaccines.

Government should also help us and work closely with counterparts in the neighbouring Tanzania so that we are able to get money and other amenities that can help our people.

The line ministry should be tasked to declare the district free from the disease. They should sensitise our people on what to do without coming on the ground and impounding people’s trucks without compensating what they have lost. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is here. I hope that when he comes to speak on the other issues, he can answer this question on the stopping of cattle traders from earning money.

3.27
MR CHARLES ILUKOR (NRM, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the halting of the operationalisation of the newly created local governments.

According to the budget execution circular for the financial year 2018/2019, which the CAOs in our respective areas have just received, they have been advised that operationalisation of 200 subcounties and 196 town councils be halted. These people had gone as far as electing their leaders. They even set dates on which to have their functions celebrating the operationalising of these local governments, but today a circular came directing them to halt. 

Why does Cabinet do this without informing their counterparts? We have already been invited to officiate at these functions. What kind of embarrassment are we going to face, telling our constituents that the process has been halted? Remember that we are all stakeholders in these things. Members must have already communicated to their constituents that they have struggled very hard to get them these things. Now, you are telling us that they should be stopped. Can the Minister of Local Government tell us why such decisions are taken and we are not informed, so that we inform our people in time and avoid such embarrassment? 

THE SPEAKER: Related to that, yesterday, I was in Luuka and the chairman LC V told me that although we had appropriated money for some schools and health centres, recently a circular was sent to them to say that all that money should go to seed schools. They asked me that question and I did not know what to say. I was with hon. Mbayo and I asked her to come and speak to the Cabinet about it. You have to explain to us. It is not information. He wants answers from the Government.  

MR ILUKOR: Madam Speaker, I would like to use this opportunity to thank you and the Commission for having assisted me during my predicament. I was successfully operated on in India and they replaced my hip. You can see me now smiling and being able to perform. I also want to thank my colleagues for the material and moral support you gave me during that time. May God reward you abundantly. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ilukor, we are happy to see you walking smartly. I hope you will be able to dance soon on the Floor of this House. (Laughter) Thank you. The minister will respond.

3.30
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the state of roads in Yumbe District.  

The roads that connect Yumbe to Arua via Terego and the ones that connect Yumbe to Arua via Koboko have become so bad that it is very difficult for vehicles to move. The distance from Koboko to Yumbe is 36 kilometres, a distance that could be covered within 30 minutes, but as of now it takes over an hour. When we tried to go to the regional Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) office in Moyo, they told us that their machines had broken down. One of those that they mentioned was a roller. The refugee vehicles that operate on these roads now avoid the Koboko route and they use other feeder roads that go up to Keri, coming via Lobe, which is around 80 kilometres. In the process, they have also damaged all those roads. 

Since allocations of Government money are based on population, Government should remember that the refugee population in these areas has increased the population of locals because of the nature of their settlement. I have two immediate prayers: One, that Government should increase allocations of the Road Fund to Yumbe District and if possible, to some of the other districts which are hosting refugees like Moyo, Adjumani, Koboko, and Yumbe; secondly, some of this equipment, which was allocated to this – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, just state the point quickly. You want support for the damaged roads.

MR ONZIMA: Madam Speaker, the second prayer is that Government should increase the equipment supplied to Moyo. They told us that they have only one roller, which has broken down. Therefore, because there are a number of vehicles on that road, they should give them at least two rollers. 

During the refugee summit, the President had promised that the route between Koboko and Adjumani would be tarmacked as a contribution for hosting refugees in those areas. We also request that this should be taken into consideration as a long term plan. Thank you.

3.33
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. 

Yesterday morning, I was having my 10 to 15 kilometre run as I usually do. Unfortunately, on my way, I found a dog that was being chased, having escaped from a gate around that area. The dog instead attacked me. When I checked, I discovered I was bleeding on my hamstring. I picked two stones and I chased this dog for about one kilometre, it turned around and I hit it and killed it. (Laughter) I dragged it for about one kilometre to my compound. I rushed back for medical treatment and I was injected with an anti-rabies vaccine. Later on, I reported to the police. We tried to look for the owner but could not find him.

The main issue I would like to raise is that the Rabies Act, Statutory Instrument No. 44-2, gives powers to cease and detain or destroy stray dogs from certain people that do not take care of their animals. During the mating season, the dogs sometimes make a roadblock on the streets and when you pass by jogging, they feel jealous and might attack you. (Laughter) 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, regarding the treatment, assuming I was in a village, how would I get the treatment? This is why I am raising this issue to be handled accordingly. (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Is that in Kampala District? Is it under Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA) or a different district? We should know who to direct the issue to. It is an issue of public health. Is Kira in Wakiso District? Maybe we should ask the Minister of Health because the issue of rabies is a health issue.

MR ACON: I live in Namugongo and I would request the minister responsible for domestic issues - I do not know if we have such a minister – to do us a favour.

THE SPEAKER: We shall ask the Minister of Health to speak about containment of rabies because if the dogs are attacking people, soon we will find rabies in people’s homes. 

3.36
MR KAMUGISHA TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank   you, Madam Speaker. I arise on a matter of national importance concerning human trafficking in Uganda, especially following the headline in the New Vision of 30 July, which said that 50 girls are trafficked out of Uganda daily.

Madam Speaker, this is very shocking. If 50 girls are trafficked every day, it means we have problems in the country. The report that featured in the New Vision said that people are trafficked for slavery and prostitution, and some of them end up being killed and their body parts sold. 

This report was written by the director of a taskforce in charge of fighting human trafficking in Uganda, Mr Moses Binoga. It indicated that the victims connive with traffickers to beat justice. Therefore, when they are working on their cases, the victims work with the traffickers so that the traffickers are not brought to book after the victims are paid some money.
	
Madam Speaker, I have two prayers. One is that we should get a separate national agency to work on human trafficking. My second prayer is that we should have a deliberate effort to sensitise Ugandans, so that they get to know the companies that export external labour and they do not fall into the traps of traffickers. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we discussed that matter some time back. Trafficking happens every day. However, we shall ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to tell us his plans of upgrading that unit into something more formidable. He will let us know.

3.39
MR LAWRENCE MANGUSHO (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance.

On 29 May 2018, the Electoral Commission conducted an election for council representatives for workers. By 30 May 2018, they had declared the successful workers’ representatives in the district councils. In mid-June, the CAOs were also informed about the declaration of the results. The CAOs requested for the swearing-in of those councillors, but some of them have not been sworn-in even to date. My district is one of those affected. On 5th of July, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Local Government wrote a circular to the CAOs and the town clerks denying this.

Madam Speaker, on 30th April, the Electoral Commission circulated guidelines which specified who is qualified to be elected as a district councillor representing workers. On the 5th of July, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Local Government wrote a letter contradicting what the Electoral Commission wrote – I have copies of these letters - quoting section –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you do not have to go into all those details. You only want to know why the workers’ representatives at district councils have not been sworn in. We shall ask the Ministry of Local Government to update the country on when the workers’ representatives at the district councils will be sworn in.  

Honourable members, let us use three minutes and please do not go into narratives; just state your problem and prayer.

3.41
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance.

Madam Speaker, the Department of Wetlands Management in the Ministry of Water and Environment is demarcating River Sezibwa. However, a number of homesteads have been cultivating crops on the shores of that river. When they were sensitising the communities, they told them that they would demarcate about 100 metres from the main river. However, when I went there with some people, the people complained that they measured between 600 to 500  metres instead of the 100 metres they talked about.

My humble prayer is that the Ministry of Water and Environment should stick to the 100 metres that they talked about. 

THE SPEAKER: We shall ask the Minister for Water and Environment to explain to us how the demarcations were done for the population around River Sezibwa. 

3.42
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of national concern from Bugabula County South is on the hepatitis B vaccine.

Last weekend, I was in my constituency and many issues were raised. One of the issues raised was that in Butansi Subcounty, the doses of the hepatitis B vaccine were available but the syringes and needles were not provided. The officials administering the vaccination asked patients or those that go for the vaccination to pay. When they ask them to pay for those vaccines, it means that they are actually asking them to pay for all the doses. Otherwise, when I asked the nurses from that subcounty about the vaccines, they said they have the doses but they were not given the syringes.

In Bulopa Subcounty, the nurses said they did not have testing kits; they gave people the doses but the test kits were not given. In Kitayunjwa Subcounty, people were asked to pay between Shs 3,000 to Shs 5,000 to be vaccinated. Meanwhile, those who received the first dose, when they go for the second dose, as a result of those lapses and days they have missed, they do not get the second dose and it renders the first dose useless. This is a challenge.

When the nurses discover that you have hepatitis B, they ask you to go and test for your viral load. They send you to International Medical Centre in Jinja and once they have tested and checked for the viral load, they send people to either Rubaga Hospital or Kiruddu Hospital. In Rubaga Hospital, people are asked to pay Shs 450,000 and in Kiruddu I am told the clinic day is once a week, on Wednesday - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In Kiruddu, patients said that they work on the first 10 patients and only on Wednesdays, which they call the clinic day.

Madam Speaker, I would like to address myself to the minister concerned. Hepatitis B is not malaria and the dosage is not simple. For me to be in a position to come back in the next Parliament, my people in Bugabula County South must be alive. Could you kindly address that issue?

3.45
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues to raise. 

One of the issues I would like to raise is about Karuma Bridge. In the last six months, about two trucks have gone over that bridge and the police and Government have failed to retrieve both the trucks and the people that drowned along with them in the river. Yesterday, the road was cut off for almost three hours because there was a truck that failed to climb and then it lost control and blocked the road.

Madam Speaker, my issue of concern is that this bridge was constructed in 1963 when the population and vehicles were few. It has now become a death trap. We all drive over that bridge with a lot of fear, both during the day and night time. First of all, the bridge is in a corner, it is Z-shaped and also on a slope. The trucks normally lose control because of the weight they have.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that Government considers putting up a state-of-the-art bridge at that place or at least straighten it. At least some of us who are from there are a bit used to it, but people who have never crossed the River Nile before, immediately they cross they call me because they know the other side is Nwoya District. They say, “Honourable, we were going to die while entering your district; what is happening?” Therefore, that is my request. 

The second issue I would like to raise is about the boundary between Nwoya and Amuru districts. In 2006, when Amuru District was being created, the district headquarters were placed between the two districts – they curved it from Nwoya County in Nwoya District and Kilak County in Amuru District. This means that Amuru Town Council, which is the headquarters of Amuru District, is partly in Nwoya District and the other half is in Kilak County in Amuru District.

However, when Nwoya District was created, the pronouncement from Parliament was that the boundary of Nwoya District is the original boundary of Nwoya County. However, the authorities of Nwoya District, including me, cannot access that part of the town council in Amuru District. Therefore, Parliament needs to rectify this. Give us our boundary of Nwoya County in Nwoya District and leave Amuru with their part of their town council. That is my prayer to the Government and Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: On that one, honourable member, you should move a motion. We cannot just alter boundaries anyhow. You should bring a motion and we debate it. We should also follow up the records of the decision we took so that we know where we can put the headquarters.

MS ADONG: Much obliged.

THE SPEAKER: The minister will answer the other one.

3.49
MR PIUS WAKABI (NRM, Bugahya County, Hoima): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the people who went missing at Murchison Falls National Park, as reported by yesterday’s Daily Monitor. 

Madam Speaker, the said missing persons are suspected poachers who cannot be accounted for by the Uganda Wildlife Authority as well as their communities of residence. Indeed, the community suspects that these persons could have been killed by game rangers. 

Madam Speaker, human life should be valued and if these suspicions are true, that is a clear sign that these game rangers took the law into their hands. The victims are Ben Ojok, Charles Ongom, Jacob Okot, Patrick Oringa and Alele.

I pray that the line ministry, as well as the Uganda Wildlife Authority, with the help of the police, investigates this to the core. This is because I find the response of the spokesperson of Uganda Wildlife Authority unsatisfactory. They said that wild animals probably ate these people. Investigations into this matter will ease tension, especially of family members and neighbouring committees, and redeem the image of the tourism sector. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We shall ask the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to come and explain to us the issue of the missing persons in Murchison Falls National Park.

3.51
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Madam Speaker, you recall that on 10 July 2018, there were LC I general elections. I speak on a sad note because on 11 July 2018, the UPDF, who are on the waters, shot two people during that time of elections. These two people are now in Bugiri Hospital.

My prayer is that firstly, the Government should give a statement about this queer and regrettable incident. Also, the Government should take responsibility because this lady who was shot had just gone to the health centre II for treatment and the bullet got her there. I pray that the Government takes up the responsibility of taking care of the treatment of this young girl. 

I also pray that these officers who have over stayed on the waters be transferred. The other time I spoke here and told you that their activities are queer. Therefore, I pray that they are transferred. While we legislate here and talk like I am doing now, tomorrow the officers will say that I reported them in Parliament. Our work is to legislate and represent our people. The UPDF has been a very good force but now that these people have become errant, I pray that the ministry concerned and the Government prevails over these errant officers. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We shall ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to give us a statement on the issue of these residents at Lolwe Island.

3.53
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. 

It has been hell over the last 14 days for the people of my constituency because cross-border traders, majorly women, have been arrested in Kenya during the market days. We have a record of almost 60 women who have been arrested and all their fruits taken. They had to pay KShs 10,000 to be released from the cells. This has made our people in Uganda fear to cross to Kenya and yet we have allowed Kenyan traders to come and transact business in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, it is my prayer that Government intervenes to help our people, as cross-border trade has been the culture, and also talks to the Government of Kenya to respect the East African Community protocols that allow free movement of goods and services across the border.

Madam Speaker, the second matter of importance that I would like to raise is that when we have any problem with electricity in Busia, Namayingo and Bugiri, we have to use almost Shs 20,000 to go to Tororo because the regional Umeme office is there. Many times, I have requested Government to help our people to save them on distance and time and let services be availed. However, we have not heard any answer from Government directing Umeme to put up a service centre in Busia. 

Therefore, it is my prayer that the Government and the minister save our people and put up a service centre in Busia that will help almost four districts, so that when we have a problem –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: I am sure the minister has heard. In relation to the cross-border problem, we shall ask the Minister of East African Community Affairs to examine the situation on the Busia-Uganda border to ensure that non-tariff barriers are not erected to stop our people from trading freely. 

Honourable members, the Minister of Local Government is required to speak on whether the operationalisation of the new administrative units has been halted. Also, when are you going to swear in the workers’ representatives? I do not know whether you are ready now or you need time? Hon. Namuyangu is not here. The Minister of Local Government should come and update us on whether the new units will be operational or not, and when you will swear the representatives of the workers in the districts.

The Minister of Health should talk about the dogs and also hepatitis B. I do not know whether she is ready. 

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are not many brave people who can run after a dog, especially after it has bitten them. So, I would like to congratulate hon. Acon for that bravery to run and kill this dog from wherever it came. However, I would like to indicate that we have the rabies vaccine at the National Medical Stores and districts are supposed to order for them. He received the vaccine at a private facility but the vaccine is available. The only challenge we have is that some districts do not prioritise this and only ask for it when it is necessary. Sometimes, it is not an issue in some of the districts. 

Regarding the hepatitis B vaccine, Madam Speaker, we have adequate vaccines and test kits. I am surprised that the shortage of syringes and test kits has remained an issue. We are going to follow this up. However, colleagues, when the health workers report that they lack these test kits or syringes, please first confirm with the District Health Officers (DHOs) because sometimes this has been a way in which these health workers make money. I can only state that we need to follow this up. Some health workers are using this to get some little money from the population.

Regarding the issue of the viral load, it has been an issue before, but allow me to inform the House that the Central Public Health Laboratories has the equipment for testing the viral load of a person. We have been calling upon the districts and informing them during training on where further tests are supposed to be conducted, especially that of the viral load. The fee ranges between Shs 300,000 and Shs 450,000 at private health facilities. We have a sample network system where samples can be picked from the lowest health facility and sent through our network to the Central Public Health Laboratories without requiring the patient to move and the results are sent back.

Madam Speaker, this is also an area of weakness amongst our health workers. We shall raise it with the DHOs so that they reach out to the responsible officers in the lower health facilities. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: What about the rabid dogs?

MS OPENDI: I just want to clarify that the tests at the Central Public Health Laboratories for the viral loads for hepatitis B are free of charge. 

On the rabid dogs, we will have to follow that up, Madam Speaker, because I do not have that information right now.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, is the test of the viral loads done in Kampala only? Does that mean someone must come from Mukono and go to Kiruddu on a Wednesday?

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, that should not be the case. All regional referral hospitals are supposed to provide this. If it is treatment for hepatitis B, it is at the regional referral hospitals and some selected hospitals. I do not have the list now but maybe I can avail it later to the House. People are not supposed to travel. We have designated places. 

Of course, you realise that Mukono does not have a Government hospital. There is a health centre IV. So, maybe we will follow it up to ensure that we also designate that, because that is another district which is heavily populated. For health centres IV, it is only Dokolo Health Centre IV that was designated because of the experts in that facility, and of course the general hospitals were also designated.

Madam Speaker, we will follow that up so that people do not have to move long distances especially for treatment. However, for the viral load tests, people do not have to move far because the sample network system that is already in place should be used by the various facilities countrywide. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Internal Affairs, are you ready to talk about trafficking? Do you have plans to upgrade the trafficking unit to an authority?

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, I did not get the question very clearly. However, I also wanted to say that the technical people should do some work on these microphones because there is a lot of echo, so those of us who are seated here do not get the sound very clearly. Secondly, I would request Members not to talk into the microphones but to the microphones so that we can get you clearly. However, the most important issue is that there is an echo which is vibrating around.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Timuzigu was concerned about a report in the press that every day, 50 girls are trafficked out of Uganda not through the right channels.  He was wondering whether your unit to manage trafficking should not be upgraded to an authority to deal with the situation better. That was what he said.

MR OBIGA KANIA: The issue of trafficking has persisted for quite some time with the connivance of some of the victims. At the gazetted entry points, we have done everything possible between the police, other security agencies and immigration to ensure that people travelling outside the country travel for legitimate reasons. However, as honourable members will know, it is difficult to tell whether somebody is stating a genuine reason or not. This leads to many of our citizens ending up in foreign countries where they fall into the trap of these traffickers. 

We have also, through our system, identified some of the main traffickers whose activities were minimised. Our advice has been, as the Government, that when our people are looking for employment outside the country, they should use licensed companies from the destination countries that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development have checked to be legitimate and genuine. Our embassies have also been informed about those companies such that when our people go outside the country, they are able to inform the embassies to keep tracking them. 

Madam Speaker, many of our people do not follow these guidelines. However, we continue to do our best to make sure the number of people who are trafficked illegally are minimised. I think right now, the number is minimal. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Padre Pio Nursery Day and Boarding School, Banda, Wakiso. They are represented by hon. Sseggona and hon. Nansubuga Seninde. You are welcome. (Applause)

Minister of Works and Transport, are you ready to talk about the adjustment of the budget for the areas affected by the refugee population? Okay, you will come back to us next week. Minister of Water and Environment, are you demarcating River Sezibwa and interfering with the rights of the people to own their land? 

4.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Dr Mary Kitutu): Madam Speaker, all rivers in Uganda are required to have protection zones as a way of protecting the water from pollution and also protecting the biodiversity in the river. 

It is true that River Sezibwa falls in the schedule of rivers which require 100 metres protection zone. If it is 600 metres, I would try to crosscheck. However, I would like to request colleagues that if you have such an issue, just give me a call and we will be able to crosscheck with the team on the ground. This exercise is done in collaboration with the community. Therefore, we sensitise the community and then we are able to do that. 

This is supposed to be a regulated zone and it is under the law. It is a way of protecting that river bank from river erosion. You know, when the rivers get eroded, then the soil goes up to the lake and harms our ecosystem. However, I will crosscheck to see whether River Sezibwa has been given 600 metres and not 100 metres as required by the law. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Perhaps the honourable member should indicate the village where it is being done. River Sezibwa is long; you should indicate the village so that the minister does not go on a fishing expedition. Which village is that where they have gone beyond the 100 metres?

MR NOAH MUTEBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The demarcation is being done in the subcounties of Kalongo and Kalungi. It is also being done in the villages of Kilanga LC I in Bamugolodde Parish, in some villages like Burwandi and some other villages in Kamilampango Parish up to Kalungi Subcounty. There are a number of villages.

Since the minister has said that we will work together, we can do so. When she sends the team, I am ready to be with them and we solve the problem. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: There was a request to improve the bridge at Karuma. I do not know whether the Minister of Works and Transport is ready to speak about a new Karuma bridge. Do you have any plans? That is what hon. Adong would like to know.

4.09
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Ntege): Madam Speaker, we have plans to build a new bridge at Karuma. We have already done the designs; we need just to review them. We have already sent our interests to two funders, trying to get them to fund that bridge. Therefore, we are on course, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the other minister will answer the question next week. Now we shall go to item No.3. I have asked the Minister of Agriculture to respond to hon. Kangwagye’s question together with the issue under item No.3. 

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. KAMUSIIME PENTAGON ON THE FALLING MAIZE PRICES IN THE COUNTRY

4.09
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, Minister of Agriculture, your item is No.4. Let us hear from the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives under item No.3 -

MR SSEMPIJJA: Yes, that one.

THE SPEAKER: Are you together?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Yes, we are together. We are-

4.10
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, we are supposed to respond to the issue of maize prices and we have prepared a joint paper with the Minister of Agriculture, who will support me after I have presented our bit.

We know very well that Uganda experiences two production seasons annually. The current season came exactly before the prior crop could be completely mopped out of circulation. Uganda’s exports in the East African Community (EAC) during season A were as follows - Please note that this statement has been uploaded on your tablets. The total was 338,886,877 metric tons and the value was US$ 256.427.

The contribution of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, through the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) and Operation Wealth Creation was 1,959,500 kilogrammes of maize seeds to farmers across the country. It was estimated to be planted on 195,950 acres of land and the outturn is expected to be 249,000 kilogrammes of maize. In season A, the domestic prices for ungraded grain ranged between Shs 450 to Shs 800 per kilogramme in the main grain trading urban areas, while the farm gate recorded the lowest, as usual, at Shs 300. The standardised storage infrastructure stands at 920,500 metric tonnes - those are silos and warehouses - owned by the private sector. That is the Grain Council of Uganda and the cooperatives. 

These cyclic fluctuations in agro-commodity prices are not accidental. At the peak of harvest of crops, mainly cereals and grain prices tend to decline gradually or drastically due to a number of reasons. The reasons are: 

1. 	Low prices during a bumper harvest across the country.
2. 	Fluctuating or declining demands by the traditional consumers.
3. 	Undefined markets, largely due to lack of reliable market information.
4. 	Unstructured trading due to undeveloped financing and marketing mechanisms.
5. 	Acute lack of standardised storage infrastructure actually makes the situation worse.

I should not dwell on lamentation but I would like to give the proposed solutions to issues raised in Parliament. On the challenge of plummeting grains and cereal prices, in short term, Government through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will provide a budget from the Agriculture Credit Fund. This will be specifically for some cooperatives and members of the Grain Council of Uganda to buy 500,000 metric tonnes from farmers. That is supposed to take place immediately, and the Minister of Finance will supplement on that.

In the medium term, we intend to operationalise structured training mechanisms, that is, the Warehouse Receipt System and commodities exchange, to avail market access to farmers produce.
The implementers of this are the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, the Warehouse Receipt System Authority, Uganda National Commodities Exchange, the private sector through the Grain Council of Uganda and cooperatives, and financial institutions.

In the medium term, we shall provide basic standardised storage facilities at household, community and regional levels by working directly with the private sector, including cooperatives, to develop and renovate storage where necessary. 

There are a number of storage facilities - we worked out about 140 units all over the country - which are being misused. Some people are sleeping in them, some are using them as shops but they used to belong to the cooperatives. We have a list. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, development partners and the private sector will deal with that.

We also intend to strengthen trade negotiations with the East African Community and the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) partner states to promote exports. The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, the Uganda Export Promotion Board and the private sector will do that. 

We intend to carry out comprehensive quality promotion campaigns throughout the country through NAADS, Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) and cooperatives. 

We intend to implement the National Grain Trade Policy and its strategy. The implementers are Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, Uganda Warehouse Receipt System Authority, the Grain Council of Uganda and cooperatives –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, this House knows very well that I am a well-entrenched farmer. I had anticipated that the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, who is supposed to help me market my products, was going to help me through the statement that she is making in the House today. However, having listened, she seems to be talking about building infrastructure. 

What came on the Floor of Parliament last week was that farmers are harvesting maize but the prices have dropped to the extent that they cannot subsist on what they have produced. We appreciate the building of infrastructure, which is long term, and the resources, which the minister readily has - although when we need money for other urgent things, it is not readily available. 

Can the minister right now address the immediate issue? I will be very happy to translate that to my family and the people of Dokolo who survive on farming. Thank you. 

MS KYAMBADDE: I started with the immediate - the short term. I said that Government is providing a budget out of the Agriculture Credit Fund, and this is immediate, specifically for some cooperatives and members of the grain council to be able to buy seeds. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development could supplement that with the details and modalities. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, I would like to allay the fears of Members. Right now, the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury is chairing a meeting of bankers to get all the funds that are under the agricultural credit finance and we shall get that report hereafter.

In addition, the Grain Council of Uganda needs Shs 300 billion to evacuate 500,000 metric tonnes. As Government, we are mobilising those funds and this is what the honourable minister responsible for trade is talking about. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, at what price are you buying this maize?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, we have gone through the technical evaluation of producing a kilogramme of maize and the highest cost of production is Shs 400 per kilogramme. For the purposes of evacuating this maize, we have agreed with the Grain Council of Uganda to buy directly from the farmers at a minimum of Shs 500 per kilogramme. 

4.21
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable ministers for attempting to answer the cry of the majority of Ugandans and more so, those in my area. 

With due respect, I would like to say that this is mere poetry that cannot deliver Ugandans from the scourge that they are facing right now. I have looked at the suggestions presented as solutions to the problem. I had expected to hear about cross border trade. My traders tell me that they are not free to take maize to South Sudan, Congo and Rwanda, which used to be big markets. I would expect the minister to tell us whether this is true or not. I would also need to know -

THE SPEAKER: Is that part of what you talked about?

MR KAMUSIIME: Yes, it was part of what I asked and it should be in the Hansard.  In addition, I would expect a timeline for the operationalisation of our silos. When shall we see operational regional stores?

May I know from the minister the role of the Export Promotion Board, which is under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the role of NAADS in this issue? This is because where there is an inlet, there must be an outlet. The National Agricultural Advisory Services give us seeds and seedlings and it would be important that they provide the market so that our people are not frustrated. 

In the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the minister said that they are developing a national strategy to partner with private sector investors and farmers as out growers. They had also talked of promoting fruit processing in Kapeeka and Soroti - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are dealing with the falling prices of maize; do not go into fruits and other things. Honourable minister, can you answer the question about national reserves?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, the honourable Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives was going to answer the question of national food reserves, from page 5. Government has a plan and I think I should ask the minister to respond.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on that matter, we shall wait for the honourable member’s motion because he filed notice of a motion. Let us leave it for now and proceed to item No.3 (2), hon. Akamba’s question.

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, I wanted to say something about the markets. The markets are open. You can trade in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Rwanda, Burundi, Sudan and Kenya. These markets are open and we have introduced a simplified trade regime at the borders. We have improved on some of these border posts, so cross-border trade is going on. We would really recommend that we go ahead and sell across the borders. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think there is conflicting information from the Government. Sometime back, we heard that the market in South Sudan is not there anymore and that is why prices are low. Please, tell us where we are.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, let me inform the honourable members that the only fortunate thing we have in Uganda is the two seasons of maize and other crops. Our neighbours have only one season. The unfortunate part about the season we are harvesting now is that the other countries are also harvesting. This is the season where we converge. However, they will not have food in the next season. If we make strategies today to evacuate the bumper harvest, certainly they will have to come back to us in the next season.

THE SPEAKER: Can we have information about the regional silos so that we know where to take our maize?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Kenya and Tanzania are not buying at the moment because they have maize; they are harvesting now. On the other hand, if I may inform Members, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is mentioning trade negotiations because our friends in the East African Community have been shifting goal posts. 

You may recall that recently, the EAC presidents agreed to buy 2 million tonnes of maize from Uganda. Unfortunately, unscrupulous people in Kenya went ahead and mentioned that Uganda’s maize is not of good quality. Meanwhile, they came at night and informally bought all the maize from us. Therefore, what we need to do is to structure ourselves and ensure that we can buy off this maize, keep it safe and clean and then – 

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My expectation and that of the Members is for the ministry to show us that there is a way forward to help Ugandans. The minister has gone ahead to tell us stories about plans in other countries. Is he in order to show us how other countries are planning for their citizens instead of telling us what they, as the ministry responsible, are doing to rescue Ugandans from the plight they are going through? (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, our farmers are really suffering and they want solutions. How is the Grain Council of Uganda with the 500 metric tonnes going to work?

MS KYAMBADDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As far as the status quo is concerned, Government is providing a budget out of the Agriculture Credit Fund, specifically for some cooperatives and members of the grain council. That is the medium through which they will buy the 500,000 metric tonnes – (Interjections) 

Let us start next week and see how it operates. However, we must be in cooperatives. It is very difficult to handle individuals; it is almost impossible. The grain will be bought at Shs 500 per kilogramme.

THE SPEAKER: If it is this week, can we get a report on Tuesday about how much has been bought? Yes, because it is urgent.

MS KYAMBADDE: Yes, we will do that. However, we suggest that the district commercial officers list down some of the organised structures in the districts. If honourable members – (Interjections) – Yes, it will be easier to manage.
 
Honourable members, you know the district commercial officers in your areas. Tell them to give us a list of people who have maize. How do you expect us to access – (Interjections) – It is possible. We have to work together. You do not expect the public sector to work alone. We have to work with you because you are representing the people. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, the Grain Council of Uganda buys 70 per cent of our maize while individuals such as the Allied Brothers, Aponye etcetera buy 30 per cent. The Grain Council of Uganda has stores spread all over the country up to Amuru and is composed of private companies. They have stores and modern storage facilities with driers, sorters and cleaners to handle the maize.

4.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue at hand is that there is a crisis of over production of maize in the market, which is a good thing for us, but we must come in and help our farmers. The issue is that the price is very low and there are no buyers of maize at the moment. 

I am trying to reply to the question that hon. Mwiru asked. We have resources under the agriculture credit facility, which we have agreed, because of this crisis, to avail. In that way, we can, together with the private sector and cooperatives, buy this maize at a minimum price that will not disadvantage the farmers and thereby help the situation. It is as straight as that. 

We are going to avail resources. One of the organised companies and cooperatives that we know is the Grain Council of Uganda. There could be other cooperatives, which are organised and can be assisted to buy this maize. However, for them to do so, they need resources. If you are going to buy this maize, it will be very difficult to buy it from all the farmers across the country in a short time. It cannot happen that way. Thank you.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Grace Freedom Kwiyucwiny, the Deputy Prime Minister, Gen. Moses Ali, and I went to Germany where we saw a big farm that deals with post-harvest handling. We engaged the director who flew to Uganda. We told him that our issue is post-harvest handling, especially in the case of a bumper harvest. 

Madam Speaker, when there is a bumper harvest, there are two solutions; you either get a market very fast and dispose of what is going to perish, or you keep the harvest with very hi-tech equipment. We engaged them and they said that they are going to use the German Development Cooperation and engage our Government so that our farmers are organised in groups. Their equipment is super powerful; hon. Kwiyucwiny Grace can attest to this. 

The same finance minister - 

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who has not done anything to engage the German Development Cooperation, is here purportedly “feeling” for the farmers yet these people are willing to give us equipment like silos for the farmers at a subsidised cost. 

Madam Speaker, is he therefore in order to mislead this House that they are actually doing something when he has completely refused to provide funds and even engage the German Development Cooperation in this matter? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, did you decline to engage the German Development Cooperation on the issue of silos?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, that proposal has not come to us.

THE SPEAKER: On a more serious note, I do not know whether the Produce Marketing Board was effective. However, don’t you think that we need them?

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural point. The first issue concerns the source of money. If the money was appropriated by Parliament for a purpose, I am wondering whether it is procedurally right for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to divert this money for another purpose without coming back to Parliament. 

Secondly and most importantly, I was a member of the Committee on Trade. The Grain Council of Uganda that we are talking about is a composition of companies, which are within the Warehouse Receipt System. It is very difficult for our local farmers to join this council, wherever they are.

Thirdly, all the maize that is under the Warehouse Receipt System is on the stock exchange and the owners of the system earn money. Therefore, for us to get money and channel it under the grain council’s private companies, which are already controlling the maize sector that we are talking about, will be to enrich the same people.

Therefore, the procedural point I am raising –(Interjection)– hon. Bahati, you failed to provide a solution and I am now raising a very important matter. Madam Speaker, I should be given a chance to address these matters. I am wondering whether it is not procedurally right that instead of involving only members of the grain council, who are still controlling the sector, we also involve the other members that are within the sector, like cooperatives within those particular areas.

Wherever you go, for instance in the villages, there are local cooperatives, which deal in maize; for instance, if you go to Kamwenge, where hon. Frank Tumwebaze comes from. These local cooperatives that deal in maize are there but we are not paying attention to them now. Instead, we are looking at the grain council which is already controlling the sector. They could even be the cause of the problem. 

Madam Speaker, I am wondering whether it is not procedurally right that before the minister tells us who they are going to deal with, she comes up with a statement, which details the formula on who is going to be involved in this. This is because they are going to set aside money and we are going to find that the people who are benefitting from the Warehouse Receipt System, which is supported by the Government, are the same people that are benefitting from this money. 

We are leaving out the common man, and the would-be surplus value for the farmers is being taken by middle men who have categorised themselves into the grain council. The actual farmers will lose the would-be surplus value and remain in the same situation while we enrich these companies for which hon. Bahati is making a case. I am wondering if it is procedurally right to proceed that way.

THE SPEAKER: I will invite hon. Angura and then the Prime Minister to say something. 

In the meantime, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of High Hope Nursery and Primary School, Kyenjonjo District. They are represented by hon. Aston Kajara and hon. Spellanza Baguma. You are welcome. (Applause) 

4.42
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, I stood here in compliance with your directive that I needed to try and get the ministers to come and answer issues raised. I am now surprised that when the ministers are trying to answers the questions, there are a lot of interruptions, which normally makes it difficult for the minister to explain. This is very unfortunate. Why should a minister be blocked from saying what he or she was asked to come and explain? Now, who is going to explain? Can the other people explain what the minister should explain? They cannot! (Laughter) 

The minister should be allowed to explain. I am surprised; when the ministers are not here, we are hanged but when the ministers are here, we do not give them an opportunity to speak. What is this? Allow the ministers to say what they have come to say - what you asked them to say. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to thank the Prime Minister for really doing his work because the Front Bench is looking good today. We asked for answers and the answers are here through the ministers. Please, if they are not satisfactory, we can ask again. Allow the minister to speak. Please, take your seats for now.

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, you guided that we should come back with a report on Tuesday and I can see that all the issues that Members are raising are premised on the gaps that are in our report today. Allow us to come with a report on Tuesday, with all the details and modalities on how we are going to implement this exercise. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, come back on Tuesday and tell us where the money is, how much it is, who is going to bring it and where the farmers can sell. 

Let us go to Item No. 3(2), Minister for ICT and National Guidance – We are coming back to that issue; we have a motion on national reserves. 

RESPONSE FROM THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. AKAMBA PAUL ON THE BAN OF AIRTIME SCRATCH CARDS

4.45
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity you have given me to respond to the issue raised by hon. Paul Akamba on 24 July 2018 regarding the ban – apologies for my hoarse voice – of airtime scratch cards. 

Madam Speaker, we all remember that early this year, our country experienced an unprecedented surge in the number of crimes committed using mobile phones, including the rampant kidnaps and murders of several women such as Susan Magara and the Entebbe women, among others.

In order to improve the security situation, in March 2018, Cabinet agreed to the streamlining of SIM card registration processes. An inter-ministerial committee of Cabinet involving the ministries in charge of internal affairs, security and ICT and our respective agencies was tasked to engage with telecom operators with a view of finding solutions to the phone-based security threats.

Madam Speaker, several measures were implemented, including requiring all telecom operators to install biometric card readers such that all SIM card registrations and SIM swaps are done only upon electronic verification of the biometric details of the SIM card applicant.

In addition to SIM card registration, the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC), working with other security agencies, further consulted the sector players - the telecom companies in particular - to recommend other practical measures through which Government could eliminate SIM card related crimes and improve traceability of mobile phone users. 

Uganda Communications Commission and the security agencies recommended to Government that vending of airtime cards was directly linked to the selling of illegally registered SIM cards and would facilitate airtime recharge and top-ups manually without any digital tracing.

The use of electronic recharge systems was therefore recommended as the most viable and secure option with so many other attendant advantages. Electronic recharge systems are already a common practice in many other developed and developing countries, including South Sudan and Zimbabwe.

Advantages of the Electronic Recharge System

The use of the electronic recharge system has brought with it the following benefits:
    1. It has improved the process of directly tracing vendors/hawkers/stockists and eventually their customers who procure airtime electronically.

All vendors who have been selling the paper version of airtime scratch cards have been given the opportunity to sell the same airtime in a digital format using an ordinary phone, like this one I am using or any other, as a tool of trade and have been duly registered by the telecom operators. There is therefore no inconvenience to anybody since the people and outlets that were selling the paper scratch cards are the same points of sale for the electronic recharge. Contrary to fears that digitisation of airtime shall cause a mass loss of jobs, it will instead create more opportunities through formalised distribution.

    2. It will improve revenue assurance by Government since with the electronic system, Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) can determine the amount of airtime sold by telecom operators and their agents and thus rule out any tax under declarations.

    3. This system will reduce e-waste caused by the many scratch cards that are thrown into the environment. 

Madam Speaker, I am aware that in his statement, my colleague, hon. Paul Akamba, suggested that since there are many buveera in our environment, Government should not bother about airtime scratch cards. I am happy that hon. Akamba acknowledges that paper scratch cards were adding to the environment menace. However, if we have not yet succeeded in banning buveera, it does not mean that we should condone any other waste that contributes to the already bad situation.

    4. This one is very important: The use of electronic recharge systems will protect the public against purchase of fake airtime scratch cards intended to defraud unsuspecting members of the public. Security agencies have in the past arrested a number of people defrauding members of the public through sale of fake airtime scratch cards. I believe that using the e-recharge system will completely eliminate this problem.

    5. Airtime scratch cards are a cost to the provision of communication services in Uganda. It involves the cost of manufacture, importation and distribution that increases the overall cost of doing business, which eventually is passed on to the consumer. In addition, the paper scratch cards are manufactured outside Uganda and add onto our importation bill thereby facilitating capital flight.

	With the new electronic recharge system, it will rationalise/minimise all associated costs in the distribution system enumerated above and mitigate both importation of scratch cards and capital flight to some extent.

    6. An electronic recharge system is one of the steps of inculcating among the citizens the culture of e-commerce by transacting digitally and slowly transitioning into a cashless economy. Honourable members, the advantages of a cashless economy are enormous with creation of digital jobs through anticipated innovation.

    7. Lastly, on the benefits and for emphasis, electronic recharge systems will enhance security measures on telecom related services because there shall be traceability in the entire transaction.

Process towards the Banning of the Scratch Cards

Uganda Communications Commission and sector operators informed the public about the planned ban on scratch cards in March 2018. The sector players agreed to set 31 July 2018 as the deadline for the use of paper airtime cards after carefully evaluating the process necessary to effect the ban.

Several public notices have been running in the mass media to prepare customers for the shift to the electronic recharge system. Consumers can buy airtime using Easy Load, Mobile Money, Me2U, PayWay and several other electronic means. These services are available across the country at the same outlets that were selling paper airtime vouchers.

The mobile network operators have gradually phased out the distribution of scratch cards and a majority of users are already using e-top up. They are also working out mechanisms to redeem any scratch cards that will still be in the hands of customers by 31 July 2018. 

Mobile operators have already put in place systems to facilitate conversion of any unutilised scratch cards into mobile money. Through this system, no customer will lose money; they will be refunded for any unutilised airtime cards.

A team from UCC has visited a sample of 186 outlets around the country to verify SIM card and vendor registration and progress to adopt electronic airtime in 37 districts. The findings are that 99 per cent of vendors assessed are already selling electronic airtime and 54 per cent still had some scratch cards they expected to sell by 31 July 2018. If they do not sell them, they will be converted.

Vendors/stockists/hawkers are being encouraged to register with the operators’ distribution structures to continue selling airtime conveniently using electronic top-up.

Telecom companies are working with their agents and distributors across the country to ensure that there is seamless transition from the old system to the new system.

It is instructive to note that we are in a digital era and it is therefore important that we embrace the new measures that are being implemented by Government in service delivery.

We should all encourage our countrymen and women to adhere to these measures for our own good. Where someone faces specific unique challenges in accessing the electronic recharge system, we encourage such customers to approach their respective service providers and UCC for necessary support.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, just like in the past we all relied on postal mail and fax for transmission, which was quasi manual digital, technology led us to communication by email and other electronic platforms and we never resisted this. Continuous technological advancement will further lead to other digital migrations in the way we conduct business. Let us embrace these technology advancements and not resist them. If you resist technology, it will disrupt you. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Akamba, do you have any supplementary question?

4.56
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for heeding the order of this House and coming up with this statement. However, with due respect to the honourable minister, the statement does not address the concerns of most Ugandans that I presented when I raised that concern on the 24th. 

The statement seems to suggest that airtime scratch cards were the cause of insecurity in Entebbe - the killings and kidnaps.

Madam Speaker, this is a fallacy that the honourable minister is advancing without empirical evidence, and I think this is not fair. In the first place, when the Minister of Internal Affairs briefed this House then, this was never raised as an issue of insecurity and as a cause of those killings. Therefore, let us be fair to Ugandans who are suffering.

This statement does not address the issue that I raised, of Ugandans deep in the villages who cannot follow the prompts of mobile money transactions and who cannot access Easy Load services or PayWay. This leaves my concern hanging.

Madam Speaker, saying that developed and developing countries have adopted the e-system when it comes to airtime is farfetched. This is because Uganda is still among the least developed countries, and we should not forget this. Uganda has all the characteristics of a Least Developed Country (LDC) and you cannot lie to this House that 99 per cent of the populace have already adopted the e-system. That is a lie, honourable minister. You have not given us any evidence to attest to this. In any case, do 37 districts reflect the entire Uganda for you to base on that and say it is okay to ban the use of airtime scratch cards?

Honourable colleagues, we are here to represent the interests of Ugandans. However, what I am seeing here is connivance -

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Agriculture, you still have something to answer; do not leave. 

MR AKAMBA: It is as if there is connivance. When you say that it is cheaper to use the e-system for airtime instead of scratch cards, you are suggesting that there is connivance. Because telecom companies were spending more on making airtime scratch cards and so affecting their profits, there is connivance to maximise profits. You have not given any empirical evidence that by moving to digital airtime, the cost will go lower - (Interruption)

MS ADEKE: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The honourable minister mentioned digitisation in light of employment. I am speaking for the young people of this country and very few young people possess that skill of digitisation, to be able to operate those machines. (Interjection) Yes, majority of them in the countryside were easily retailing airtime scratch cards and it was easier for them than operating machines. Actually, he has phased out a group of young people who do not possess this skill, which is required to be able to operate those machines. Thank you, honourable.

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Thank you, hon. Akamba, for giving way. Does the minister want to convince the House that all the people who have been dying since time immemorial have been dying because of scratch cards? The Government bought a monitoring machine, which can monitor all communications. The majority of us represent rural areas and old people are suffering because of the decisions of a few individuals.

Madam Speaker, there are many countries that have implemented this but in a gradual manner. You do not wake up within a night and say, we are going to implement this and that, and make many Ugandans suffer. That is my information. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let us put this matter in context because it has confronted me too. I had gone for a good function where we were dancing and some people said, “Madam, there is something we want to say; why have you taken away the scratch cards? Where do you want us to get our airtime? How far must we go before we can access airtime? How will our old people access it?” That is what they asked me. It was the same thing in Jinja. It is about access, not even about money.

MR TUMWEBAZE: The vendor from who they were accessing scratch cards needs to register with his or her operator. He or she will then be based at the same location.

THE SPEAKER: Should I go to where my vendor is with my telephone?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Where you were buying your airtime.

THE SPEAKER: Should I go and register there?

MR TUMWEBAZE: No, you will go and get your airtime from there, if you cannot get by Me2U or by Mobile Money.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, those old people used to say, “Get for me airtime of Shs 500” and they would send someone to bring it. That is what they are missing.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, I am explaining it. Wherever you were sending them to get Shs 500 airtime, they will still get the same airtime. Actually, with digital loading, you can even get airtime of Shs 200. 

Let me explain the issue of security. When you buy an airtime scratch card and you load it on your phone, which you have stolen from somebody, nobody will trace you, and that is the linkage between airtime scratch cards and aiding of phone related crime. It is not that scratch cards were the ones killing people, but in the whole cycle, you will be able to load your airtime on a phone and communicate without being traced. Therefore, the whole question is traceability. Therefore, we must balance two issues: the inconvenience of going to buy your airtime or learning how to load and the potential of facilitating crime.

I am shocked that the honourable Youth Member of Parliament does not know that the majority of youth in this country are innovating e-commerce applications. Therefore, this format will support the young people involved in innovation. Manual transactions deny innovation. The more people you take online, the more the innovators will have business. I really beg that you understand this concept.

MR LOKWANG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, I was in my constituency and whoever had a phone wanted airtime from me through mobile money because they could not access airtime scratch cards. In my whole constituency, there is no Mobile Money agent. Therefore, this becomes very hard because it negatively impacts on some of us. 

I do not know whether the minister did research and came up with a conclusion or whether they sensitised the people in the rural areas on how to cope with this technology. It is very strange to a villager who cannot even read and write. Thank you.

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for arguing so much to make sure scratch cards are done away with. We have over 60,000 villages in Uganda. In my constituency, I have 204 villages. The modus operandi is that people move to nearby trading centres to get airtime. However, I would like the minister to tell us how many machines have been distributed to these 60 villages to ensure that our people in the villages access airtime, other than politicking here. 

Also, other than this tax you have put on Mobile Money, tell us another tangible reason that would require us to subject our people to such suffering, moving kilometres to access airtime. I am sure, Madam Speaker, all of us here, including the minister -I know the village where he comes from - do not have those machines in our villages. We would like to know what parameters you have used to assess the capacity of Ugandans to embrace your e-mobile money and airtime access.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the question we are asking is: You said there were campaigns in the mass media but how many people are listening to those messages? What is the actual programme you have come up with to inform the public on the next step? I think you have dealt with the big people in Kampala and the telecom companies but the consumers are on their own.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, I have heard your concerns. The good news is that these telecom companies would be losing business if they did not sell much more airtime, and that is logical. The telecom companies are assuring us that you do not need the machine, as you call it. If it is a pay machine, it will work where it is; where it is not, a phone that ordinarily dispenses mobile money will do the same thing.

Madam Speaker, the point I take home from your instructions and counsel, is to intensify awareness so that people know that where they were getting scratch cards, they can as well load airtime. I would like Members to appreciate that any migration will have some issues but gradually, people get on board. Ask yourself how mobile money became so popular; it started small and it grew.

MR MWIJUKYA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. In areas like Buhweju, which are hard to reach, there are certain villages which have no network. Somebody will go and buy airtime from a trading centre but he knows a spot where he will go and call. However, now somebody has to go and look for a boda boda to go to a town where there is Mobile Money and buy airtime of Shs 500. 

For you to assume that there is network everywhere and that in every trading centre, there will be somebody with a phone so that you go and buy from him is false. Because you are the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance, it is you who gives; so, what happens to areas with no network?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Hon. Francis Mwijukye, this method is intended to help your people of Buhweju. Buhweju is actually more modern than Kamwenge District; Kamwenge could be much more remote, since you are near Mbarara in a way. However, if you have money on your phone stored in form of mobile money - and we believe that most people transact using mobile money - you will load airtime at no cost. You do not have to incur the costs of paying a boda boda cyclist to take you to Nsika Trading Centre to either buy a scratch card or load airtime. 

Therefore, eventually, when the migration is fully accepted and people have understood it, if Members would agree, with the permission of the Speaker, we can conduct a clinic in Parliament and invite all telecom companies and they tell you how they are doing business. If there is any reduction in the number of customers, they would be suffering. I can take information from the President of Uganda People’s Congress (UPC). (Interruption)

MR AKENA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I think the point you are missing is that there are many airtime vendors who sell as a by-the-way. It is your local shop which has all sorts of small things and on top of that, they sell airtime. They are not people working specifically for the telecom companies. This is just part of the service they do in the community. 

In my village, where electricity just reached earlier this year, the nearest point where you will get a dedicated telecom person is about 13 kilometres away. However, in between there, you have small vendors. Often, somebody will get Shs 2,000 and get cooking oil for Shs 500, airtime for Shs 500 and sugar for Shs 500. That is the sort of trade that is taking place. Now, in converting this to a digitised format, you are locking out many people. It is not helpful in certain circumstances.

The nearest fuel station to my village is about 40 kilometres. You get people who vend fuel there; they have half a litre or two litres in a Rwenzori water bottle and they sell the fuel there. A lot of rural Uganda is like that. What you are pushing may exist in some of these larger centres but there are many places where you are going to leave our population out.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I conclude, I take the point raised by hon. Jimmy Akena. However, one of the objectives is to streamline selling of airtime so that if you buy airtime and you load it on your phone and there is suspicion about your activities, we are able to trace you. 

The vendors in your village who are doing it as a by-the-way, if they get some business benefit from it, they should be able to formalise their business. If they formalise their business, they will continue serving the people of Akokoro village or Kamwenge at the same point.

Madam Speaker, I pledge to this House, with your permission, to have a clinic in Parliament. I will summon UCC and all telecom operators to interact with colleagues so that these colleagues can take part in explaining to their electorate how to do it. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: The minister has made a proposal. What do you say about the proposal? 

MS JESCA ABABIKU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. It is good to have an interaction with the minister on this matter. As we proceed to that level, let the minister give us clarification on the security issue, which he has attached to the scratch cards. We believe the cards have got serial numbers, why then is it difficult for them to trace these people using the serial numbers?

Additionally, Madam Speaker, the minister should answer that question you raised. Most of the rural people are not educated, some are too old and the network is still a problem. A person buys a scratch card now and because of network problems, keeps it and loads it at their convenience. Even as we are seated here, we have many of our dependants whom we communicate with in the same way. 

Therefore, the minister needs to bring a statement that will address the issue of accessibility and the nitty-gritty issue of security attached to the scratch cards. Otherwise, there are better options they can use other than eliminating the scratch cards. Thank you.

MR KALUYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to seek some clarity from the minister. 

When you attach the issue of security as your number one reason as to why we are eliminating the scratch cards, I get a bit puzzled. When airtime leaves the telecom companies for the different areas of this country, those scratch cards have serial numbers and the telecom companies know the serial numbers that have gone to a particular area. When they reach that particular area, the distributors give the cards to the agents. The distributors also know that serial Nos. 1, 2, 3 up to 999 are in a particular area. 

How I wish that you attached the issue of environment to the scratch cards. They are really destroying the environment. I would agree with you on that. However, even then, we are known for not implementing some of these issues, like the ban on the use of kavera. We actually do not know what happened to the ban on the use of kavera. 

You say that it is a matter of security and it is very serious, but we have other ways of tracking these people. What about a person who has a lot of airtime; did you know that when you load airtime on your phone, it does not expire? You can have Shs 100,000 on your phone and you can roam around this country regardless of where you loaded it from. How are you going to determine that because I used mobile money to load airtime on my phone, they will track me in that way? I could commit a crime in Karamoja yet I loaded airtime from Kampala. 

Another issue is that when you look at the way this airtime is purchased in the rural areas, it is like we are making a law for only Kampala. If I am to talk for myself, I do not know when I last scratched an airtime card. That means I can afford mobile money; I can afford to have money on my phone for a very long time. We are however looking at that other person in the village who does not even have a smart phone, who has this analogue phone – Kabiriti. That person does not have the opportunity to get mobile money or find an agent.

The people selling the airtime themselves, like hon. Akena mentioned, just gamble around with how to get something to eat when they purchase that airtime. Now, for Government to tell that person to switch to being an agent of the telecom company – do you know the rigours that person would have to go through just to get agent status to be able to sell that airtime on his phone? 

Right now, if I want to give airtime to another person, I will be charged. What is that person going to get in terms of profit? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR ONYANGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. In my village, we actually do not have any mobile money agent - actually in the whole parish. (Laughter) If someone is to access mobile money, he has to either go to Busia or the next trading centre, which is in Bugiri District. 

Is the ministry working out a way to extend these services to such villages that do not have access to mobile money? Just like someone said, in these villages, people buy scratch cards from retail shops where one goes and buys items for Shs 500, Shs 200 etcetera. There is really no hope for us to have PayWay machines and mobile money extensions in such areas. What is the ministry planning to do for these kinds of rural areas? 

We need to bear in mind that we are legislators, legislating for the entire country and not only urban centres. We stay in Kampala and areas around the city and we can access these services with a lot of ease compared to someone deep in the village. Madam Speaker, we need to take this decision seriously bearing in mind that we are making decisions that will affect the entire country.

5.25
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo North County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would first of all like to thank hon. Akamba for the concern he raised. It is true that in the countryside, there was a lot of confusion when Government announced that people should move away from using scratch cards. There was a lot of confusion. 

I would like to start from where the honourable minister ended, that there was a gap in advertising and communicating to the general public about the eventual move from airtime scratch cards to digital electronic recharge systems. People did not get that information and maybe that was the weakness in terms of communication from the ministry.

The minister has suggested that Members of this House should hold a meeting with UCC – (Interruption) 

MR ATIKU: Thank you, hon. Nyakecho, for giving way. I am a member of the Committee on Information, Communication Technology. 

Regarding this point, I support the minister’s submission. These airtime scratch cards make the cost of making phone calls higher because the companies import these scratch cards; they are made from outside the country and that is a costly. If we remove the cost of making scratch cards and use money for loading airtime, we will make the phone calls cheaper and the environment cleaner. That is information I wanted to give.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are not talking about the costs involved. We are talking about the right of access by the population. That is what we are talking about.

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to wrap up my submission by suggesting that this Parliament has a Committee on Information, Communication and Technology. The committee could sit and discuss this issue, like the honourable minister suggested. Members can also forward some of the issues since we may not have enough time to digest all of them here.

Finally, it is very important that henceforth, the Ministry of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance takes up the issue of sensitising the public very seriously. Otherwise, the public is not sensitised and maybe that is where the problem is coming from.

Madam Speaker, embracing technology has never been easy. When we were moving from analogue to digital television, there was a lot of commotion even in this House. Today, nobody uses the post office anymore; people are using email services. Those days, people used to write love letters on paper but nowadays, it is WhatsApp and Facebook. Therefore, technology is here to change most of those things; it will either change you or you will accept to be changed. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: We agree that technology is there to change but it should change together with the people; it should move with them. 

5.29
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are not against change but change should be inclusive of everyone. That is what we are talking about.

Madam Speaker, I took time to research with the telecom companies. Right now, airtime scratch cards are serialised, stored in warehouses and then transported to different places. The ministry is doing a conversion; they have to convert all the serialised scratch cards into Easy Load. They are however, saying to convert all the serialised airtime scratch cards to Easy Load will take quite a long time. They have also said that for Easy Load to be accessible to customers, they are going to get an agent for every subcounty with a machine that can load airtime on people’s phones. 

Madam Speaker, the honourable minister is concentrating on mobile money conversion into airtime. However, they said the costs will increase a little because of the conversion to Easy Load - (Mr Atiku rose_) I am talking from an informed position. This is not my own information. I am wondering whether hon. Atiku has a telecom company in Ayivu, Arua.

Madam Speaker, that information alone therefore requires us to inquire from the minister much more. Did the ministry compare their information and conclude that if we do not migrate today, then Uganda is ending tomorrow? What will happen to the airtime scratch card dealers who are not even in shops but in kiosks? How about our people who access them easily in those kiosks along the road? That is our concern. Therefore, if you delayed it for some period so that all of us are included in the migration, what would go wrong? I think that is the concern.

5.32
MS ADONG LILLY (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister and assure him that banning airtime scratch cards will not improve security.

Madam Speaker, assuming I am a terrorist and I have airtime worth Shs 50,000, which I wish to distribute to the phones that are going to be used, does the telecommunication company or the minister have ways of detecting where my airtime will be going? 

I would like to echo the same concern as that of my colleagues. We should not forget we come from villages. What has changed is that our status has improved but we do not know what takes place in the villages. In fact, we should be sympathising with the poor people in this country. In some of our villages, people have to walk 20 to 30 kilometres to seek services.  We have many emergencies that take place in the villages. Mind you, these people in the villages, particularly the elders, would want to send children but they cannot send them with phones all the time to go to the centres where the machines for Easy Load will be. You will need to send someone with Shs 1,000 and some even keep it in the house.

Honourable minister, you should also be mindful that when you have airtime in your phone, some of these telecommunication companies use your airtime without your knowledge. You cannot even keep your airtime on the phone. However, when you have airtime scratch cards somewhere, you can keep them. 

Therefore, I would like to beg that we move slowly. We should not forget where we came from, unless we are saying we are planning for the rich and the urban population. We cannot forget that the biggest part of Uganda’s population is in the rural areas. Otherwise, we are planning for the urban people like everything should be like it is London, England, where the majority of their population lives in the urban centres. In fact, in those countries, it is the rich who live in the villages, so they can afford these kinds of policies we are coming up with. However, in this country, it is the contrary; the poor who are the majority live in the villages while a few of the rich people live in the urban areas. I beg to submit.

5.35
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity.

Madam Speaker, over the weekend, I was in the village. However, I was surprised when some of my constituents told me that there is a new way of loading airtime. I took the matter lightly and I was hesitant to respond. They further told me that the way to get airtime is by sending your phone to the trading centre to people who load the airtime there and then bring it back. They said that you can load as low as Shs 200.

This matter is disturbing all of us because we represent mainly rural people who may not understand the way technology is moving. However, I would like to say that this transition is already being used by our people in the rural areas. However, the question is on the deadline being today. That might inconvenience many of our constituents.

We would request the minister to leave the window for the scratch cards open. Leave the window for the easy load cards to also continue so that we assess what impact we will have in the next few days. My people are already starting to emulate the system. I did not respond but I could see them sending their phones to be loaded in the neighbouring trading centres where people have been positioned.

Honourable minister, we would request that the telecom companies move very fast to continue sensitising our people while giving that window period and also answering the question of dropped calls. There are so many questions people are raising about airtime, where they do not exhaustively utilise their airtime. You call for one minute and your airtime is used up –(Interruption) 

MR TUMURAMYE: Thank you, my brother. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I agree with the points given by my senior minister. The argument of using e-loading is very important. However, the point is, what is the practicality of having those machines in the villages?

Secondly, how accessible are those machines in the villages?  Therefore, I request the minister that as we move ahead to use e-loading, let there be an extension of time so that our people can easily understand how to do that business and how we can have those machines put in the villages. They are not accessible in every place. However, the method used is very important. Thank you very much, my brother.

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, my brother, for the information. As I conclude, this is the opportunity that many of our trading areas that do not have such facilities should take, to see how to engage our people to get businesses to improve on the services we are giving to our people. I beg to submit.

5.38
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not want to dispute the justification given by the minister, although some of it is controversial. However, I would like to say that there is too much hurrying that is going to push us into bad light. Of late, you must have noted that the public is not happy with Parliament. Let us do this. 
Madam Speaker, this issue needs time to educate the masses and that we strategically make sure that each area can access airtime. That is what we need. We are not against change or transfer from scratch cards to electronic loading. We request that the minister sets a timeframe so that it is not done overnight. Otherwise, we shall have legislated against the capacity of our people to survive. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Before I call hon. Akamba, I would like to assure the minister that we are really with you; but we want to walk together with you. You know, we crashed on the sim-cards. We crashed on the taxes. We may again crash on the scratch cards with the same population.

MR AKAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Members who have immensely contributed to this subject. In conclusion, I would like to urge the honourable minister to lay on the Table evidence that there was an environmental impact assessment by National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) to the effect that airtime scratch cards are a threat to the environment.

Secondly, let the minister lay on the Table evidence that the airtime scratch cards are the root cause of insecurity in the country. Thirdly –(Interruption) 

MS OGWAL:  Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of clarification. I would like the Member on the Floor to clarify to me a matter of policy. I would like to know - since you have done a bit of research on this particular subject, who is going to benefit from this policy shift? 

When you look at it on the surface, it is the telecom companies which are benefiting because they are going to forego the purchase of the same cards. One would say that the minister is actually advocating for the telecom companies to make more profits because they are now not going to use the scratch cards which they were purchasing. Therefore, I would like your clarification, as you conclude, who the beneficiary is.

Secondly, can you also clarify for us, as a matter of policy, the people who are actually engaged in selling scratch cards are women. In Kampala, you find them sitting on the streets with newspapers. They sell newspapers together with the scratch cards. Therefore, can you also tell us if you have done some research on that as well? 

When you flush these women out from selling the scratch cards on the streets, has the Government worked out some arrangement where you are going to deploy these women because they will now have to leave the streets? They have been selling scratch cards and so on. Are you aware that you are actually pushing women into unemployment and into desperation and probably forcing them into prostitution? Are you aware of that? Can you please help us, through your research, and try to educate the ministry on some of these issues?

MR EDWARD OTTO: Thank you, my brother, for giving way. I will be brief. I have just returned from Canada and I confirm that scratch cards are still being used for long distance calls in a developed country like Canada.

I am wondering why it is a big security issue there. My worry – and I need that to be clarified – is that maybe we are doing the security gate keeping at a wrong place. I think if you know the phone owner’s registration through a government national identity card, among other things, if they load the card, you should be able to trace who is using the phone and all that. Therefore, I do not know whether we are not over reacting. I think this needs to be clarified. Thank you. 

MR AKAMBA: Thank you. The minister again should lay on the Table evidence that as you ban the airtime scratch cards, you have plans to substitute for the women and other petty traders who have been involved in selling airtime scratch cards, who cannot deal in easy load or buying such machines to do business. Are there plans for you to resettle them, in terms of business?

Another issue is, can you lay the evidence that all Ugandans know and can operate mobile money services?

Then, Madam Speaker, allow me, as I conclude, to call upon this entire august House that whereas Government is deeming it necessary to have a transition from using airtime scratch cards to digital or e-airtime, there has not been sufficient sensitisation. There was no consultation before they reached this decision.

I would like to pray that we suspend the ban on airtime scratch cards until such a time when the honourable minister will convince this august House by laying at Table all the evidences I have requested for including allaying the concerns raised by other Members. The minister should also come up with a clear roadmap on how the e-airtime will be accessed easily without incurring a cost by all Ugandans including those that are illiterate or dwell in villages where there are no centres with the easy load machines.

Madam Speaker, I move that this august House resolves that the ban on the airtime scratch cards be suspended until such a time. I beg to move. (Applause)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, honourable members, for your concerns. I will attempt to respond, in summary form, to similar points but with special attention to the person who raised the query, hon. Akamba.

I will give you the facts which are known. Known facts are a form of evidence. The first point is on unemployment. To the contrary, e-airtime makes everybody with money on his or her phone anywhere a vendor of airtime. If I have money on my phone which I have put through mobile money -(Interjections)- I am continuing; allow me to respond. I can vend airtime.

The second point -(Interjection)– no, I have to finish. I have to respond to the issues you raised. It is important you get answers for the people you represent. 

Madam Speaker, telecom companies are licenced to do business. They are not stupid to advocate for a measure which they very well know will alienate their customers far and wide from the business transactions. The same telecom companies are reporting very good conversation in most parts of their coverage. I mean it is in their interest to tell us that people are not buying airtime because of the migration because they will be losing revenues.

The point I take note of is to intensify sensitisation. Now, on the question of illiteracy versus literacy; honourable colleagues, let us be honest, when telephones came, my first time to see it, Madam Speaker, I was a student at Mbarara University. You came there as our council chairperson with hon. Elly Karuhanga and you were the people I saw with mobile phones. Now, even us who knew how to read and write never had phones. I never believed that my father, Mr Matayo Kagyigyi, who does not even know how to write in Runyankole can get a phone and store a number. The same competencies Ugandans use to operate phones are the same competencies they use to load airtime. Surely, you do not need any more literacy programme.

Madam Speaker, on the point of security that Members spoke about- Now, the information we have from the security agencies is that it is true that any airtime card has a serial number. Therefore, the telecom companies which imported it have its serial number. However, what is difficult to trace are the unregistered vendors. So, if I buy from an unregistered vendor who sells the airtime as a by the way, as hon. James Kaberuka said, I cannot easily trace the person who sold it to the criminal or suspect on the run. So, that is the leakage. It is not that the serial number is unknown - 

However, anything you put electronically, you will be traced. It will help Government, ladies and gentlemen, to even track taxes from the telecom companies because we shall know how much money MTN as well as Airtel sell in form of airtime.

My brother from Kyankwanzi said we are hurrying. Madam Speaker, the process started in March 2018 and that is why we are getting some good progress. The proposal we advised the telecom companies on is steadily phasing out. We can share it with them; there is no problem with that. After all, they know what works for them in business. So, we can share with them and say let us phase out and we see the possibility. I will take that one as a recommendation because it is not entirely a Government process alone. The telecom companies do import the scratch cards as part of their business.

Now, the point that we are protecting telecom companies -(Interjection)- let me answer, hon. Akamba. I will take it after. Any cost a business or a trader incurs will be passed on to the consumers. So, it is not true to say if we reduce on the cost of manufacturing these cards, we are advocating for the telecom companies. Eventually, they post these costs in the voice calls. Therefore, it is the customer to buy -(Interruption)

MR AKAMBA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister, in his statement, stated that one of the advantages we will benefit as a country is that URA will be able to monitor how much airtime has been sold by the telecom companies. He has just said now that telecom companies import these cards. 

Madam Speaker, URA monitors and takes record of every item that enters this country. Is he in order to contradict himself and lie to this House that the ban will help URA in monitoring how much airtime has been sold and yet he acknowledges that URA monitors the cards at the points of entry? Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, substantiate what you are saying.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank my brother for the friendly fire. It is true Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) records all imports; scratch cards inclusive. However what is - and there is no contradiction because when they are selling the scratch cards, the sales - (Interjections)- there is no way Government or URA or UCC can know who has bought from where because this is a very informal business. However, if everything is digitalised, you will see and track the movement of airtime.

Hon. Tumuramye Genensio asked “Where are the machines?” The machines are the phones and this is irrespective of which phone. Any phone that can receive mobile money can be that machine.

Of course, there are also easy load machines but your phone and mine can do as well. You cannot say that what if in village X, there is no easy load machine; I have told you that any person with a shop and with mobile money and wants to vend that money into airtime is free to do it.

Thank you hon. Angura, for reporting that in your area, compliance levels are going up. Hon. Anywarach says change should be inclusive; I agree with you because if it excludes other Ugandans, these telecomm operators will not be in business and Government will not collect enough taxes. That is why we believe that we should be able to make it easy. 

However, you also said that the conversion will cost money; that is not true. The telecom operators have planned it. They cannot engage in an exercise that makes them lose business. They know what they want.

Finally, the point which I take is that there is need for more awareness in all local languages and we shall put it upon the telecom companies working with UCC; the way they advertise their phones and packages in Ateso, Runyankore, Lusoga to do the same. I hope the migration will be complete. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable minister, we have come to some agreement that you need our help. You have 400 voices you could use to help you propagate the message. I suggest we should still have that meeting with the telecom companies so that when we go out to the constituencies, we have the same message for our people. Therefore we should have that meeting.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, I entirely agree and I would like to thank you for that decision. We shall work with the Clerk, and UCC, the staff have picked it. We shall do like an awareness clinic the way URA does it here. Invite all the licensed operators and UCC and they take questions from Members and demonstrate. They will tell us whether they are only serving urban people and not rural areas so that we can all know and explain this matter. I thank you, for the friendly fire and for your attention.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. No, we have finished with that matter honourable member. Now there was - we shall clarify when we have that big meeting. We shall have time; the whole morning. What we shall do is to arrange a meeting next week so that we get the information, exchange views and then go back to the people.

Honourable members, I would like to invite the agriculture minister; you had not completed the issue of hon. Kangwagye and also we shall take the motion of hon. Lubogo at the same time then we go back to work. I would like you to first answer hon. Kangwagye’s question.

6.01
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Madam Speaker, hon. Kangwagye wanted to know what we are doing about the problem his people of Bukanga are facing to find market for their cattle. 

That zone has become a very big problem to this country; the borderline which stretches from Kyotera, Bukanga area up to Ntungamo. The problem in that area is that cows cross from Uganda to Tanzania in search for grass and water and at some stage, those cows cross into Uganda from Tanzania. The biggest problem is that the policy on the other side of the border; Government does not vaccinate or get involved in vaccination. Therefore, those who want to vaccinate as farmers on that side do it by themselves.

That is why we have most of the cows crossing from the other side coming with Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) and it has been the main source or our main problem causing our cows to be infected by FMD. That is why you hear of Isingiro as the source of infections. However, the problem comes from across.

Madam Speaker, what we have done is to vaccinate along the border on our side because we have no powers over the other side. We have tried to contact the authorities on the other side but they insist that that is not their policy; they do not do it.  Therefore, what we have decided to do is to emphasise vaccination along the border in the farms which are on side of Uganda.

Secondly, we now have quarantine in those areas to be able to give us time to complete vaccination. However, during the quarantine, certainly, the farmers suffer and they cannot sell their cows. We have now moved and have completed the entire districts of Isingiro and Kyotera. What we are going to do is to create a partial quarantine for them so that they can sell.

When it is partial quarantine, you do not open the larger markets but you allow the farmers whose cattle has been certified free of disease to be sold from the farm. Therefore one can load from the farm to the other markets in Kampala and elsewhere once the animals are freed -(Interruption)

MR KANGWAGYE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for his good statement. However, what we are going through now is challenging and you know it better. Before we quarantined, Members of Parliament in conjunction with other local leaders made sure that all the markets within the region were closed for only six months.

After a full year we resolved that cows should be moved freely because we are now free from foot and mouth disease. You can find a whole family with nothing to survive on. For instance, when such cases happen in Tanzania a full ministry comes to that area and makes sure that all animals are treated and people are given food. 

Where shall we get food for our people, money for our children, medical and other services that we need if you do not want people to sell their cows and get money to cater for their needs? We used to have loading sites which are no more and people are crying out. There are cows that were burnt and those people are yet to be compensated, they are waiting for their money and their cows as well.

The ministry has not come on ground to test and update us whether the area is not yet free, how are they going to move? Thank you.

MR KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance. What has befallen Bukanga and Isingiro for a long time has terribly hit Kyankwanzi. For one and half years our cattle keepers are not selling cows because of foot and mouth disease but we are now free from that disease.

The challenge is that cows are not sold during day. On a market day at day time a cattle keeper can bargain a price but business people want to do business at night. 

A cow that would have been sold for Shs 1 or 2 million goes for only Shs 500,000. Our cattle keepers can no longer take children to school, they cannot buy food. Honourable minister let a team come to do a final verification so that we can set our people free. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We just need a solution because the problems are similar. The prolonged quarantine that is affecting people’s income, give us the solution minister.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, this problem has been solved in some districts that have cooperated with the ministry. If we controlled the movement of cows so that the infected ones do not affect the others as we vaccinate, it takes only 30 days to clear foot and mouth disease. 

The problem is that some leaders connive with the defaulters who move cattle at night and the problem continues. I would like to ask the honourable member and the local leaders in those districts to accept to cooperate so that we wipe out this problem. Isingiro alone has taken billions of Ugandan taxpayers’ money in terms of vaccines. If we work together-(Interruption)-

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. This is a national problem it may be coming from the area of my colleague but it is spilling over to the entire country.

We have people who are moving despite the fact that they declared that no moving animals because of foot and mouth disease. However, they move at night with their animals armed with guns. 

We are ready to cooperate but how do we make sure that your directives are in force, especially for the people who are moving with their animals at night armed with guns.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, We have opened a holding ground in Mutukula. When we arrest animals being transported illegally we push them back to where they came from.

We have holding grounds and we are going to open up other quarantine grounds, it is going to be a bit expensive but we have to do it in order to stop this mess. Foot and mouth disease is spreading like fire because of those people. There are traders who cross to your area at night to buy cows from Tanzania and bringing them all the way up to the northern region-(Interruption)-

MS LOWILA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister is saying that we have to come up and yet we all know that this problem of foot and mouth disease has been on for a very long time but up to now the minister is still looking for a solution. 

He is talking about the high cost of vaccination that takes a lot of taxpayers’ money and yet the very minister gave the committee on agriculture information about the billions of shillings the ministry is spending vaccinating stray dogs and they put them back on the streets.

Can the minister clarify how serious they are in addressing these problems so that the farmers who are suffering are supported on this very important issue of their livelihood? We do not see any planned strategies on the ground. Can the minister be clear? Thank you.

MS NABBANJA: I need clarification from the minister about foot and mouth disease, which was identified in Kyankwanzi, which neighbours Kakumiro. The commissioner in your ministry put quarantine in my district and closed our markets. Please clarify; did you close our markets because our neighbouring districts were affected? However, they are now saying that they are okay. This is business; our people thrive on selling their animals. 

You know the prices of maize have gone down. They only depend on cattle, goats and pigs. Why put us on quarantine when you have not identified any problem in Kakumiro?

MS BIGIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Buliisa District is one of the places that have suffered for the last one and a half years under quarantine and it being a cattle keeping community, you can imagine what is happening to the rural people. There are no more of children going to school and people cannot even take care of their families. 

I do not know what the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries intends to do for this community. Quarantine for all that time; what is it that you intend to do for this community? I think it is important for you to come on the ground. If it is the foot and mouth disease, what steps have you taken to clear this? If not so, why are other communities coming in the night to buy these cows at very minimal prices for these local people to continue suffering and they cannot be able to benefit from this? This issue needs to be addressed.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure. The minister came to explain to us the measures in place but the way the colleagues are also contributing, it is like they are not going to obey the law yet there is a cost to the country. 

I am wondering whether it is not procedurally right that the minister tells this House the mechanisms of enforcement. If you are in charge of the ministry, you have set up quarantine for a particular area and people are moving with the animals selling them in different places, it is a failure on your part. Isn’t it procedurally right at this juncture that the minister tells us the mechanisms he has put in place to enforce the quarantine so that Government does not stop on spending money on people who have stopped to obey the law? As long as they do not obey the law, the same scenario will continue. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have the minister to answer and conclude.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, there are two scenarios: The first is that where you have this disease, the traders and some farmers connive because the cows are cheap. There is that illicit trade between those defaulters.

The second scenario is where we work together with the local leadership like in Lyantonde and Mbarara. Interestingly, we do not have that problem in Mbarara because you cannot land there with your animals if you are moving them from either Isingiro or anywhere else. You cannot offload or even sell meat in that district despite these being transit districts.

Therefore, this is a problem that can easily be handled. We need to work together with the Member of Parliament for Bukanga County to make sure that we stop those people from entering. The only problem in Bukanga is that the border is porous. River Kafu is inside Tanzania so people graze from Uganda up to the river. That is a problem, which we want to also sort out either by fencing or by causing the farmers to fence. 

Although we have now vaccinated our animals along that line – we have done it and he knows – still, because of the porous border people can walk their animals through at night – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we need to conclude. We have other matters. What I want to suggest is that the districts –
 
MR SSEMPIJJA: What we are doing with Buliisa and others – why they are prolonging this problem is that when we declare quarantine, for the time being we are still importing these vaccines so there is time taken for us to import those drugs. However, when we declare that quarantine in an area we ring-vaccinate around that area and keep those cows that are affected in one place. After two months, the disease clears itself. If we do not stop the cows from moving, they will infect others and the trend continues.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like to propose that you meet the members whose districts are under quarantine and you work out a strategy for each district. Buliisa, Isingiro, Kyankwanzi and Kiboga are all complaining.
 
MR SSEMPIJJA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us now move to hon. Lubogo’s motion very quickly. You had moved it; just summarise – you are going to meet so that they work out a solution for Isingiro, Kyankwanzi and Buliisa because you are at different stages of quarantine. Minister, can you give them a date? They want assurance that you will actually meet them.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Is it okay to meet on Friday morning? I will come with my technical team and everybody this Friday morning and we handle this problem. Madam Speaker, it will be this week on Friday. Thank you.
 
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lubogo, summarise quickly.

6.23
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you. Madam Speaker, I thank you because you have given me space today when we have just discussed the issue of the falling prices.  In relation, this motion comes in and I think at the right time. 

This motion was moved and I am not going into the details of the motion. I would like to make a statement before the seconders, hon. John Nambeshe and hon. Veronica Isala can speak.

First, I would like to make a clarification that the motion should be: “Urging Government to establish national food reserves.” I note that there is a typo with an omission of “s”; instead of “food reserve” it should be “national food reserves”. 

Madam Speaker, in a statement, I would like to say that we have witnessed a situation this afternoon where Government is grappling with how to handle the issues that are affecting the farmers. Government does not know exactly where to put the over Shs 200 billion. In fact, they want to give this money to private businessmen to make money using Government funds. 

Besides, even the guarantee that this money is going to be recovered; the mechanisms are not yet clearly set out. That is why I feel that this motion is important in that we should establish the national food reserves where Government can buy food and store it. When there is a situation of calamity such as famine, Government can supply food to the communities. Where there is a glut in production, like it is today, the purchase by Government helps to pull the excess production into the national food reserves. 

With that I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would want that you give opportunity to the seconders to speak to the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite hon. Nambeshe, briefly to second the motion followed by hon. Bichetero.
  
6.23
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our mover of the motion ably made a delivery and I will support it, resuming from where he stopped. Madam Speaker, the dictates of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, XXII(b) it requires the state to establish national food reserves. It says and I would like to quote verbatim, “The state shall establish national food reserves.” 

Madam Speaker, the state therefore, has not honoured this dictate of the Constitution. They have abdicated their responsibility. It is obligatory that the state establishes national food reserves. Uganda had these national food reserves but they ceased to exist in a number of regions of this country. 

The food reserves were operated by the Produce Marketing Board, but between the years 1990 and 1992, when Uganda embraced the liberalisation policy, the Produce Marketing Board, as a consequence of liberalisation was disbanded. It was actually abolished. And these food reserves do still exist – actually the infrastructure still exists. They are in the following regions: in Gulu, Hoima, Masindi, Jinja, Mbale and Masaka.

Another important revelation that we got when we were conducting our research is that, these food reserves were not privatised. They still exist and a number of them may be dilapidated. The majority of them are still safe and sound. They are in form of silos and stores.

We also have privately owned silos in Uganda. One exists in Masese, in the Eastern part of Jinja, and by far, it is the largest food reserve that is privately owned. It was constituted by DANIDA (Danish International Development Agency). Hon. Paul Mwiru happens to be the MP of that area. We have another one in Nalukolongo and it is also privately owned, it is in Kampala city here. We have one in Nyakatonzi in Kasese District. We have others in Tororo and Gulu Municipality. They are all privately owned.

Madam Speaker, world-over generally, these food reserves are a strategy to mitigate the disastrous effects of food crisis and also stabilising prices. In the neighbourhood, you can mention two countries: Kenya and Tanzania. Kenya for instance has a grain reserves strategy, and it is operated by a cereals board known as the National Cereals and Produce Board (NCPB).

This board (NCPB)has a twin mission of stabilising the prices of the produce, especially maize. For instance, as of now when the prices are low, what the Kenyan National Cereals and Produce Board (NCPB) would do is, it would have raised the producer’s price by announcing the purchase price above the market price.
 
The board would therefore, procure and store the produce in national food reserves. At the time of need, they would begin to release at a subsidised price. However, in Uganda where we have the national food reserve lying empty up to now - and you see honourable ministers coming here – I was actually baffled by my good friend, the Minister of State for Finance and Economic Development (Planning), when he said that we have a food production crisis. A crisis in an Oxford Dictionary would mean that there is a very dangerous and difficult situation as a result of a bumper harvest in Uganda. Honestly!

Then another minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, with all due respect to her, comes and says, “The markets are open. There are markets in Congo”. This leaves our producers, our farmers at the mercy of middlemen, who are exploiting them left right and centre.

These ministries could have synergised to ensure that this produce – and they are mentioning it by the way, they were even speaking in tongues, Madam Speaker. The minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is planning to procure 500 metric tons, but the minister of trade, mentioned 5000 metric tons. Madam Speaker – 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we have discussed and resolved on how we are going to resolve the issue of the crisis of prices which has resulted from the bumper harvest. The members of Parliament that are moving the motion - it is a welcome motion that all of us want to support. Is he in order to spoil a good motion by diverting it into things which he does not understand well? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nambeshe and you, the movers of the motion, I think you are supposed to help the Government to find solutions. Do it nicely. (Laughter) Address the motion properly.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. This country’s neighbours like Tanzania - I had also mentioned Kenya. Tanzania has a National Food Reserves Agency. Their agency, unlike that of Kenya, only addresses food emergencies. They do not have interventions in the market prices. What they do is to intervene in regions where production is in surplus.

They procure all the produce and stock in the national food reserves. They then sell at subsidised prices to those regions that are in deficit. That is where we need to borrow a leaf. Our neighbours, Kenya and Tanzania, have export control policies in place, which we do not have. Actually, it is not only exports, but even imports. 

We are reliably informed that we have signed protocols which have removed those restrictions. Now, that allows free movement of goods, labour and services, but it is not the case in these two countries. By the way, it is not easy even when Kenyan farmers have had a bumper harvest - for us who have land in both Uganda and Kenya. You cannot ferry maize across the border; from Kenya to Uganda. This is because they have export control policies in place. 

What the Kenya National Cereals and Produce Boards do is that: 

    1. They import from outside Kenya to stock their reserves to capacity.
    2. They sell to millers at fixed prices in order to be able to control price; like for instance the Maize.
    3. They also have variable tariffs at entry points. If you are importing maize and you are privately doing so through the seaport of Mombasa or through the borders, there is a tariff that you have to pay in order for you not to exploit the people on price. 

Madam Speaker, as I wind up, what we ought to do is:
    i. To have Government and this august House review this liberalisation policy and compare it to our colleagues in Tanzania and Kenya, where it has been reduced. 
    ii. Those national food reserves that still do exist are in a sorry state and are dilapidated should be renovated. 
    iii. The laws, such bylaws and ordinances, could be made and implemented to require our farmers to construct storage structures like cribs or granaries. 
    iv. There should also be household sensitisation on post-handling technologies. There are new post-handling technologies that I have seen in countries like Kenya, which minimise post-harvest losses. These post-harvest losses are the ones which contribute to scarcity of food. 

Therefore, if sensitisation would be done to communities or to households on post-harvest handling technologies so that we minimise those post-harvest losses, this would be great for our country. 

I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Nambeshe, especially for the good information that actually we have regional reserves.  

6.36
MS VERONICA BICHETERO (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion for the resolution of Parliament urging Government to establish a national food reserve under Rule 55 of our Rules of Procedure.

Madam Speaker, the absence of a national food reserve in Uganda contravenes the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda under Objectives XXII and XXIII.

I am aware of the existence of the privately owned reserves for the grains and cereals but these are not enough. Uganda must consider and adopt the same strategy that countries in the region (Kenya, Tanzania) and if we go down south, we talk about South Africa, who have used this to mitigate the effects of food prices and stabilise food prices. 

Government should revisit the liberalisation policy and find ways to re-establish the public food reserves that have been mentioned, particularly the reintroduction or revival of the produce marketing boards. 

The Government position now or then and still is that managing food reserves are expensive, wasteful, cause losses and therefore waste public resources. We are saying that this policy should be revisited because it is the same policy that was responsible for the abolition of the produce marketing boards.

The existing food reserves that were under the produce marketing boards have all been abolished but they are in existence. I am not going to mention them but my colleague has already done so.  

Madam Speaker, I would really want to urge that Uganda, like her East African neighbours, needs a national food reserve. The reasons are really simple and clear: To give dignity to our population; a starving population has no confidence and cannot assert themselves in any fora, let alone apply patriotism or be patriotic. 

On emergency, if we had food reserves, then they can supply food to meet the urgent needs like famine, displacement and influx of refugees. 

Economic reasons like the release unto the market of food reserves can also affect the prices and prevent excessive price fluctuation. Now, for such a reason, these safety net stocks can provide food for our social protection programmes like school feeding and food for work schemes. 

Finally, food reserves and price stability can aid national food self-sufficiency and make the economy more resilient to international shocks. When the international bodies come and invade us, middlemen buy food at cheap prices. If we had reserves, then we would not have problem. 

Government must ensure that food is also reserved at local and household levels. My colleague has already mentioned that bylaws and laws can be enacted. All households should have food storage structures and Government must aid to the construction of structures like granaries. Cribs and food stores have already been mentioned.  Like my colleague said, households should be sensitised on post-harvest handling to minimise some of these losses. 

Madam Speaker, my prayer here is that Government should review this liberalisation policy. The national food reserve, when well designed and implemented effectively, will promote food security and price stability in Uganda. 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we have been discussing food and security since last week and this morning. The subject has really been conversed. Minister, you have heard that we have regional reserves. I would like to know if you are going to take them up because everybody has talked about food security. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, I am lucky that this subject was handed to the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister, Gen. Moses Ali, and I was part of his committee; he is here. Therefore, what I am going to say is really the truth. (Laughter) Government is behind this agenda of having a national food reserve and we welcome it. 

In fact, we have started supporting farmers to get hermetic bags to keep their produce at home, to get vacuum tanks- you are aware we have been working with the World Food Programme about this. We have contributed some money to subsidise our farmers but we want to expand that programme.

Secondly, we have also started on community storage. Recently, we were opening stores in various districts- about ten of them; I will give the list when we come next week. We want to bring a statement on this so that we inform Parliament that Government is already doing some work and ready to go.

Apart from the community storage, we are going into regional stores. The community stores are supposed to feed into the regional stores under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives.

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Mwiru had an amendment.

6.47
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion with a very slight amendment. First, I associate myself with the submissions of the mover and the seconders of the motion.

The amendment I seek to move is that we establish a national seeds bank together with a reserve. The justification is simple, Madam Speaker. For example, Government has been giving out seeds through Operation Wealth Creation. However, the quality of these seeds is not tested anywhere and at the end of the day, the quality or in terms of output has been lacking.

When you ask the district production officers about the output of what they give out as seeds, they cannot adequately tell you that we gave out this number of seeds and the output is this.

I move that if it does displease my good friend honourable minister of agriculture that they permit that on top of having the food reserve, we also have a seed bank together with a food reserve. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the motion be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do adopt the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted)

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT ON THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. ISAAC MULINDWA SSOZI ON THE INCREASING ROAD CARNAGE AROUND THE BLACK SPOTS BETWEEN MABIRA FOREST AND KITEGA IN BUIKWE DISTRICT

6.50
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Azuba): Madam Speaker, hon. Mulindwa Ssozi raised the concern of increased carnage between Mabira Forest and Kitega in Buikwe and requesting us to put humps and traffic police at the spots.

In a bid to reduce road carnage in Uganda, the Ministry of Works and Transport is currently taking general measures and there are the amendment of the Traffic and Road Safety Act, which I will be presenting to Cabinet soon, the amendment of the Road Tax and Access to Roads Act. Cabinet approved the Road Bill in 2017 and it is now ready for gazetting and subsequent submission to Parliament. 

The other is the road safety financing strategy. The main challenge facing this is the ministry funding of road safety programme.

We developed a road safety financing strategy so that part of the non-tax revenue generated by the ministry is retained as appropriation in aid to support road safety activities.

Automated license system and the transport licensing board. We plan to interface the system with Uganda Police. The other is the introduction of the annual mandatory motor vehicle inspection services for roadworthiness. However, the enforcement for compliance is still at halt and waiting for parliamentary decision.

Madam Speaker, we plan to undertake the following measures- the ones I have been reading out are general. These are for a short run.

    a) The installation of speed limiters in commercial vehicles. These limiters will come with GPS trackers and recorders where over speeding alerts can notify the regulator or any tampering attempt to commercial vehicles.
    b) We plan to license good’s vehicles starting this year and the result is the inspection of vehicles first which we were not doing.
    c) Accreditation of drivers of goods vehicles. We will roll out accreditation of drivers to include drivers of good’s vehicles and categories of omnibuses. This exercise involves vetting of drivers by reviewing their accident history and criminal record. We will even do eye tests among others. This test will be given before issuing licenses to goods’ drivers.
    d) Introduction of graduated driving license. We need to introduce graduated driving license to mandate drivers of commercial vehicles to undergo refresher courses and training and it is provided for in the proposed amendment to the Traffic and Road Safety Act.
    e) Establishment of automated driver test centres. This system will minimize human bias and allow learner drivers to undergo rigorous testing to confirm their competences.
    f) The final one is the intensified road sensitisation awareness and strengthening of the coordination of road safety activities by the ministry. 

Madam Speaker, at this spot, the question arises whether we put road humps or not. The answer may not be road humps. Therefore, what we are requesting is to give us more time so that we can conduct technical and behaviour audit of the use of this stretch. Many factors cause these black spots.

The actions that we are going to do after identifying the location of the black spots, we are going to evaluate the geometric design of the road at these spots because you may find that there are corners or long stretches where people over speed, etcetera. 

Therefore, we are going to evaluate the geometric design of the roads at these spots and we are going to investigate the behaviour of the drivers when approaching these spots along the stretch. This is always done to determine why that spot has become a black spot, which means that many vehicles are getting accidents there.

We will also establish the sufficiency of police presence along these spots. It is only after that, that we will put into place the remedial measures which may be or may not be road humps.

Madam Speaker, I would like to point out that for highways, it is not very common to put road humps. However, we will study that and then put remedial measures and I will come back to Parliament to explain to you what we have done. 

On behalf of my ministry, I would like to assure you and the House that Government in conjunction with other ministries, departments and agencies, is doing everything possible to reduce the carnage on our roads.

It is becoming an epidemic and I urge this august House to support the road safety intervention that the Ministry of Works and Transport is currently implementing and those we intend to implement. They will come up in the Bills that will come to this House. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Isaac Mulindwa is supposed to ask for a supplementary. 

6.57
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker and minister for the response. At least, the message gives some hope. Of the prayers I made, you recall that on Masaka Road, there were similar accidents and then the Fika Salama Operation was launched and the accidents reduced. It is my humble prayer that we extend the Fika Salama Operation for at least another three months. I hope this will reduce on the accidents along these black spots I have mentioned. 

I do not think Fika Salama will require all these other involvements. It is about your directive to the Traffic Police. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We shall have one more submission from hon. Baba Diri and then we close this subject. We have discussed this many times.

6.58
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the steps they are taking to reduce the road carnage. 

There is a very important factor which really makes us have these accidents. One of them is our narrow roads. Our roads are just two lanes; about six metres each and there is no space for overtaking.

In developed countries, if you have one lane, at least one lane is left in between for overtaking. However, our roads are too narrow. There is no way for the pedestrians. The motorcyclists and pedestrians struggle on the same roads. Why don’t you put better roads for us in Uganda? We need large roads - at least two from each side; dual carriage for each road on highways. 

Without this, whatever you do, the accidents will continue to occur. I would like our future roads to have proper plans for pedestrians and be wide enough for vehicles to move at ease and for overtaking. 

You are blaming the drivers for nothing; you are the cause because we do not make proper roads. Thank you very much.

7.00
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the minister to take note that these black spots have been there for a long time and maybe tomorrow, we are again going to lose more lives. 

On this evaluation which you must do, I would like you to clarify that the evaluation idea is just coming into your mind which should have come long time ago. 

I think that that black spot was identified as a black spot because of the very many accidents that occur there. Another accident may occur today or tomorrow. Why don’t we take some of these issues as emergencies - maybe the honourable could have already suggested - instead of waiting for this evaluation which will take time? 

Some things should be done immediately but not to wait for that evaluation. In Uganda, a minister can promise something and take ages to implement. Therefore, can you give the timeframe of your evaluation? When is the evaluation going to be done? Thank you.

7.03
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Madam Speaker, it is very sad that accidents are happening on daily basis in our country. It seems Uganda might be the number one country leading in road accidents in the world.

The minister seems to be focused on only vehicles but there are also motorcycles which are killing our people on a daily basis. The boda bodas, what are we going to do about them?

Lastly, Uganda is the only funny country in the world where some traffic rules work during some festive seasons like Christmas and Easter where there is a lot of traffic everywhere. However, when Christmas is over, you see every soldier going back and they do not care. What is the minister going to do about that? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are going to have two Bills relating to the roads. We shall have a longer debate when the Bills come up. Please bring them quickly; this is the first meeting for the Bills.

7.05
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Independent, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the minister comes to answer, she should tell this Parliament whether there is a mechanism for a short or long term policy onto how to deal with the roads we have generally as a country. Right now, we are almost 40 million people but within 10 years, there will an addition of millions of people and they will have vehicles.

Adding my voice to what hon. Margaret Baba Diri has said; when you look at the neighbouring countries, there is provision of barricades to separate the roads. 

When you travel from Moro to Eldoret which is about 130 kilometres and you move from Eldoret to Malaba, which is about 143 kilometres, there are precautions like humps because they know that once you drive for long on a smooth road, you may get tired or something else could happen. 

Do these people in the ministry go and benchmark and see the provisions other neighbouring countries have into place? This is possible and can be done.

What our colleagues are doing in Kenya and Tanzania is not what we are doing here. There must be a general review of the whole system of roads in the country and the policy must be known by the people in Uganda. We should also know whether this is a short or long term. Otherwise, if we remain as we are and we still plan for the population as it is, I think we still have a problem. The minister must tell this House.

7.07
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, it is good that the minister has presented the statement. However, looking at the recurrence of accidents and of similar nature, I think the minister and the ministry need to come with concrete solutions for this country. 

The black spots that hon. Ssozi was talking about have been there and have been killing people on a daily basis. On the northern route, there are black spots that we are talking about. There are areas which are prone to accidents from Luweero to Kafu and on frequent occasions, accidents have happened there. From Kafu to Kigumba, there are black spots; and more from Kigumba to Karuma, and again from Karuma to Pakwach. 

There are holes you find in the middle of the road that have lasted for more than a year and the ministry has not done anything to fill up those holes.

The ministry needs to own up and find solutions, probably to re-design some of the black spots and put barricades in the middle. 

Hon. Baba Diri talked about lack of express ways and she is right. We do not have highways in Uganda. The only highway that we have is the one that has not yet been commissioned, the Entebbe Express Highway. That is a standard highway but these others going to Arua and Jinja among many others are not highways. The only highway we see is between Iganga and Jinja and that one was designed in the Obote regime. 

What the NRM Government needs to do for the highways where there are black spots is what they have done on the express highway so that we can avoid accidents. 

In the meantime, Madam Speaker, the proposal for humps is urgent. These humps actually help. If it hits you the first day, the following day you will control the speed. It has happened to some of us who travel on these roads on a daily basis.

Therefore, Madam Minister, do not run away from the issue of humps, they do help and so on some of these black spots, consider for the immediate measure to put these humps in place. Thank you.

7.09
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine is simple. Sometimes when we are told the truth, we ignore it but when the reality comes, we begin to regret and cry. 

We have lost two Members of this Parliament on that road. When we talk about humps, some people are saying that they do not want humps. In my view, if we ignore the issue of humps – The people who die are the Ugandans who voted us and we should be concerned about them because they use vehicles every day. 

Some people do not understand the issues we are discussing because their vehicles are raised and not like the ones that ordinary Ugandans use. We must be concerned about this.

I would like to add that these roads are small. They are just narrow and the traffic has increased. More than 1,000 cars are being put on the roads daily. Imagine, 1,000 cars are put on the road every day and yet the roads remain the same. 

We have gone to different countries; we all know that our roads are just connecting roads – connecting this road to the other and not proper highways. 

This is why I would like the minister to widen our thinking, to see how best the issue of roads is going to be addressed because accidents are increasing and people are dying every day. 

The ministry should give us a solution to this problem. Otherwise, if we do not do that, we shall be making noise here every day. I do not want to hear lamentations. Ministers should be giving us solutions not lamentations.  

Lamenting will not help us. If they choose to lament, how about the rest of Parliament? How about the general public? The most important thing, let us put humps on all the roads in the country. Thank you very much.

MS AZUBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for your input and concern. I would like to agree with you. We are very concerned by the carnage on the roads in the country. As a ministry and as Government, we are doing everything that we can to ensure that we reduce the carnage in the country.

I think I will answer all these questions that have been put across with just two statements. Before Parliament, we have not laid the Bill but it is coming. The Speaker inquired as to when it is coming; there was just a small mistake that there was no certificate of financial implication. 

We have the Roads Act and we have the Roads Bill. That Roads Bill includes everything that you have put in; the designs of the roads, the definition of the highways, the width of the roads, the passage way for the pedestrians and cyclists, rest areas for motorists after about every one and a half hours and so on. It is very elaborate and it will be before Parliament soon.

The second Bill is the amendment of the Traffic and Road Safety Act. This Bill seeks to strengthen the road safety management in the country to streamline and better regulate public transport in the country and to strengthen the enforcement.

Therefore, honourable members, if you could wait a little bit, when we discuss those Bills, you will find that all these items that you have presented have been taken care of.

As for the black spots in the interim; I know this has been studied in the past. There were some other black spots and the ministry took the time and identified all of them within the country. This was long before I even joined the ministry. Now that others have been identified, I have promised that we are going to study them. 

We are going to discuss the question of Fika Salama with the Police as it is in their jurisdiction. I would like to request that you let us study the question of humps. Otherwise, we are going to fill almost all the highways with humps –(Interjections)–

Madam Speaker, I am requesting that you give me one or two weeks and we will be back after our study when we have identified all these areas and what we are going to do. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister. We will expect your report of the audit after a fortnight but bring your Bills. I am reminding you that this first meeting of the third session is for legislation.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES ON THE RAMIFICATIONS OF THE INFLUX OF IMMIGRANTS ENGAGED IN PETTY TRADE ON THE ECONOMIC SPACE AND LIVELIHOODS OF CITIZENS

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall, we had debated this until we realised that the minister was not here and that we needed additional support from the other sectors. That is why we kept it up to now. I do not know whether the minister is ready. 

7.16
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I could give a summary of the report of what we have done about the influx of foreigners in domestic trade.

Madam Speaker, Cabinet issued an action extract and directed us, as a committee to work on ways and means of alleviating this problem. We, therefore, formed a technical committee, which came up with implementation strategies on the recommendations made by Cabinet.

On the trade licensing amendment, Cabinet asked the technical committee to develop regulations on how to guide business areas where none citizens should be restricted from trading and specify goods and services restricted to none citizens. 

We have developed and submitted it to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for legal review, a statutory instrument on specified goods. The specified goods according to the Trade Licensing Amendment Act are goods in which, none citizens are allowed to trade in and not to trade in. 

We also talked about goods where majority of citizens are not employed and cannot ably supply. Those were taken into consideration.

Another area we looked at was goods that are not consumables to be easily distributed through retail trade –(Interjection)– I said I am giving a summary. Therefore, we, as Government, represented by various ministries like Ministry of Local Government, Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control came up with decisions to be taken.

We were further directed that local governments and urban authorities should desist from tendering out issuance of trade licenses in some areas. 

As a result of the directive, we issued a circular to the Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) and town clerks stopping local and urban authorities from tendering out issuance of trade licenses, so that we promote the regulatory objective of regulated trade rather than revenue collection by local government.

There are a number of issues but I said I was giving a summary. However, I will come back with details on some of the issues we have taken. Immigration services are also very particular about the visas; for example, how they give out visas and work permits to foreigners who come into the country. The foreigners should specify the areas they are going to deal in.

Another area that we intend to improve is finance, where they were considering the threshold for foreign investor, which has been increased from $100,000 to $250,000, because everybody could afford it. Uganda Investment Authority (UIA) will issue an investment license to an investor who satisfies the minimum threshold.

Madam Speaker, this is the summary of what we have done in respect to mitigating the influx of foreign traders. However, I will come back with a more detailed report because I lost some of the decisions we took in Government. I wish to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that decision of the Cabinet sub-committee came after we had already discussed a report of the Committee on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, which was last year. We had really hoped that things would move fast. We have gone another year and Cabinet is still meeting yet the traders are still complaining.

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, I must admit that it has taken a while because it had to undergo through a number of consultations. We consulted the private sector and the associations that deal with foreigners who are engaged in business here and other different sectors. 

However, I would like to commit that we will be able to come back with the final decision because we have already started implementing some of decisions. Can we report back next month or is it too far?

MS MUGENI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true the minister has promised to bring a comprehensive report any time covering some of the issues that were raised on that matter.

Madam Speaker, like you said, since last year, we have been debating this matter and I think you have given the minister a lot of time to carry out investigations and bring a comprehensive report. Otherwise, Ugandans have gone through a lot with these foreigners we are talking about.

When you look at issues of land conflicts between nationals and the foreigners, it is too much; Ugandans have lost lives and property. How much time does the minister require to conduct consultations on this matter?

The minister has also told us that local governments were issued a directive not to issue work permits to foreigners. However, this is still going on. Who mandated these people to continue issuing these work permits when the ministry is aware? Thank you.

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We gave time to the minister to carry out investigations. We also appreciate the fact that she has moved some step by submitting to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for advice. However, we would like to know what is making it difficult for the minister to come in two weeks’ time with a comprehensive report?

Secondly, who gave permission for these foreigners to be issued licenses even when there is a position taken by Parliament? As we speak, there are many of them who are still being issued licenses to continue with their activities.

Madam Speaker, we are losing a lot as a country to these foreigners, especially in environmental protection. Most of these foreigners, especially in Northern Uganda are involved in logging; they are cutting our trees hence destroying our environment under the watch of the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and nothing is being done. 

The most annoying part of this is that they are being protected even when they are not licensed to engage in timber business. What is the minister saying in regard to the decision and the position of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives? Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether the honourable minister reflected on the report that was laid here. We expected from your ministry short-term, medium-term and long-term solutions to the issues that were raised.

The ones you have highlighted there are mainly long-term. You know, the majority of these illegal immigrants here are mainly in the informal sector. How are you handling those in the formal sector? When we see them hawking here and selling things left and right, what have you done? I think that is what we needed.

Can you tell us because there are those that do not need amending the law or forming those things? We expected you to come here with those short-term, medium-term and long-term solutions. How are you addressing those who have come and have joined the informal sector and then those in the formal sector? That is what we expected from you.

Therefore, if you are coming back in a week’s time, we would want you to categorise and to bring your presentation with those things. That will enable us to know the impact of the remedies that you have put into place. We should be able to see. On what you have said; if you walk downtown and in the country side, these people are all over hawking. They are either from Sudan or are of Indian and Pakistan origins. There are also some from across the border. 

You have heard how Kenya tightened the borders and the issue of work permits. However, we are so lax here. I think that is how we had expected a response from you but looks like you were not prepared to have these answered. If I were you, I would have asked the House to give me time since you were not ready now and you come back. 

I saw how you were opening those documents which we even do not have. We do not know whether you were picking from your head or even from that document. (Laughter). I do not know whether the Speaker has that document because that is what I was speaking about. If I asked for that document now, I think it is different from what you were presenting.

I would plead with the House and Members that the minister goes back and returns in a week’s time with a well-structured statement that we can be able to cross check. However, in the meantime, she can lay that on the Table. Thank you.

7.28
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I was listening attentively to the minister, I was hoping that maybe she was going to move away from giving the summary of the statement she was making to giving us a more detailed and comprehensive statement. This issue we are discussing here is not a joking subject. It is not a small matter.

I also expected the minister to at least come up with something in the short run as she prepares herself in the long run, like she was saying she would. I further expected her to say that she is going to issue a directive as a minister that with immediate effect, all foreigners who are dealing in petty businesses that would otherwise be reserved for Ugandans should stop. After that, she starts looking at the long-term programmes that she is preparing in the ministry.

Madam Speaker, many Ugandans are hurt. There is a lot of competition down there, especially downtown and upcountry. This is a matter I expected the minister to really take up seriously. As I was listening to her, I thought she was joking about what she was presenting. I did not think she was serious about what she was doing. 

However, I know like she has said – (Interjection) - It was too brief. That is why I am saying you were joking. It was very brief and not satisfactory to what we expected, given the gravity of the situation. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, people have actually been run out of business. Ugandans have been run out of business by these people.

7.31
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just like hon. Annet Nyakecho has said and as you have stated, it is important for the honourable minister to know that this complaint actually arises out of the people who come here as investors, taking the lead even up to retailing whatever they are manufacturing.

Somebody comes here, establishes a factory in Jinja or Kampala here and he has the same people retailing in Arua. Where does the common man benefit from this investor who has come in this country to create employment opportunities? I expect the minister to come back to this House with a report, indicating clearly the implementation measures they have taken in as far as the various policies and laws that govern her ministry are concerned in alleviating this situation.

Madam Speaker, we expect the ministry to bring to this august House proposals, amending the Companies Act. Actually, that is one of the areas where these investors find their way through to retailing in the various parts of the country. Therefore, the Companies Act has some loopholes which need to be amended. We also recently here looked at the Investment Code Act. It is also another area where the ministry needs to look into. When the minister comes back, we expect her to return with a clear report indicating what steps they have done in as far as implementing some of the resolutions we have passed here as the august House and also what the Government is doing in State House. 

Otherwise, the cry is overwhelming on the level of unemployment that they have created. I have seen personally in Arua where these people have created warehouses everywhere. The only employment opportunity they have given our people is to act as loaders and off loaders. Where is the business? Where is the employment opportunity that we are talking about? 

Honourable minister, these are serious matters. If we want our people to also enjoy the fruits of these investors, let us give them the real opportunities where they can also make money. I thank you.

7.33
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the first session of this Parliament, I was on the Committee of Tourism, Trade and Industry. That was the time we had this issue of our traders complaining. We even went downtown in Kikuubo and brought the report. 

Honourable minister, you will recall that one time during the committee meeting, the Members were so concerned. In fact, there was even one honourable member who requested you to go and announce closure of businesses of the foreigners. 

However, it was not possible to do it there and then. I would like to find out. Since that time, honourable minister, what happened to those licences which were granted at that time? The reason you gave us was that licences had been granted for a certain period and therefore, they were running. Who has granted these business people who are going on with their business the licences? I would imagine that even if the districts down there are licensing, you should have monitored them because it was already an issue.

Madam Speaker, the minister acknowledged that there were loopholes in our laws. When are you bringing those laws, honourable minister, so that some of these problems are corrected? I thank you. 

7.35
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity. I remember in the 8th Parliament, we moved a lot to Juba for the peace process and we saw investors there and we asked how they were acquiring land. 

They were not allowed to get land; they were only hiring for a short time. With us here, even the refugees are buying land. Is it our foreign policy which is a problem? 

As far as trade is concerned, when we talk about foreign investors - (Interjection) – In only two minutes, I cannot have you give information. When we talk about foreign investors, I remember very well we even displaced our own children from Shimoni Demonstration Primary School for foreign investors. Really, do we love our people? Do we love Ugandans? Patriotism is just a lip service. Up to now, the hotel is not yet there. 

So, madam minister, you really need to sit together with some of your ministers and hold inter–ministerial meetings –(Interjection)– I will allow you time. Give confidence in us, the Ugandans. 

Right now, the refugees seem to even be living better than our people. If you go to Lamwo, they are better than our people. They have the resources our people do not have. What do we do? We are really stuck - (Interruption) 

MR SSEMPIJJA: I would like to thank the honourable member for giving way. Madam Speaker, we really have to accept this is a developing world. We are in this - (Interjections) – yes; we are aiming at that status. When you are developing, you keep on trying. Sometimes, you fail; sometimes, you succeed. Sometimes, you have to know that you do not succeed all the time but you have to do exactly that. 

I just wanted to inform you. Do not get really worried and tired of trying because we are not there yet.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude. 

MS BETTY AOL: Madam Speaker, I know that sometimes we try but we should not now allow Ugandans to be like guinea pigs in the laboratories. We should research and do our work well. We should also review our policy so that Ugandans are - (Interjection) - you can give the information but I am sitting down now. Thank you.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and thank you, honourable colleague for giving way. The information I wanted to give you is that when the Committee on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives delved into this matter, we found out that it was very easy for the administration and those in authority in Uganda to rough up Ugandans; handle them roughly, throw them away and cast them off the streets of the city than handle these people who come to drive them out of business. 

We brought a report here which had recommendations including amendments in the Licencing Act, the Investment Code Act and some other recommendations all tailored to addressing this problem. When the Investment Code (Amendment) Bill came here, it was clear that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives was not very interested in making an input in that Bill, which I believe was passed in Cabinet. So, the point is that it seems the ministry is not serious in handling the issues of these people flocking our country and driving our people out of business. 

However, if it is a Ugandan, they will chase him, arrest him, rough him up, beat him and throw him on the back of a truck. They will do anything. But when it comes to these people who are making our people unemployed, you are not worried. It seems you think Ugandans should run out of their country and go to another. Thank you.

7.41
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a bigger issue here. I am talking as a retired immigration officer. The greatest challenge we faced in that department was the lack of alignment of professional immigration work to the bigger Government interest. So, I understand where the minister is coming from. 

Issue of immigration border international relations, diplomacy and security. So, there is an intricate delicate balance of what we need as nationals, what Government needs and the entire diplomatic interest. Critical to this, there is no immigration policy. We are operating using a few subsidiary laws. We started developing the immigration policy in 2010 and I am surprised that to date, it has not been completed. 

Perhaps, the minister should pick interest and fast-track this immigration policy. This policy was being championed by the International Organisation for Migration (IOM) and not Government. There are things that IOM will not push for. Therefore, the Government should push for such interests. I will give you a typical scenario. If the immigration profession employed all the tenets that are required, half of the visitors that come into this country especially from Asia would not qualify. You would look at a scenario where half of the planes of Indians and Chinese have been turned away. That is a diplomatic faux pas. 

So, my appeal here is for Government to come up clearly to guide this department and the ministry of where we would like our immigration interest to go. I am very excited when Parliament gets interested in this because there has been something that is vague. 

Therefore, honourable minister, you fast-track the immigration policy, bring it here, let the House panel beat it and direct the country. Thank you.

7.44
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, once again. When this debate ended the other day, I was on the Floor. I would like to start from where my sister has stopped. 

We are a third world country and we are yearning to move through the ranks to a developing country and beyond. I think when you consider immigration; if you look at the report critically, F-class visas and work permits issued are very few. I would imagine those would be the kind of work permits we are giving to these people such that they can help us especially in the line of professionalism.

Madam Speaker, when you also look at the incentives given to these people who come and brag as investors - I know they come with some investments. I am happy the threshold has now moved from $100,000 and it is going to $250,000. That is still not much. I would have expected these investors to at least put here $500,000 to $1 million, that is when we can consider that they are coming with an input that is good enough. 

Madam Speaker, when you look at the incentives these investors get, even with that $250,000, they will qualify to get free land that a fellow Ugandan may not be able to get. This actually brings a lot of pain to us. 

We need to work as a country to ensure we get these investors mainly on production. Let them come and do value addition here such that the rest of the retail work is left to us and we shall be able to create employment and also retain resources locally here. 

In the case that they are going to do production and retail, it means the capital flight will continue to increase. Let them do production and we do the retailing and we share on the resources that will remain down in the country and improve on employment of our people, while also considering bigger and better incentives for our community. I beg to submit. I take information –

THE SPEAKER: I am inviting the minister. Honourable minister, last week I told Members that the $100,000 is pedestrian. Therefore, even the $250,000 is pedestrian. In the UAE, Canada and Cyprus, if you invest one million dollars, you are entitled to be a resident. We are still operating like - we need to up the stake, minister.

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, I would like to point out three major issues. First and foremost we are all legislators here and we know very well that the issue of mitigating that problem was not in the law at all. That is one. 

Secondly, so there was no law controlling foreign traces here because of the liberalisation policy that we have in the country. 

Thirdly, these laws pertaining to traders here are not only in the trade ministry. We had to work with different agencies in the country like Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA), Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) and Immigration. Therefore, it is a cross section of different sectors – (Interjection) - it is only one year, my dear.

Therefore, all these sectors have got their laws; some have not amended their laws and they are still operating on obsolete or archaic laws. Others have also got their pace of doing business. 

To see that we have come to this level, after a year is an achievement because we had to ensure that all these laws like the Employment Act, the Immigration Control Act, the Investment Code Act and the Immigration Code Act are tackled. You know all these – the gender ministry also had to come on board and we had to ensure that we bring all these sectors on board which we have successfully managed to do.

The different agencies have brought in their provision and the reason as to why I gave a summary was that we have to go back to Cabinet and return here with a comprehensive report. There is a process that I cannot wake up in the morning and say I, as trade minister, I am doing this or that. Not alone.

Madam Speaker, I wish Members could also use better language because to say that I am joking; I do not joke. Therefore, we should refine our language when we are presenting our issues. 

I pray that I come back with a comprehensive report with all the issues despite the fact that I have mentioned some of them. I will come and present them so that we have a law in place or provisions in different laws to be able to mitigate the problem of foreign traders.

I apologise for the delay but I pray that by September, I will come back with a comprehensive report. I wish to submit. Thank you, very much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you very much, ministers. It is now Government assurance that we shall have feedback from the Cabinet in September. Therefore, let us wait for that and hope that this time it will be done because we cannot continue allowing our people to suffer. However, thank you for the efforts, minister.

Honourable members, as I indicated, we have been engaged in the Global Peace Foundation Conference that starts tomorrow and therefore, the House will not sit. We shall sit next week. Honourable members, the House is adjourned to Tuesday next week at 2.00 p.m. Thank you.

(The House rose at 7.51 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 7 August 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

