

Wednesday, 25 July 2018

Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to our regular sitting. Thank you, again, for giving support to the visit of the Prime Minister of the Republic of India, Mr Narendra   Modi. I do hope that the Government will move fast on the issues that he pledged for Uganda and for Africa. 

Honourable members, I am glad that we finally constituted our sectoral committees. I would like to urge you to handle your assignments with dedication and efficiency. We are going to vigorously enforce rule 215 of our Rules of Procedure, which requires that a Bill remains with a committee for only 45 days. If they fail to complete it within 45 days, they are expected to come back here and report so that the House can use its authority to give it extra time or to proceed with the matter without further delay. 

Therefore, all outstanding Bills which have stayed for more than 45 days in a committee shall be put on the Order Paper starting from 5 August 2018. They will be considered by the House in the state that they are in. I would like to remind you of the Bills: 

    1. The Marriage and Divorce Bill; 
    2. The Uganda Forestry Association Bill; 
    3. The Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill;
    4. The Mental Health Bill; 
    5. The Law Revision (Penalties in Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous Amendment Bill; 
    6. The Human Rights (Enforcement) Bill; 
    7. The Indigenous and Complementary Medicine Bill; 
    8. The Minimum Wage Bill; 
    9. The Sexual Offences Bill; 
    10. The Kampala Capital City Authority Bill; 
    11. The Data Protection and Privacy Bill; 
    12. The Uganda National Authority Laboratory Services Bill;
    13.  The Corporative Societies Bill; 
    14. The Sugar Bill; 
    15. The National Environment Bill; 
    16. The Uganda Wildlife Bill; 
    17. The Civil Aviation Authority (Amendment) Bill; 
    18. The Constitution Amendment Bill; 
    19. The Investment Code Bill; 
    20. The National Bio-safety Act (as returned to the House); 
    21. The Security Interest in Movable Property Bill; and
    22. The Judiciary Administration Bill, 2018

I would like to urge all of you to really work quickly because now, any Bill that goes beyond 45 days will automatically be placed on the Order Paper. 

Honourable members, starting tomorrow, we shall consider the State of the Nation Address. I know that the text has been delivered to Members, so tomorrow we shall start the debate. The debate will run for four sittings. After that, we will go straight to the Bills, as I have indicated. 

There are just two matters of national concern. The one of accidents was raised yesterday by hon. Isaac Mulindwa Ssozi and we are waiting for the minister to respond, so we shall not repeat it. Can I invite hon. Paul Mwiru to be followed by hon. David Abala. Use two minutes each.

2.39
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of great national importance, and this is in regard to sachet waragi, which is being sold all over the country.

In the Ninth Parliament, we passed a resolution banning sachet waragi on the market. The reason was that sachet waragi has high degrees of ethanol. We also had an undertaking from Cabinet that they were going to implement the ban. However, I am given to understand that the manufacturers of this sachet waragi have held members of the Executive hostage and the ban is not being implemented. 

Madam Speaker, the effect of sachet waragi is that, one, it makes young people’s organs fail and whenever they go for medication, they are non-reactive. This is the information I got. Secondly, when you look at all these youth in our constituencies, they seem to be deformed.  

My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that if we want to raise this as a tax measure, since we have failed to implement it, Government would rather introduce 500 per cent tax on the ethanol that is used in the manufacturing of sachet waragi so that we save the population. Otherwise, the population is being put to waste. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I am not answering for the ministry but I am aware that in the last session, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives said she had a programme starting in September aimed at ending the manufacture of these sachets. However, that was the last session and that is why I allowed the matter to come again. However, I think we shall expect the minister to come and report to us because she gave us an action plan here, which we agreed to with her. 

2.42
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, arising from the statement from my honourable colleague, hon. Mwiru, about the dangers of the sachet waragi and the impact it is inflicting on our young population, I would like to move a motion under rule 56 of our Rules of Procedure - oral notice of motions. 

Rule 56 (1) (a) reads, “a member may with the leave of the Speaker, give oral notice of a motion using a sitting.”  Madam Speaker, I intend to move a motion to urge Government to end marketing, distribution and sale of sachet waragi with immediate effect – 

THE SPEAKER: Who are these children in the gallery? Let them wait a bit so that I can introduce them. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I was saying that I intend, with your permission, to move a motion urging Government to ban marketing, distribution and sale of sachet waragi with immediate effect. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: What about the manufacturer? 

MR OKOT OGONG: Even the manufacturing. The motion is to ban the manufacturing, distribution, marketing, selling and everything on sachet waragi with immediate effect. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you can draft the motion and we shall give you time. 

I still think that although the minister had come up with a programme, she should still come and brief us on where she has reached with that programme. However, that will not stop your motion.

2.44
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to raise a very important matter concerning the provision of health services in Soroti Referral Hospital.

In the last three months, Ngora District, in particular Ngora County that I represent in this House, has buried nine people just because of the poor service delivery in that hospital. One of the issues that are very key is that the drugs are being stolen and health workers are hostile to patients. There are even reports that the in past four weeks, in Ward 3, 17 people died.

Madam Speaker, as a Member of Parliament, I get concerned if people who vote for all of us die and yet there is nothing being done by those responsible. One big problem is that there is no board of governors in this hospital. There are reports that the term of the director expired in March. 

Madam Speaker, my prayers are: one, I would like the minister to come and tell us the status of service provision in this hospital. Two, I would like the minister to come out clearly, because there are so many reports that all matters concerning Soroti Hospital lie with the Ministry of Health.

I am the publicity person for Teso Parliamentary Group. I am concerned because people are dying without anybody attending to them; there are workers but everything is left to chance. That is why I would request the minister to come and make a statement concerning the poor health service provision in Soroti Referral Hospital. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Madam Speaker, the ministers are supposed to be around and take note of our concerns. However, from what I see, there are only two ministers. Are we moving on well procedurally when almost all ministers are away and serious matters are being raised?

THE SPEAKER: This morning, I informed all the Members, including the ministers, that we have a sitting today. Today is not Cabinet day; therefore, I do not know why they are not here. Hon. Bahati, you used to do some whipping, where are the ministers? 

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. 

First of all, Government is here and we are taking note. Secondly, because of the visit of the Prime Minister of India, there have been some movements here and there, but we are whipping them and a number of them are coming. However, we are taking note of everything that is happening in the House and Government will respond to the directives of the Speaker.

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not know for how long we are going to give ultimatums to the Cabinet. This is not the first time. I remember you made a very passionate appeal to His Excellency during the State of Nation Address about the performance of the ministers but it has continued. It is as if it fell on deaf ears and blind eyes. 

We were here in the morning and we are still here. The Cabinet has 82 members but we are only seeing two. Madam Speaker, are they fatigued? If it is fatigue, can His Excellency reshuffle them very fast so that we can possibly have new faces to help us? The President should go ahead and help us very fast, so that we have new faces with new energy and we are able to see a difference. I see some honourable members who are willing to work very hard on the Front Bench. (Laughter)

Therefore, I think this is the message we need to send to His Excellency - The ministers are fatigued; can they be helped very fast now that even elections are finished - (Interjection) - At least hon. Bahati has always been around. However, this is a very serious matter.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Bahati, find a way of whipping the ministers. We need them here. This is a new session, a new sitting. The Minister of Health should come and speak to us by Wednesday on the management of health services in Soroti Referral Hospital, which is not a small hospital because it serves the whole region.

2.52
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am from Kanungu District and I have been in this Parliament since 2011. Even before I came to this Parliament, we had a challenge with the road. The President promised very many times that he would work on our road from Rukungiri to Kanungu. However, up to today, nothing has been done. 

Madam Speaker, what hurts us most is that in 2014, we approved money to construct that road together with the Lwakhakha Road. As I talk now, the construction of the Lwakhakha Road is going on and they have reached very far but not even a small metal has been placed on the Kunungu Road to show that there is any hope. I do not why.

I have been asking the Prime Minster here and he promises that they are going to work on it and the process is ongoing. I hear we thrice had challenges during the procurement process, but there is still no hope. To worsen the matter, there are some people who took news to Kanungu that the road was completely forgotten. Now we are asking ourselves whether Kanungu is part of Uganda or not? Why is it that other roads are being worked on every day and yet nothing is happening on ours, which we requested for many years ago? 

Honourable members, when I talk, do not complain because at least most of you are enjoying – (Interjection) - Thank you for your sympathy. Some Members are enjoying tarmac roads from here all the way to their constituencies. I use a tarmac road from here up to Rukungiri. From Rukungiri, the Nengo section is extremely bad. To worsen it, when it rains, there is soil erosion in that area and you cannot even cross over. I do not know whether this Government or Parliament or the Ministry of Works and Transport sympathise with Kanungu District.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue raised by hon. Elizabeth Karungi is really grave. For the last two Parliaments, the issues of roads in Kanungu District have been on this Floor many times and we even passed a loan request. Minister, do you know anything about what has happened to that part of the loan?

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, it is true that we passed a loan request here. We then started on the procurement process, which had challenges, and we again engaged the bank and still got challenges in the procurement. However, this time round, the procurement is going on very well. We do hope that by November 2018, the contractor will be on site to solve this problem which has been there for so long. 

I know Kanungu District very well and have close relationship with it. I have been there so many times. I would like to assure hon. Elizabeth Karungi that in November this year, we have confirmed that the contractor will be on site.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is at least somehow a comforting answer. However, I do not believe it because they have been promising. Can they put it in writing that by November they will start on our roads, so that we are also comfortable like other places? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, write to the Speaker confirming that position and copy to all the Members of Parliament. No, we want letters. Thank you very much.

DESIGNATION OF UPDF MEMBERS TO SECTORAL COMMITTEES 

THE SPEAKER: Is it now Maj. Susan Lakot? Did we congratulate you? I think we did not congratulate her. She was elevated from captain to major. Congratulations. (Applause)

Honourable members, I think I should do it properly; Capt. Evarlyne Asiimwe is now Maj. Evarlyne  Asiimwe. We should also congratulate her. (Laughter)

2.58
MAJ. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In accordance with rule 15 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, I hereby designate the following UPDF Members of Parliament to the committees of their choices as stated below:

1. 	Lt Gen. Ivan Koreta - Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry;
2. 	Maj. Gen. Pecos Kuteesa - Committee on Foreign Affairs;
3. 	Brig. Innocent Oula - Committee on Natural Resources;
4. 	Brig. Francis Takirwa - Committee on Physical Infrastructure;
5. 	Col Felix Kulayigye - Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs;
6. 	Lt Col Flavia Byekwaso - Committee on Public Service and Local Governments;
7. 	Maj. Evarlyne Asiimwe - Committee on East African Community Affairs;
8. 	Maj. Susan Lakot - Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

Madam Speaker, in the same –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we designated other Members and I am aware that all the committees are below 30. Therefore, there is still space. I now put the question that all those Members nominated to sectoral committees from the UPDF be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

 MAJ. LAKOT: Madam Speaker, following the appointments of Gen. Katumba Wamala and Gen. Elly Tumwine to ministerial positions; and noting that the two Members were members of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Governments) and Committee on Appointments respectively; further noting that since the appointments and approval of these Members to the respective ministerial positions there has been no representation of the UPDF Members on the above mentioned committees; it is against this background that I now request to designate the following Members to the above mentioned committees: 

1. Brig. Innocent Oula - Committee on Public Accounts (Local Governments)
2. Col Felix Kulayigye - Committee on Appointments

I beg to propose.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the two Members be designated to the two standing committees.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO THE 2018 JOINT PARLIAMENTARY FORUM OF THE FEDERAL NATIONAL COUNCIL OF THE UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (FNC) AND THE INTERNATIONAL RENEWABLE ENERGY AGENCY (IRENA), THE IRENA LEGISLATORS’ FORUM AND THE WORLD FUTURE ENERGY SUMMIT, ABU DHABI-UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (U.A.E)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before hon. Lawrence Biyika reports, join me in welcoming the pupils and teachers of Kamuli Church of Uganda Primary School in Kireka, Wakiso District. They are represented by hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju and hon. Rosemary Seninde. They are here to observe the proceedings. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure with respect to the committees we have just designated and approved. 

During the State of the Nation Address, you emphatically made it clear that one sectoral committee of Parliament in terms of its leadership and membership would be disbanded. I would like to seek clarity as to whether we proceeded well and we respected your ruling when you addressed the House during the State of the Nation Address. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I can confirm that it has majorly been done. There was only one error which will be corrected on Tuesday; otherwise, it has been done.

MR ONYANGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. Last week, on Thursday, there was an incident that took place in Busitema Forest in Busia District. A citizen was shot dead by a Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) officer. A post-mortem report confirmed that, indeed, this person was shot. Two other people were arrested by the UPDF and handed over to the police. I made a follow up with the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) – 

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of procedure and how does it relate to this work?

MR ONYANGO: Madam Speaker, I am giving a background to my procedural point.

THE SPEAKER: Please, hon. Onyango, get to the point.

MR ONYANGO: Madam, it is an important issue that needs your intervention.

THE SPEAKER: Is it a procedural issue or you are just trying to smuggle it in?

MR ONYANGO: Madam Speaker, I am requesting that you give me audience and I present this on the Floor.

THE SPEAKER: I have not understood what the procedural point you are raising is. Is it in relation to the Order Paper? Is it that the minister has failed to come? That is what I want to know.

MR ONYANGO: I would like Government to respond to this issue. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, raise it officially on Tuesday as a matter of concern, not by smuggling it in as a point of procedure. We will give you time on Tuesday.

Hon. Songa, use just 15 minutes.

3.06
MR LAWRENCE SONGA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the parliamentary delegation to the 2018 Joint Parliamentary Forum on the Federal National Council of the United Arab Emirates together with the International Renewable Energy Agency and International Renewable Energy Agency Legislators’ Forum at the World Future Energy Summit, which was held in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. I beg to lay.

Under rule 33 (2), I am required to make some three highlights of this meeting. This meeting was a three-in-one meeting, and the major purpose was to work out the policies that are needed to support the transformation to a global energy system. 

The objectives were to exchange best practices, deepen the understanding of policy and legislative tools and financing issues for renewable energy in the world, and also raise the level of ambition for accelerated energy transition especially in the developing world. 

The problem was simple: There is a realisation that there is shortage of electricity and high cost of electricity especially in the Southern countries, and yet these countries have enormous potential of renewable energy that they are not exploiting due to many factors including lack of legislation, lack of policies and lack of finance. There is also the issue of absence of legal frameworks and national policies to champion this renewable energy growth. Many parliaments do not have the right tools and knowledge in the renewable energy sector and yet many countries under the UN systems have already ratified the Paris Agreement. That awareness is still lacking in many parliaments. 

This meeting discussed Sustainable Development Goal No. 7, which is about energy. The meeting also discussed the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) under the legislators’ forum. The assembly also brought together the governments, civil society and private sector to network during the World Future Energy Summit. 

The major recommendation was that countries that have ratified the Paris Agreement should make it a priority to implement the NDCs as reflected in many of the development plans. We should look for resources so that we can implement them. We shall then be able to report on each NDC when we go for the review of the Sustainable Development Goals. This is very key; it is important for us to mobilise resources to implement our NDCs and development plan. This was the key recommendation of this meeting. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Songa. Let us have one or two comments. 

3.10
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the team that represented Uganda as a country. 

As we talk about the recommendations, my concern is how we shall include the people in the rural areas of our country to enable them benefit from these international arrangements. Look at the solar energy arrangement, for example; the majority of the people benefiting from solar energy are in town and not in the villages. I would expect that when we are handling these things and the maturity time comes, as Parliament we should consider how to bring on board the people in the villages. Due to the biting level of poverty, they cannot be able to pay for power. 

Otherwise, the meeting was good and the recommendations were okay. I support the international arrangement. Thank you very much.

3.11
MS ROSETTE KAJUNGU (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank all the Members who attended this conference. 

My response to this is that as a country, when it comes to renewable energy, we should have made it a priority a long time ago, especially for the sake of women. In my district, I have very many incidents because there is scarcity of firewood. Many of the women have been raped when they go to look for firewood. When they go to look for firewood in other people’s forests, they are mistreated. 

Therefore, I welcome the recommendations that were made at the conference. However, I specifically want us as Parliament to consider affirmative action and see how we can put a fund in place to help women’s access to clean energy. I know many of them are really suffering. It is happening in Mbarara and I know it is happening in other districts too. I urge all of us to do something for the women. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we returned from that meeting, I remember coming to the House and reminding Government to join the International Solar Alliance through which we could get a grant of US$ 50 million to support the rural areas. I do not know whether we have done it already, but I know that that money is there. 

3.13
MR LAWRENCE SONGA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Members who have made comments on this report. However, it is very important to note that we have been following up the issue of Uganda being a signatory to the International Solar Alliance. 

This is an alliance being championed by India and France. Fortunately, today you heard the Prime Minister of India talking about the International Solar Alliance. We are happy that Uganda signed as a founding member of that alliance and we shall be able to benefit. This is basically making solar available to pump water for irrigation, home use and also promote some lighting in rural areas, thereby taking away women and children from using kerosene. It is very important that we are a signatory and we need to follow that up and implement it in the rural areas.

The other issue, which is related to that, is budgeting. When you look at the Sustainable Development Goals, they are 17 but the goals have 169 targets, with energy being No.7. Many countries in the North are now making their budgets based on the 169 targets so that they can be able to report progress on them. Therefore, it is also important that we see how best we can budget for these targets so that we report on them and benefit from financing from other development partners and the international community. I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I think it is important for you to come and tell us how you are going to use that US$ 50 million grant. We would like to know whether it is going to support the young people or women. You should come and lay it here and tell us your priority. You heard the Prime Minister of India - priorities.

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON THE ROLE OF PARLIAMENTARIANS IN COMBATING ILLICIT FINANCIAL FLOWS FROM AFRICA, HELD IN ABUJA, NIGERIA FROM 23 TO 26 APRIL 2018

3.16
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report of the workshop on the role of Parliamentarians in combating illicit financial flows from Africa, held in Abuja, Nigeria. I beg to lay.

I would like to thank you for according my colleague, hon. Idah Nabayiga, and I an opportunity to participate – on behalf of Parliament of Uganda – in this very important workshop that was held in Nigeria. 

Given that the Members have this document uploaded on their iPads, I will just highlight a few issues that transpired in that workshop. The main theme was on urging parliaments in Africa to come up with measures to combat illicit financial flows from their respective countries – having legislative items on this matter so that we reduce financial flows from Africa. 

A number of countries were invited to this workshop, Uganda inclusive. There were also a number of regional bodies in attendance, such as the East African Community (EAC), South African Development Community (SADC) and others. The workshop was conducted by the African Development Bank.

I will just highlight briefly some of the topics presented: 
    • Why illicit financial flows is a matter of concern to the African Development Bank. 
    • Reducing opportunities for abusive tax practices. 
    • The other was on issues of tax evasion. I think we deal with this every day, where people evade tax and in a way Government loses revenue. 
    • Beneficial ownership information. Government gathers information about those engaged in money laundering but who is responsible for taking on this information and coming up with actions. 
    • There were issues to do with improving on asset tracing and recovery. When people accumulate wealth wrongly, how do we trace such assets and recover the money?

Madam Speaker, the overall objective of the workshop was to review challenges African countries face in fighting against illicit financial flows and share countries’ best experiences and practices on how to deal with these problems.

During the discussions, there was a panel of experts who came up with what they considered to be the key issues that all of us that attended that workshop could take home as a package: 
1. To work towards promoting transparency as an essential tool in combating illicit financial flows. 

2. To put more effort in closing all routes of illicit financial flows. You know the people who come here as investors have all kinds of tricks they use. Therefore, the workshop was basically urging us – governments – to tighten measures that will combat some of these tricks and routes that they use to take our resources out of the country.

3. To deal with abusive transfer pricing in order to curb illicit financial flows. Madam Speaker, yesterday we were talking about the pricing of our maize and we agreed that the price of maize in Uganda has dropped significantly. They buy maize here very cheaply but they take it out, improve it a little bit and sell it at more than double the price. That is illicit financial flow. 

4. There was the need to promote a compliance culture. We come up with very many laws and I think in Uganda here we have the anti-money laundering law but the issue is how to implement it.

Madam Speaker, those were some of the highlights of the issues. 

There were 12 points that the meeting adopted and I think Members have them. I will just read a few of them and Members can read the rest. The points are entailed in the communique from the workshop. 
1. Participants renewed their commitment to fight against illicit financial flows and agreed to pursue renewed political commitment from the executives and decision makers to combating illicit financial flows. We noted that the Executive has a role to play if this matter is to be addressed.

2. Participants committed to strengthen good tax governance through the enactment of appropriate laws and to support the efforts of governments to develop and implement specific policy measures and adequately fund institutional frameworks designed to counter abusive tax practices.

3. Participants called on parliaments and the executives in African counties to ensure that all agencies involved in combating illicit financial flow, including abusive tax practices, tax evasion, money laundering and corruption, have sufficient independence and resources to both carry out their existing functions and undertake effective developments and implementation of legislative and operational resources to identified gaps and weaknesses.

Madam Speaker, we have agencies that are dealing with this matter of fraud in the country. However, sometimes they are under undue cohesion and so, their work does not yield results. The issue here is that they urge Government to support these agencies. Some of the agencies include Uganda Financial Intelligence Authority (UFIA), Inspector General of Government (IGG), Anti-Corruption Coalition Uganda etcetera.

Since Members have this document. I beg to end here. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Woboya and your colleagues. Are there any comments? Can we use two minutes? 

3.25
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU	(NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I congratulate the delegation that represented us in Abuja. It is good the African Development Bank is concerned about what is happening in Africa. 

When you look at the situation in Uganda, we have lost a lot of money to people who understand what we do not know. When I read this report, I discovered that we need to think about empowering Ugandans so that they get to know the resources they have and how to exploit such resources. If our people are empowered, these people who come from abroad and have more knowledge than us will not keep on taking our money without our knowledge. Unless we empower Ugandans through our legislation, these people will keep on coming and taking our money because they know more than we do. 

Madam Speaker, when you look at the mineral sector, we discovered that many Ugandans are not engaged in mining and so when we lose money though minerals, most of the Ugandans do not know that we have lost money. We have industries which are attracting investors but most of the investors are Asians and Europeans. When they make their money, if there is way they can take that money and evade taxes without our knowledge, it becomes very simple for them. Therefore, we need to empower Ugandans so that we can reduce chances of people taking away our money. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.27
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also read through the report and my major concern is about the flow of money outside the country. I will emphasise regulation of investors.

Madam Speaker, most of the investors who come to the country paint a very big picture at the beginning as if they are serious investors. However, when they are given the opportunity, most of them are petty investors and the activities they engage in could be done by fellow Ugandans. I, therefore, think it is very important that we try to regulate this area. There could be an investor who manufactures hardware, for example, and has a factory here. Sometimes the same investor will end up being the manufacturer, distributor, wholesaler and retailer. In this chain of production, where does the Ugandan lie? How do Ugandans benefit with this nature of production? As a country, we should think about how to handle this matter.

Madam Speaker, there are cases where you find that someone has a factory in Kampala but the same person also has shops all over Uganda, even up to the villages. As my colleague said, we should think of ways of empowering Ugandans. Many of these investors could be in Uganda today because the economic conditions favour them. However, when the economic situation changes, they may not stay here and yet Ugandans will never run away; they will remain here.

Secondly, on the issue of pricing, as a Government, there is need for us to change the initial colonial attitude where the industries set up by the colonialists were basically for reducing weight, like reducing the weight of copper so that when it is exported, it is lighter. Even in the ginneries then, the lint was merely separated from the seeds. I would like to request that we should think of processing our products so that the items we export can fetch for us more money. This is one of the ways in which we lose money. We sell products very cheaply and at the end of the day, they sell them back to us very expensively. 
	
On the issue of the chain of distribution being marked clearly, I think we should be serious on this matter. I will give an example. I went to Zombo to buy some items for a business I was trying to establish. I approached a local shop owned by some woman and bought these products and used them. However, after three months, when I went back to buy the same products, the Indians had set up a similar hardware shop next to this woman’s shop and this prompted the woman to close her business. Imagine if this woman was paying school fees, she would already be in trouble. We, Ugandans, must be concerned about our people. We should regulate the nature and the level of investment. Thank you.

3.31
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Like my colleague who spoke earlier, I would like to thank the committee of two Members for attending this very important workshop on combating illicit financial flows and returning to this Parliament with a report, which to me is very useful and will help us monitor, investigate and prevent money laundering.

In 2014, the Uganda Financial Intelligence Authority was established by this august House. We gave them a law that they are currently using. However, what is not clear, even to those of us who were in the Ninth Parliament, is the extent to which they are enforcing the anti-money laundering law and monitoring all financial flows into the country. 

I think this kind of report would be very useful if it is shared with this authority because it is the implementing agency. It is, therefore, my humble request that we share these findings with the Uganda Financial Intelligence Authority. As a member of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, where Uganda Financial Intelligence Authority is resident, we should pick recommendations of this committee of two Members and share them increasingly with the authority.

It is also my humble request - maybe the presenter of the report will help us to know when the next workshop will take place, so that members of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development are co-opted to be part and parcel of the next meeting. Information that is got from such a meeting would be useful for us to build on issues related to combating illicit financial flows in this country. Given that it is resident in the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, members of this committee should be encouraged to interact more in these kinds of workshops. However, I thank you for the opportunity given to make this submission. Thank you very much.			    				
THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I think hon. Okello has raised an important point. I know we made the law but I do not remember where the reporting is. Do they file an annual report here? I do not think I have heard from them since we appointed them. They came back for renewal and went away. Minister, I do not know whether you could sleep over it and let us know. We need to know who consumes their product. Thank you.

3.35
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the delegation of two. 

Illicit financial flows are real. Reports indicate that Africa loses over US$ 80 billion per year in illicit financial flows. This is far above what we receive as Africa from the developed countries. Therefore, illicit financial flows are very dangerous to Africa.

Madam Speaker, it is very easy to talk about Africa, and indeed Africa can achieve in terms of combating illicit financial flows without Uganda achieving. We should be asking ourselves as a Parliament of Uganda and tasking Government to tell us what is being done to stop illicit financial flows from Uganda to countries even within or outside Africa.

The other day, we heard the President say that the office of the Inspectorate of Government (IGG), which is one of the key offices in fighting illicit financial flows – because illicit financial flows go hand in hand with corruption – is actually failing. We need to know which specific office Government is using to fight this. 

Going by our contracting system, nowadays we have donors or lenders also taking up contracts. Even before Parliament approves, contracts are already approved and mobilisation is already done. Therefore, what are the measures that Government is going to put in place to also curb capital flight because it is not easy to separate the two? 

At an appropriate time, Government needs to reassure this Parliament and the country that we are ready. We can put our signatures on so many protocols, like we have done for very many of them, and we have no reports on how far we have gone in achieving any part of the recommendations. Otherwise, I thank the team once again.

3.38
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Madam Speaker, allow me to join my colleagues in congratulating the delegation of two for producing a wonderful report.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me explain. The people who invited us told me to send only two Members. That is why they are only two. (Laughter)

MR OYET: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Actually, I was saying that what they have produced and presented before Parliament is a lesson to all of us, that when you are assigned to do something, you must produce quality reports, which should inform the decisions of this Government. 

That aside, I would like to pick on the recommendations of the committee. First, I would like to comment on the regulation on investment. Madam Speaker, I do not call these tricks of the investors; I actually call it thuggery. We have so many investors who come with “kaveeras” into this country. They create an impression that they have a lot of money and take advantage of the loopholes we have within the country. They manipulate the system, get money from within, use it and then remit it to their countries.

I would like to cite an example of a company which was licensed to do boat building. It is called Mango Tree. They were licensed by Uganda Investment Authority but up to now as I speak, they have not produced a single boat. What they did was when they got the licence, which was actually not for mining, they descended on our minerals. They are the first company that depleted us of our sands in Lwera. It is on record. As I speak, they are still there up to now.  Madam Speaker, we need to strengthen our regulatory authority to be firm and strong enough to control the resources of this country.

Secondly, on the Financial Intelligence Authority, I am happy you raised the concern to the Ministry of Finance. We would like to know who consumes their final product and what they have so far done. Uganda is the only country where one can easily walk with physical cash in a bag without being queried. In other countries, you cannot even go to the foreign exchange bureau and get services without your identity card and particulars, but here you can go anywhere. Whatever amount you have, they give you without even querying the source of the money. 

Our worry is that if we do not strengthen that kind of regulation, then we are going to end up with mafias controlling the country –(Interruption)

MR MASIKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member who has just been speaking about the looting of our country. 

I happened to be an agent of Chinese organisations. I have ever been to Lake Victoria as an interpreter and as one of their workers. I was very patient with them. They took me to different places in Africa, Asia, et cetera. We happened to come to Uganda and I have been hearing that Uganda is gold and indeed, Uganda is gold. 

I was taken to Lake Victoria. We put on suits like amphibians with oxygen cylinders on our backs. Funny enough, we were being escorted by our own police, going to watch the foreigners eat the good meat while the bones were being left for us. We went under the water with big torches which can light the whole of this place. Fish would come because we were behaving like fish. 

They had metal objects which they used to drill up to 20 or 30 metres into the bed of the lake and they extracted gold from there. We went to Lwera and they took some sand on the boat. We came with the sand up to somewhere. When they processed it, they got some gold. I witnessed this and I picked some. I hid some with me for further research. As I speak now, I have it. (Laughter) 

Our Lake Victoria basin in East Africa is the bowl of everything. They told me that when the rivers swell from the water from the mountains after it has rained, they come with big boulders of rocks. They knock each other and then the gold is formed and it is brought up to Lake Victoria. The rivers have been doing this for hundreds of years. We have a lot of gold in Lake Victoria but it is not yet exploited. We do not know about this but up to now, there is gold.

Madam Speaker, I am not trying to tell the Lake Victoria dwellers or those people who live on the lake to jump in the water, thinking that there is gold and they can pick it; it is not easy. It is only Government which can buy all those machines to extract our gold from Lake Victoria. It is a lot and we are very rich. 

Madam Speaker, we feel our Government could get money from these sources. We would be the ones sponsoring countries abroad. Now they come stealthily and take away our goods. When they go back, they pick small money and give us and we say, “Thank you very much, Sir”. This is very - I cannot talk. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We need to leave this subject. Please finish, hon. Oyet; you were very generous to hon. Masika.

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, my colleague, for that useful information. I do not want to get into that; you can do a lot of research and find out for yourself. The aluminium glasses we are now consuming are produced with the materials from Uganda. Go to Dubai and China, they will tell you that. 

On the Financial Intelligence Authority, I would like to say this with a lot of pain in my heart: There is an Indian man who came to me and he wanted me to help secure him farm lands in my constituency. He was residing at my place and he convinced me that he was a powerful farmer. I took him to those who wanted to partner with him in the farming, but his interest was beyond that. One evening, he sat me down and said, “All I want from you is to cooperate with me and I can give you whatever money you want and you will never leave Parliament. Even if you leave Parliament, you can do any other things”. 

Why am I emphasising that? Madam Speaker, I would like the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) and the intelligence services to take this very seriously. Many countries have problems because of dubious financing from sources which are not clear. That can only be addressed by the Financial Intelligence Authority. Therefore, we must take that as a matter of very serious concern. The Financial Intelligence Authority is not only supposed to regulate petty traders of Nakivubo, Kampala and Gulu; it is supposed to monitor those so-called investors. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.47
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke County South, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the delegation that represented us. They represented us very well. However, I also would like to thank you for being gender sensitive because you sent a man and a woman to represent us. You did well. (Laughter) 

I would like to appreciate the recommendations made, but we still have a challenge as a country. We do not usually walk the talk. Recently, I heard a story about a certain big woman in Bank of Uganda having got billions of money from nowhere and the same woman has been reappointed to the Financial Intelligence Authority. We have some institutions that fight graft here like the IGG. However, the IGG’s office is not funded well. I read with concern that they get only Shs 8 million per month to cater for all their needs. Therefore, unless we walk the talk, there is nothing much we can do. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, we have a very big challenge called political will. We have politicians who know things in their own way. Recently, you heard that we are trying to revive Uganda Airlines. We are all aware that the Uganda Airlines belongs to Uganda but we got a report that someone bought the name “Uganda Airlines” and the same person is asking the Government of Uganda to pay him Shs 150 billion. We are here to represent this country. Until we wake up and represent our own people, we are still not walking the talk. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.49
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the Members who went to attend this very important conference and have come up with a very impressive report in regards to illicit financial flows. Madam Speaker, I also would like to thank you for bringing up the issue of how the Financial Intelligence Authority is sleepy. 

Madam Speaker, you are aware that most of these fraudsters are even residents in this country. Uganda alone has lost a lot in terms of foreign exchange. Money is taken out of the country; they bring in dirty money, clean it from within and take it out. Nobody is really there to seriously monitor and see who is doing what, where the money is coming from and where it is going to. 

Madam Speaker, it is like the country has been taken hostage.  We would like investors to come into the country - we are desperate for them – but these crooks, sorry to use that word, have taken advantage of the situation in the country and brought in a lot of dirty money. 

I wish this Parliament could strongly pronounce itself on investors. Who is an investor? Today, you find somebody masquerading, dressed up in a suit and he gets an appointment to meet the President and tomorrow or after a few months, he cannot even start up an ordinary retail shop. These people are here; you find them loitering in the streets of Kampala. They are instead begging. They are instead competing with our people. You find them downtown doing businesses that otherwise would have been reserved for the local Ugandans. You find them upcountry trading in items as small as maize, grains, charcoal and Irish potatoes. 

They come in a different way and then get stuck. Some of them are lucky because they have huge chunks of money. Maybe they could have got the money through internet fraud and so on. They come in, clean it and there is nobody to monitor. We do not have strong institutions, Madam Speaker, to monitor these issues. Therefore, I think this report is timely and like my –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give the House is that we have institutions; the problem is mal administration. Even those who are supposed to help the country are covering the truth more and yet they are supposed to reveal it. That is the information I wanted to pass on. Thank you.

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by really thanking the team that went for the conference. I would like to call upon this House- (Member timed out.)

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we will inform the House on the reporting mechanisms of the Financial Intelligence Authority at the next sitting. 

Secondly, we have presented the investment Bill in this House and it is with the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Most of the issues that Members have been raising and how best we can regulate investors have actually been captured there. We hope this House will help us tighten the loose ends so that we control the system of regulating investors. 

However, I would like to also like to state that we should make a distinction between investors and con people - people who go everywhere, even to the USA. These are different. Investors come, report to the Uganda Investment Authority and are given a licence. We have a process of getting proof that they have resources and then they start the process of investing. Therefore, those are different from people who come to con people and these are handled differently. 

On the issue of anti-money laundering, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank this House that after the laws that we have passed - the anti-terrorism financing and anti-money laundering laws - Uganda was able to be lifted, at the international level, from wrong indicators to green. We are now one of the best countries in the world that are ranked as having fought money laundering in the world. We are on record and it is because Parliament stood firm to pass the laws.

It is now impossible for one to bring in money anyhow; it is difficult. Madam Speaker, you may recall that we passed a law here that if you deposit more than Shs 100 million, even on your personal account now, you will be questioned by the central bank. Therefore, we are making some progress. Yes, there are some gaps remaining and I am sure that they will be addressed by the investment code and by - 

THE SPEAKER: We need to do other work, Members. Can we keep that debate for the investment code amendment? 

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to seek clarification from the honourable minister. We have people entering the country by road and we have many border points where people travel by bus and by private means. I would like to know from the minister what mechanisms he has put in place to check for a person who may be carrying US$ 10 million, for example, in his suitcase? What mechanisms have you put to stop such a person at the border?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, on the issue of foreign currency, it is true that we are operating a liberalised market. However, arising from the motion we had on the Floor of the House urging Government to tighten loose ends, some of our Members who are operating forex bureaus can testify that it is now impossible for one to go to a forex bureau without an identity card. This is because forex bureaus have to report on a daily basis to the central bank who has come to exchange money. This is a requirement by the central bank.

Regarding our borders, we try our best. At the official borders, it is very hard to pass, for example through Entebbe Airport, with US$ 1 million, unless you have connived with our staff. It is possible to pass through an area without a border post without Government getting you. However, at the official borders, we have systems to detect that. I thank you.

MR KALULE: Madam Speaker, the minister has mentioned a limit of Shs 100 million, which I remember we passed here, but it seems the banks are not aware of this. Any time you go beyond Shs 20 million, the banks question you. Therefore, I request the minister to make it clear to the nation and all the banks that the limit is Shs 100 million and not Shs 20 million. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, the clarification I would like to seek from the minister pertains to what hon. Luttamaguzi was trying to hint on - the issue of appointing people who have questionable integrity and character to sensitive agencies of Government. 

Here, we are talking about the Financial Intelligence Authority. We would love you to come up clearly and confirm or deny reports that somebody somewhere, who has been accused of banking money somewhere in billions of shillings, has been appointed to head the Financial Intelligence Authority. We are talking about a lady called Bagenda. Sincerely, can you confirm or deny this. If, as a country, we are very serious about financial intelligence, can we go ahead and appoint such people to positions of responsibility? Shall we be sensitive to sensitive matters? Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, on the issue of how much you deposit on your personal account to prompt the bank to require you to tell them where you are getting the resources, it is true that we put a minimum of Shs 100 million. However, the banks are at liberty, given the history of an individual, to crosscheck even if you put Shs 2 million or Shs 20 million. As long as the banks are suspicious, given your history and the transactions you have been carrying out in the bank, they can come and say, “By the way, can you tell us how you have received this Shs 20 million?” If an account has been receiving Shs 10,000 or Shs 20,000 and all of a sudden it receives Shs 20 million, the bank would be interested in knowing where the Shs 20 million is coming from. This has helped us to tighten loose ends.

On the issue of Mrs Bagenda, I request that I crosscheck the facts and come back to the House next week. Thank you.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES ON THE RAMIFICATIONS OF THE INFLUX OF IMMIGRANTS ENGAGED IN PETTY TRADE ON THE ECONOMIC SPACE AND LIVELIHOOD OF CITIZENS

4.02
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES (Ms Hellen Asamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been the vice-chairperson of the committee but yesterday, I got a promotion and I would like to thank you for it.

Madam Speaker, I am presenting a report on behalf of the Committee on Equal Opportunities. First of all, I would like to thank the members of the committee and the staff who enabled this report to come here. I beg to lay the minutes and a copy of the report on the Table for the record. 

Madam Speaker, the Committee on Equal Opportunities, established by rule 180 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, is inter alia mandated by rule 180 (2)(c) of the same rules to monitor and promote measures designed to enhance the equalisation of opportunities and improvement of the quality of life and status of all people.

On 2 August 2016, the Committee on Equal Opportunities commenced an inquiry into the management of aliens in Uganda and the ramifications of the influx of immigrants and their continued engagement in petty trade on the economic space of Uganda.

The phenomenon of the aliens engaging in petty trade, and by implication infringing on the economic space and livelihood of Ugandan citizens, cannot be over emphasised. These aliens range from refugees to commercial and professional immigrants and illegal immigrants in some cases. 

According to a study conducted by Inter Aid, a United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) implementing partner in Kampala, a large number of refugee respondents are making only sporadic income through petty trading, begging, and provision of services such as hair dressing and translation.

It is therefore no surprise that many burgeoning towns across the country are buzzing with investors of colour, - we have just been talking about this - most notably Indians and Chinese, engaging in various forms of petty trade, commanding factory and construction sites. Some can also be seen hawking flimsy Chinese merchandise and operating slot machines in slums. They are everywhere and this is a worrying development because many of them are engaged in the nature of work that Ugandans are and should be doing, thereby pushing local businesses out of work.

According to a 2008 report by the World Bank, youth unemployment, for instance, stood at 83 per cent. A 2015 report by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics estimated that of the total working population in Uganda of 13.9 million, only 7.9 million, about 66.8 per cent, are employed. This implies that about 43 per cent of the Ugandan youth continue to wallow in unemployment. 

The prevalence of unemployment and the threats that come with it are a pointer to, amongst other things, the structure of available economic space, especially for natives of the society. In a country where aliens engage in petty trade, such an economic space will be considerably narrowed to the detriment of natives.

As the committee undertook these matters of inclusivity and equalisation of opportunity, the need for preservation of economic space and livelihoods of citizens and natives was the key underlying thrust of this investigation. The future of productivity and transformation of Uganda depends on the enhancement, harnessing and protection of the livelihood of Ugandans.

Objectives of the Inquiry

The committee sought to –
 
i) 	inquire into the efficacy of the existing legal and policy framework in promoting the economic space of Ugandan citizens;
ii) 	examine the challenges faced by the responsible ministries, departments and agencies in post-entry management of aliens in Uganda;
iii) 	propose interventions that can ameliorate the challenges in post-entry management of aliens and protecting the economic space of Ugandan citizens. 

I will not go into the methodology, but I will go straight to the observations since Members have this report uploaded to their iPads. 

All the witnesses that the committee interfaced with conceded that indeed the proliferation of aliens into petty and retail trade in Uganda today is a threat to the economic space and livelihood of citizens.

The trend of issuance of work permits by class over the last three years is shown on the table, which has been provided in this report. From the above mentioned table, the highest number of work permits were issued to classes G, A and D. 

Class G is for a person who satisfies the board that he or she has been offered and has accepted employment in Uganda. As you can see, it is a very small number. C1ass F, which is for professionals, has one of the lowest numbers. This clearly indicates that the bulk of aliens seeking work permits are ordinary persons who may not even offer an exceptional professional skill. Such ordinary aliens will inevitably jostle for the same economic space with citizens. If this trend is to be curbed, there is need to ensure more stringent modalities for qualification for entry permits.

The committee is cognisant of the existence and effort of the technical working group on the harmonisation of procedures for issuance of entry permits to aliens. This working group has representatives from the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities; Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; Ministry of Works and Transport; Uganda Investment Authority; and the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control.

Considering that this technical working group is inter alia tasked with formulation of operational guidelines on the educational and professional levels of applicants for entry permits, the committee recommends that the working group be supported through resourcing and consideration of its recommendations in an attempt to bolster post-entry management of aliens.

The State of Immigrations Management in Uganda Today 

Madam Speaker, the committee notes that there is no actual figure of the exact number of immigrants in Uganda, given that beside the legal immigrants, there are a host of undocumented illegal ones too. With Uganda's porous borders and attendant limitations of the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control, the phenomenon of illegal immigrants is one to severely contend with.

The committee observed that while the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control is mandated by the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Act to manage all matters of migration and immigration. This includes issuance of work permits and monitoring of all foreign nationals intending to work in Uganda. Cases of proliferation of aliens, many of whom are presently operating petty and retail businesses in various parts of Uganda, continue. Some of these aliens are illegal immigrants while others have breached the terms of their entry permits. 

All this points to inherent challenges in the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control in executing its mandate. Indeed, the committee learnt that the directorate has, for the last decade or so, been understaffed with less than 300 staff. The post-entry monitoring unit that directly monitors aliens upon entry into the country has had only 20 staff. Considering the porousness of Uganda's borders, it is inevitable to have so many undocumented illegal workers and “investors”.

The committee also observes that while it is in the interest of the country to safeguard the economic interests and livelihood of its citizens, the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Act is silent on this. Matters are not helped by the seeming absence of a policy and regulatory framework to enhance and protect the economic rights and livelihoods of citizens.

While section 82 of the Act, for instance, grants general powers to the minister to make regulations for the implementation of the Act, there was no evidence of any regulations in place that deliberately aim at securing the economic space and livelihoods of citizens in the management of immigration. 

With the Investment Code Act similarly silent of any such protection strategies, it goes without saying that the current legal and policy regime that governs immigration and investment are significantly short of institutional safeguards for the economic space and livelihoods of citizens.

The committee recommends that the Executive initiates targeted policy and legal reforms in immigrations, investments and business licensing processes to ring-fence certain sectors and trades exclusively for Ugandans. These reforms should also include strengthening relevant regulations.

Cognisant of on-going attempts to initiate amendments to the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Act, the committee views this as an opportune moment to play existing gaps, enhance inter-sectoral coordination and strengthen immigration management in the country.

The committee recommends that the said policy and legal reforms be initiated within six months after the adoption of this report.

Cognisant of the challenges of manual information systems, voluminous paper work and limited staffing, the committee also welcomes the on-going reforms at the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control aimed at enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of immigration service delivery through inter alia digitising their processes and procedures and eliminating bureaucratic delays. This, coupled with increased budgetary allocations, will go a long way in stemming corruption and streamlining post-entry management of aliens.

While the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, hon. Obiga Kania, informed the committee that part of the 23 objectives set out for the current Cabinet by His Excellency the President is to ensure that the welfare of Ugandans is safeguarded in regard to income generation, the committee notes the need to increase budgetary provision to the staffing of the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control (DCIC) so as to bolster its capacity and competitiveness. 

The committee, for instance, notes that the Department of Legal and Inspection Services of the DCIC, which is tasked with post-entry monitoring of aliens, has over the last five years received an annual funding of Shs 25O million to facilitate its activities all over the country and has, at its disposal, only five vehicles for field monitoring. This dismal level of funding and deplorable levels of facilitation renders the unit ineffective.

Therefore, commitment in terms of Government objectives should be matched with requisite resources to enable translation of the said objectives into actual output. 

The committee recommends that the sectoral Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, under whose purview the DCIC lies, the Budget Committee and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should appropriately consider revising the budget of the DCIC when considering the policy statement for the year. Madam Speaker, this will be for the future because it was for Financial Year 2018/2019, which we have already passed.

The committee also notes that the biggest infrastructure projects, both in terms of size and cost, are being handled by foreign companies that hire their own to the detriment of local Ugandans. This implies that not only does the money end up in foreign hands but also the employment opportunities envisaged may not accrue to Ugandans. 

While the argument has sometimes been that local entities may not possess the capacity to undertake such projects, a deliberate legal and policy regime that ensures joint ventures between local and foreign firms in such instances and specific quotas for employment opportunities for locals would go a long way in enhancing and safeguarding local livelihoods. Strong monitoring and surveillance to ensure compliance should accompany this.

The practice of according foreign investors preferential treatment with regard to tax incentives and land coupled with the absence of a minimum wage continue to predispose native investors and labour to gross disadvantage. As such, some foreign investors displace domestic companies that could better serve local populations. Others can impoverish local communities by inter alia recklessly exploiting local and natural resources and/or polluting the environment.

The committee is cognisant of the recent remarks by H.E Yoweri

Museveni on the matter of foreign investors to the effect that, “It is not correct for the regulators not to take action against Chinese and Indian retailers who unfairly compete against our retailers. Those foreigners should not operate at that terminal level. They should be redirected to manufacturing in particular and other areas like construction. Retailing should be preserved for the Ugandans or possibly, other African immigrants as well.”

There is therefore need to translate this commitment into actual practice but this will require concerted and coordinated efforts from all agencies involved, including the Ministry of Labour and Social Development, Uganda Investment Authority and the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control to realign our investment, labour and immigration policies to ensure that the investors permitted to operate are indeed compliant and issuance of work permits and monitoring the activities of aliens and foreign investors are dealt with squarely. This, in many ways, will require amendments to the existing legal and policy regimes.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Internal Affairs is currently drafting a new migration policy to be submitted to Cabinet for approval. In that policy, various reforms concerning the issuance of entry/work permits have been tackled and once adopted by Cabinet, will inform further amendments to the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration law on the protection of economic rights and the livelihood of natives and citizens of Uganda. 

Amendments have also been proposed to the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Act, which are aimed at streamlining the issuance of entry and work permits and setting stringent penalties for immigration offenders.

While these developments are welcome and are a step in the right direction, a more robust and well-funded and equipped post-entry monitoring unit will be crucial in enforcing these policies and regulations.

The role of Uganda Investment Authority

Uganda Investment Authority (UIA) is the statutory agency mandated to initiate and support measures that enhance investment in Uganda and advise Government on appropriate policies conducive for investment promotion and growth. An examination of the functions of UIA leaves no doubt that UIA has a crucial role to play in regulating the economic activity of foreign investors. 

However, the committee's interface with UIA revealed that in their facilitation of foreign investments, protection of the economic space of citizens is not an intricate consideration. This is largely because of the provisions of the Investment Code Act. Section 10 (2) provides a limitation to the kind of industry that a foreign investor can participate in. It states that “No foreign investor shall carry on the business of crop production, animal production or acquire to be granted or lease land for the purpose of crop production or animal production. But a foreign investor may- 

    a) provide material or other assistance to Ugandan farmers in crop production or animal production; or
    b) lease land for purposes of manufacturing or carrying out activities set out in the second and third schedules of this Act.

This limitation does not preclude foreign investors from engaging in retail trade. If this is read side by side with section 13 (1), which besides subjecting itself to section (10 (2) provides that an investor may engage in any type of business enterprise.

Section 10(5) states that the foreign investor who is intending to engage in trade only shall not be required to comply with subsection (1) but shall incorporate a company with the Registrar-General, as is required by law; and deposit a sum of one hundred thousand United States dollars or its equivalent in Uganda Shillings, at the Bank of Uganda, which shall be specifically used for importation or direct purchase of goods for the business.

While the spirit of eliciting a US$100,000 deposit from a prospective foreign investor is good, albeit low, the latitude granted for the investor to use the same deposit to import or directly purchase for the business renders this money short of being a deposit. This is because it can be withdrawn or even used for other things, by unscrupulous investors.

In fact the Executive Director of UIA could not provide assurances to the committee on whether or not UIA monitors the status of the $100,000 deposit in Bank of Uganda, by prospective investors.

The committee recommends that the Minister of Trade immediately considers amending the Investment Code Act. It should be amended to inter alia double the said deposit, from $100,000 to $200,000, to strengthen commitment by prospective foreign investors to the objectives of their businesses and to reform the conditions governing its use by the investor.

Loopholes in the trade licensing process
Madam Speaker, the committee notes that, while the process of licensing businesses is largely decentralised with local authorities taking charge, there are inherent loopholes which if plugged, would grossly streamline the engagement of aliens in petty trade.

Section 5 of the Trade Licensing Act, 1969, spells out the geographical boundaries where aliens can/cannot conduct commercia1 activity and that the line of commodities they trade in should be that for which they are licensed. The inherent loophole to that is that it does not peg licensing to set clearances from the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control, and the Uganda Investment Authority. Since Licensing is at the tail end of the chain, it should be conditioned to clearances from DCIC and UIA. And local licensing authorities should be empowered and resourced to ensure compliance.

The committee recommends that the Executive should initiate the process of amending the Trade Licensing Act, 1969 to peg licensing to compliance by prospective licensees to specific provisions of the Uganda Citizenship and migration Act, dealing with, amongst other terms and conditions of the specific categories of entry/work permits, the industrial parameters for engagement by aliens and security deposits.

Remuneration of locals by especially foreign investors

Ugandans who work with some of these foreign investors are dismally paid thereby depriving the country of any hitherto envisaged multiplier effect of such investments on household and individual incomes. In some cases, where Ugandans are employed, their terms and conditions of service are unclear with the absence of formal employee contracts. There is need for Government to quicken the process enacting the minimum wage legislation.

The committee implores the Sectoral Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to expedite consideration of the Minimum Wage Bill of 2015, so as to forestall the deplorable conditions of the income of workers from their employers.

Local content shareholding

The committee notes that the bulk of foreign investments in the country lack a 1oca1 shareholding component, especially due to the absence of an enabling lega1 and policy regime. The net effect of this has been exclusive foreign ownership, less local content, high incidences of repatriation of profits and a limited multiplier effect of foreign direct investments.

The committee recommends that the Investment Code Act and other related laws be amended to provide for mandatory local content, shareholding of at least 10 per cent of foreign investments in Uganda.

Rent restriction

In a bid to streamline the engagement of aliens in business, the committee notes that pegging restrictions to renting of premises by aliens would be a strategic initiative. Cognizant of the existence of the Rent Restriction Act, 1949, which seeks to consolidate the law relating to the control of rents of dwelling houses and business premises, the committee notes that, an amendment to this 1aw by pegging renting to proof of stay, would go a long way in regulating the activities of aliens. 

The committee therefore recommends that the minister, in charge of trade, considers amending the Rent Restriction Act, 1949 to peg renting of premises by aliens to proof of legal stay in the country.

Conclusion

The committee notes that the antidote to the influx of aliens and their continued engagement in petty trade rests in streamlining the delivery of immigration services including resourcing and bolstering the capacity of the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control, increasing synergies and interoperability between and among the various stakeholders, involved in issuance of work permits, licensing of businesses and security surveillance. 

There is a1so need for legal and policy reforms namely the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Act, the Trade Licensing Act and the Investment Code Act. The Executive should a1so strengthen the local council system, especially local councils I and II, in the post-entry monitoring of aliens in the vicinity of their local communities.

Madam Speaker, that is the report of the committee and I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson of the Committee of Equal Opportunities. We shall have a few minutes of debate, but just before I hand over to the Members, I would like to touch some four areas:

    i) There is an annoying habit in this country of saying that it is a good place for investment, because of cheap labour. That condemns our people to slavery – people pay you anything because the Government has said that there is cheap labour. I really get annoyed when I hear that. It is not good for the Ugandans. I think we need to set a minimum wage so that our people can live meaningful lives.

    ii) A second one has to do with the role of the Local Government in investments. Recently, we were sitting as MPs from Busoga, reviewing mineral exploration in our region. I think you saw the newspapers. All the licenses in Busoga belong to some person. 

	Now, we were told that even the chairman of the sub-county, just woke up to big trucks guarded, moving into the area in and out, but the chairman was not allowed to reach there. So, what is the role of Local Government, in relation to these investments?

    iii) The third one, is to do with what we call an investor; $100,000 really. I think that is a trader. I am saying this because in the United Arab Emirates, if you invest up to $1million, you are entitled to a resident permit. It is automatic. If you do more, they can allow you to become a citizen.

I also saw that in Cyprus. If you raise $ 1 million, you can be a resident. In that very rich country of Canada, if you raise $ 1 million or invest in that country in any other way, you can become a citizen or a resident. Therefore, how do we fit in that with our $100,000? I think we need to improve the incentives so that they are more meaningful. 

Then the labour ratio; I do not know how many times I have spoken on this Floor. In Egypt, if you are an investor, for every Ugandan you take there, you must create jobs for nine Egyptians. In Malaysia, for every Ugandan you take, you must create 11 jobs for the Malaysians. That is the law and that is how they are taking care of their people. However, here, it is for whom it may concern. 

4.36
COL FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to contribute to this nutritious report. I would like to also thank the committee. Allow me to say that this report has really touched the nervous system of our economic policies. 

First and foremost, I recall vividly that the President directed the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives not to allow any foreigner to engage in retail businesses. I have had the opportunity to raise this matter on this Floor of Parliament but up to now, the ministers of Internal Affairs and Trade, Industry and Cooperatives have not done anything on this direction. We still see multitudes of foreigners; Chinese, Indians and Arabs, who are engaging in petty trade and retail business. 
Madam Speaker, there is a problem which you have talked about concerning liberalisation without regulation. Anybody here, as you said, has the “whom it may concern” attitude and it is really absurd. This freedom must be regulated, Madam Speaker. 

Let me quote what the President said at the State of the Nation Address. He said the economy of this country is being developed to create wealth and jobs for Ugandans as well as widening the tax base – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you have one minute to conclude. 

COL MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, last night, for example, when the President was addressing the business fraternity, he asked manufacturers to stand up. How many stood up? They were very few but you saw the whole crowd full of multitudes of Indians. Only few people stood up as manufacturers so what is that group doing in this country? They are hawkers – they engage in retail business which is absurd for our people. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
4.39
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first of all appreciate the committee for this report. However, I have the following observations: 

We, as a country, have conflicting policies. When you pursue an open door refugee policy, you must expect people to do petty trade because you are welcoming anyone. You have no framework to regulate the refugee populations in refugee camps. They settle anywhere they want. They buy land and you do not monitor them so it should not be a surprise that we are finding all sorts of immigrants doing petty trade. 

In a country where corruption has become the norm, it is difficult to restrict access to the labour market for immigrants. In fact, the other day, the Minister for Security was saying, in the interest of Pan Africanism, people are allowed to move freely in Uganda. Therefore, if that is the policy we are pursuing, we must be ready to reap the consequences.

Madam Speaker, when you look at that table in the report that shows the issuance of work permits, it talks about 10,000 people for the year 2015/2016. However, the numbers of just Indians alone – (Member timed out.)

4.41
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start from where my colleague stopped. When you look at class F for the professional work permits issued, it is the lowest in number. I think that is where we should start from as far as regulating entry into the country is concerned. 

Madam Speaker, I think we are also to blame. Look at the opportunities and privileges that are given to would be potential investors, as we refer to them. Take a look at the preferential treatment they get that our business people do not get here; tax incentives, land and all this. Therefore – (Interruption)

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you, my brother, for giving way. The information I would like to add to what you are saying is that recently, I was reading an article and following news on the internet. I read that in China, they passed a bylaw that if you travel there, you cannot sleep in a hotel that is third class and below, that includes Ugandan businessmen; yet for us here, what do we do to these people who come as investors? 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural point. This is a very important report. The minister concerned is not here. I also come from the border district and I seek your indulgence because last time we passed a loan here to support refugee committees and the President wrote back asking why the loan was passed.

Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence that this report should not be rushed. It is my prayer that members raise other issues. As the report has rightly put it, they are only talking of registered refugees dealing with permits and visas.

Madam Speaker, for us who come from the border, that 80 per cent of aliens are not in that category and yet they are the ones who have finished our forests, encroaching on lakeshores and depleted the lakes, they even have national identity cards.

Madam Speaker, we are even at risk of becoming an Ivory Coast where immigrants took over business and caused war for ten years. I would like the security and environmental angle of this to be brought out. The matter we are dealing with is bigger than what is stated. 

Madam Speaker, would it be procedurally right for you to prevail on both the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Prime Minister in charge of refuges. Our alien policy is not like other countries where all refugees are in camps. In Uganda, we have an alien policy where they are allowed to move and that is where the problem is- they are not only leasing land, but also have mailo land and are buying property.

I was in property business before I came here; people have lost land because it is being purchased by Sudanese, Somalis –(Interjections)- the problem is much bigger than we are stating. Can we get a serious perspective on the 80 per cent? The scope was limited to those with and without permits. There are so many who have - by the way, very soon, they will ask for Presidency and Parliament. I seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I also got engrossed in the issues but first, I have seen that many Members want to contribute but I think the ministers of Internal Affairs, Trade, Gender should be here. Maybe we could allow interfering with the State of the Nation Address and use Tuesday. Can we dedicate Tuesday to this because it is important? I think we shall delay the State of the Nation so that we can deal with this issue. It is important and we should try to make sure that many Members contribute.

Honourable members, let us defer this to Tuesday, and Prime Minister, those ministers must be here. It is important. The Minister for Disaster and Refugees should be here - maybe they are in the landslides. 

Honourable members, let us go to the next item, we defer this until Tuesday so that we have all the ministers and fully deal with this issue and all the prime ministers must be here.  

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES ON AN OVERSIGHT VISIT TO THE KARAMOJA SUB REGION TO APPRAISE THE STATE OF EDUCATION AND HEALTHCARE SERVICE DELIVERY AMONG THE MARGINALIZED COMMUNITIES OF IK, TEPETH AND POKOT CONDUCTED IN AUGUST 2016

4.48
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES (Ms Hellen Asamo): Madam Speaker, I would like to lay at the Table the minutes and report for this visit.

Madam Speaker, the Parliamentary Committee on Equal Opportunities, established by Rule 155 (g) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, is inter alia, mandated by Rule 180 of the same rules to monitor and promote measures designed to enhance the equalisation of opportunities and improvement in the quality of life and status of all peoples.

In recognition of the importance of basic social services of education and health in breaking barriers to equity and inclusivity in society, the Committee on Equal Opportunities undertook a fact-finding visit to Ik community in Kaabong District, the Tepeth of Moroto and the Pokot of Amudat District on 2l-27 August, 2016. 

Through this visit, the committee sought to appraise the state of education and healthcare services delivery in the localities visited with a view of advancing remedial propositions in pursuit of greater equity and inclusivity.

The attainment of equity and inclusivity in development is significantly dependent on the state of well-being, skills and competitiveness of the various categories of individuals and groups in society. While well-being is dependent on the quality of healthcare services available to the masses, skills and competitiveness is the aftermath of the equality and coverage of education.

While Uganda has witnessed impressive school enrolment rates especially in the last two decades with the universalisation of first, primary education and later secondary education, contemporary discourse indicates sharp contrasts between the glossy and rosy enrolment figures and the grim and dismal completion rates of both boys and girls. 

A 2015 report by Uwezo entitled “Are our children learning?” Five stories, on the state of education in Uganda in 2015 and beyond inter alia revealed that while the national average of school enrolment indicates that only four per cent of children have never been enrolled in school, sharp inequalities exist and indeed in the Karamoja districts of Kotido, Nakapiripirit and Moroto, 61 per cent, 35 per cent and 27 per cent respectively, of children have never been enrolled in school.

Additionally, significant inequalities exist in access to education and learning outcomes with Eastern Uganda, where the Karamoja sub-region lies, having the highest pupil to teacher ratios averaging 62 pupils per teacher as compared to 41 pupils per teacher in central and western Uganda. This does not get any better with a pupil classroom ratio of 104 pupils per classroom in eastern Uganda compared to 64 per classroom in western Uganda.

In relation to learning outcomes, only 21 per cent of pupils in primary 3- 7 in eastern Uganda can read a primary two story and do primary two level exams.

In health, the Karamoja sub region after years of insecurity occasioned by cattle rustling and inter-clan conflicts and long-standing marginalisation has left women and children as the biggest bearers of disease burden and yet the coverage of healthcare services is significantly limited especially. 

Generally, a cocktail of inadequate healthcare services, poor water and sanitation facilities, drought and violence have predisposed a significant segment of the population in the sub region to high morbidity and mortality rates. 

Maternal and crude mortality rates in the Karamoja sub region stand at 750/100,000 live births and 39/100,000 per day respectively. The Karamoja sub region has also witnessed a spike in the HIV prevalence rates within the last decade from 3.5 per cent to 5.3 per cent.

While the Government amongst other interventions sought to bolster representation and inclusivity of some of the marginalized communities in the sub region namely the Ik, Tepeth and Pokot through the designation of regional ministerial positions and creation of constituencies, a lot remains to be done if the plight of the citizens in those areas is to be improved.

Against this background, the Committee on Equal Opportunities deliberately sampled some of ethnic groups that are considered marginalised hence the Ik, Tepeth and the Pokot then set out to ascertain the realities on the ground in relation to healthcare and education services delivery.

The objectives of the oversight visit were as follows:

    i) To ascertain the conditions of life of the populace therein. 
    ii)  To observe the state of socio-economic amenities such as education facilities, health facilities, markets and roads.
    iii)  To interface with the local authorities and elicit  their views on the plight of the masses.
    iv) To propose measures for the improvement of the conditions of life of the people in the sub region.
I will not look at the methodology but will go to the findings.

Madam Speaker, we begin with the Ik. 

The Ik people are an ethnic group numbering to about 10,000 people living in mountainous part of Uganda's north eastern border with Kenya in present day Kaabong District. The Ik as a community, are sandwiched between the more populous Karimojong and Turkana peoples. 

Historically, the Ik were displaced from their land to create the Kidepo Valley National Park and consequently, suffered the ravages of alienation from their heritage and livelihoods rendering them relatively weaker than their neighbours. As such, the Ik bore the brunt of raids and harassment from their more powerful neighbours. In terms of livelihoods, the Ik are subsistence farmers who grow and grind their own grain and gather honey and other natural foods from their surroundings. 

In 2015, the Ik were accorded a constituency leading to the election of the first ever Member of Parliament from that constituency. 

The committee observed that generally, the geographical area inhabited by the Ik Kamion Sub county, is a hard to reach area. Not only is it remote from Kaabong town but the seasonal road leading to Kamion is in such a deplorable state. This remoteness not only inhibits people’s movements but also comes with immense challenges with regard to service delivery with hospitals and schools not only distant from sections of the population but retaining staff in some of these hard to reach areas, is a tall order.

The Tepeth

The Tepeth are an ethnic group that is predominantly found on the sloped of Mt Moroto in Moroto District. According to available statistics, there are at least 40,000 Tepeth in Moroto District; many of them women and children. The committee observed that many of these reside in the conical mud and wattle huts in the semiarid and swampy land and scrubby forests spread across the slopes of Mt Moroto. Visibly, some of the settlements are located significantly far away from the basic social amenities such as schools and hospitals.

From the interactions with the local communities at Tapac Sub county headquarters, there is an acute gap in the provision of services of education, healthcare, clean water, electricity and security amongst others. Children and women, for instance, have to trek about 20 miles to Moroto town to access education and health facilities.

In addition, the Tepeth have for ages bore the brunt of insecurity occasioned by hostile neighbours; the Turkana and Matheniko.

Like the Ik, the Tepeth were accorded a constituency status in 2015 in a bid to bolster representative democracy and its attendant benefits.

The Pokot

The Pokot are predominantly found in Amudat District and share a common culture and customs with the Pokot and Kalenjin of Kenya. In 2013, the population of Amudat District was estimated at about 143,300. Like the Ik and the Tepeth, the Pokot too have had conflicts with the Turkana precipitating insecurity. In addition, the Pokot too suffer the same deficits in social services delivery and infrastructural challenges as the Ik and the Tepeth. The road linking Amudat to Moroto and Sironko is terribly rugged due to the heavy and frequent passage of trucks ferrying stones from the Karamoja sub region to Tororo Cement Factory. Like the Tepeth, some sections within the Pokot too practice Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) in spite of the fact that FGM was outlawed.

Madam Speaker, for the road, we stayed on the road until 1.00 a.m. as a committee where we could not get a shop to buy anything. By the time, we found ourselves getting out of that muddy road, it was really terrible and I do not know whether it is now being worked on.

Effect of the state of situation of Ik, Tepeth and Pokot

The net effect of this state of affairs is deplorable conditions of living characterised by the following: 

Deplorable socio-economic conditions: By way of observation, the committee noted very low levels of agricultural production in the areas visited. While there is land available, the terrain certainly requires some considerable investment if minimum tillage is to be attained yet the prevalent poverty poses a huge impediment to any such investment. The neighbouring pastoral communities whose cattle may indeed pose a threat to the crops of the Ik have occupied part of the arable land. 

The committee also ascertained that the Karamoja sub region has for the past three successive seasons suffered drought that has led to massive crop failures thereby posting a looming threat of famine.

There is need for targeted agricultural interventions in the Ik County in aspects such as tillage, sensitisation and dissemination of appropriate efficient technologies and post-harvest handling. This can be done concertedly with the non-governmental organisations that are actively engaged in livelihoods interventions in the sub-region given their cutting edge in rural development programming and their grassroots presence.

The need for greater equity and inclusivity: It is noteworthy that global capitalism with its attendant reliance on competition and the market in the allocation of goods, services and opportunities; has exacerbated inequality and equity so much so that the world is grappling with the need for greater equity and inclusivity.

Uganda has not been spared by this capitalistic onslaught and with it already disadvantaged communities like the Ik, Tepeth and the Pokot have grossly bore the brunt. The committee observed that considerably low numbers of the Ik, Tepeth and Pokot possess requisite competitive skills and capabilities to partake of available opportunities. This has significantly hampered the alleviation of bottlenecks to equity in pursuit of opportunities for socio-economic advancement. In most of the education and health facilities visited, Members of the indigenous communities hardly featured among the technical staff. This is an indicator of the need to deliberately invest in skills enhancement.

The committee recommends that Government cascade existing interventions in the realm of skills enhancement to the counties of the Ik, Tepeth and Pokot, like other marginalised communities. This will grossly aid the elimination of barriers to equity and inclusivity in the national development and further a greater sense of nationhood among the citizenry.

Investment in transport infrastructure

The committee noted that all the three communities visited are settled in a challenging physical environment characterised by hilly terrain, marshy soils and rocky landscape. The net effect has been the difficulty in transport and accessibility. The road leading up to Kamion from Kaabong town is particularly rugged throughout the winding hills and valleys. This is not any different from the road from Moroto town to Tepeth County on the slopes of Mt Moroto. On several occasions, the parliamentary bus almost had its behind bumper scrapped off by the rocky rigged surface. From Moroto to Amudat then to Sironko, the committee spent over six hours on a journey which would have ordinarily taken two hours due to the muddy road affected by heavy rains and trucks ferrying limestone from Karamoja to Tororo. Such a deplorable state of roads severely hampers transport, communication and impedes production. The Committee particularly observed that children found it difficult to access schools while medical referrals from lower level health centres were a tall order given the state of roads in the areas visited.

The committee recommends that Government devote resources to the improvement of roads in the said areas. This is a precondition for the movement of people, goods and services and meaningful engagement in production.

The need for more health and education facilities 

The committee noted that generally the populations in Ik, Pokot and Tepeth trekked particularly long distances to health, water and education facilities given the sparse locations of these vital amenities. The committee particularly noted that some children in Ik County trekked 49 kilometres to attend secondary school in Kaabong town. In Tepeth County, some communities moreover from hard to reach mountainous indications have to trek for tens of miles to access Tapac Health Centre. 

It does not any better with sparsely located bore holes and other water facilities, which require that women and children especially, whose primary role it is to fetch water, have to spend hours trekking to look for water. It is therefore imperative upon government to improve access to such basic services by establishing more facilities especially in the affected localities that are further off from the existing service points.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Education and Sports explore the possibility of increasing the number and improving the locations of health, water and education facilities respectively so as to boost access and utilisation of basic social services by the communities in the Ik, Tepeth and Pokot.

Security challenges

The committee notes that after about 15 years of disarmament on the Karamoja sub region, while the local communities in Karamoja have been relieved of arms and the incidences of intra-country cattle rustling and insecurity significantly reduced, cross border security remains a challenge especially to the Ik. The porous borders with Kenya and South Sudan has made it easy for the hostile cross-border tribes such as the Turkana to infiltrate the Ik and dispossess them of their property including animals, rape women and terrorize local communities. 

Given that peace is a vital precondition to meaningful socio-economic activity, the affected communities have had their livelihoods grossly disrupted by the insecurity. Besides the trauma occasioned on the affected members of society is something that will live with them for ages and adversely affect their psycho-social wellbeing 

The committee recommends that Government continues to engage with the governments of Kenya and South Sudan in a bid to disarm some of these cross border tribes meting insecurity in parts of Uganda.

In addition, there is need to increasingly invest in border surveillance so as to stem unregulated cross-border movement and guarantee national security.

The threat to ethnic identity 

The committee notes that the increased people movement across the world and its attendant effect in erosion of identity has not spared the local communities of Ik, Tepeth and Pokot. Perhaps the most affected are the Ik who after decades if not centuries of subjugation by neighbouring communities of the Dodoth and Turkana, now face the daunting challenge of assimilation by their neighbours. This assimilation is due to the desperate attempt by those who face marginalisation to escape this marginalisation by migrating to other neighbouring communities and thereby embracing a different way of life, dialect and identity so as to adapt. The net effect of this cultural assimilation is the loss of identity and possible extinction. It is noteworthy that the right to cultural identity is enshrined in Article 37 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, and through it, the country can harness the beauty and strength of diversity.

While interventions like the creation of specific constituencies for the Ik and Tepeth is designed to ameliorate this feeling of marginalisation by the affected communities, there is need to follow this through with various development interventions to improve the state of infrastructure such as roads and market and social amenities such as schools and hospitals. This will grossly alleviate the push factors that lead to people migration and ultimate erosion and loss of identity.

Specific observations at Kamion Health Centre II, Ik County, Kaabong District

This health centre II receives a monthly average of 400 out-patients and in the financial year 2015/2016, it registered 5,000 patients. 

Structurally, the health facility needs renovation. The health facility is without electricity and this renders provision of healthcare services at night a near impossibility unless the health workers do crude improvisation possibly with mobile phone torches as is the case in the labour ward. The labour ward has just the one delivery bed implying that concurrent labour and delivery by more than one mother would deprive one mother of befitting services.

Staffing

Whereas this health centre II is supposed to have nine staff, there are currently only four staff members (one enrolled nurse, one midwife, one nursing assistant and one porter). 

Coupled with the difficulty in accessing the health centre given its location in the mountains, transport challenges and low remuneration, staff retention is a big challenge. The committee was informed of staff that had opted to quit service because of the aforementioned difficulties. 

The transportation challenge has also impeded support supervision of the health facility by district authorities as well as community sensitisation by the resilient health workers present at the facility. The latter has adversely affected interventions such as immunisation.

Specific observations at Kamion Primary School

Staffing 

Whereas the school has a staff establishment of 18 teachers, there are only nine in post. This adversely affects the quality of teaching and learning outcomes.

Inadequate water and sanitation facilities 

The committee observed that all workers, teachers, pupils and visitors share the same latrine at the school. The only water source is a bore-hole located at the health centre about 500 metres away which is shared with the local communities. The cumulative effect is deplorable sanitation facilities and loss of time in trekking for water and queuing at latrines. This has a ripple effect of precipitating high school dropout rates.

High school dropout rates 

The committee notes high dropout rates for both boys and girls at Kamion Primary School though girls are more affected. The average dropout rates in the last three years average 90 per cent for girls and about 78 per cent for boys. The trend indicates that the escalation of dropouts is in upper primary at the time children are ascending into adolescence. The high dropout rates for girls are mainly attributed to early marriages while the boys end up in pursuit of livelihoods.

Inadequate accommodation facilities for the teaching staff have led to overcrowding in the few available teachers' houses. The discomfort occasioned by overcrowding poses a threat to the retention and motivation of teachers.

Communication and transportation challenges

As earlier enumerated, Kamion is generally a hard to reach area characterised by a rugged access road winding through the hilly terrain of Kaabong District. This jeopardizes support supervision and the movement of requisite goods and services.

Delay in the payment of teachers' salaries

The committee notes that whereas the payment of salaries has been decentralised to the local governments, teachers in Kamion Primary School had not received their salaries for three months. This adversely affects teacher motivation and negatively impacts on teaching.

Inadequate accommodation for the pupils in the boarding section

The committee notes that in a bid to boost pupil retention, the school established a boarding section. However the school suffers an acute shortage of space for boarding facilities. Overcrowding persists. There is certainly need for more resources for capital investment for learning and boarding facilities.

Inadequate furniture/desks for the pupils 

There is need to procure more furniture to improve the learning conditions.

The absence of examinations centre 
The committee notes that the whole of Kamion Sub County does not have a school with an examination centre for the Uganda National Examinations Board. This implies that for exams, pupils have to trek about 50 kilometres to Kaabong town to sit exams in a school with an examination centre. This inconvenience is occasioned by the absence of an examination centre that impedes the chances of success for the affected pupils. The committee recommends that an examination centre be accorded to Kamion Primary School.

Feeding of pupils and teachers 

The committee notes that feeding in schools remains a daunting challenge. While the committee was informed that, previously some non-state actors had conditioned the school to the supply of food items, lately there had been some delays in supplying food to the schools by organisations. This had resulted in a lot of anxiety, especially given the wider looming threat of famine in the region. Without a harmonised approach to the feeding of pupils, especially in rural public schools, the effect of hunger in both teachers and pupils will grossly jeopardise teaching and learning.

Emerging issues at a meeting with the sub county chief and other officials and councillors at Tapac sub county, Tepeth County, Moroto district
During a meeting with local leaders, opinion leaders and locals at Tapac sub county headquarters, the following issues emerged:

    i. Deplorable state of road infrastructure which has been worsened by heavy trucks transporting limestone from Karamoja to Tororo. 
    ii. Unavailability of a secondary school to the Tepeth community, contrary to the policy requirement of a secondary school for every sub county. Locals have to trek long distances in pursuit of secondary school education. 
    iii. Low retention rates in schools, with the girl child most affected due to negative cultural practices of early marriages and FGM amongst others. 
    iv. Inadequate information dissemination by officials at Tapac sub county concerning royalties accruing from the extraction of limestone from the area. 
v) 	Inadequate water sources leading to the traversing of long distances by both people and animals to access water.

Emerging issues at the meeting between the committee and the LC III and other officials at Loro sub county Amudat District 

    i) Insecurity occasioned by incursions into Amudat by the Turkana and other hostile tribes in the neighbourhood and the porous borders with Kenya.
    ii) High level of consumption of alcohol by the locals, grossly hampering meaningful engagement in production and precipitating social disorder. Madam Speaker, this was about the sachet waragi. During the meetings we had, people were just drinking sachet waragi freely as we were seated. It was a terrible state of the community.
    iii) The outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease has led to significant loss of livestock and undermined the livelihood of the masses.
    iv) Inadequate staffing at the health centres in Loro Sub County, coupled with the high population within the catchment area of the two health centres in Loro Sub County. According to the LC III chairman, Loro Sub County alone has a population of 36,000 people.
    v) The lack of a secondary school at the sub county and this causes the locals to trek long distances in pursuit of secondary school education and in many cases affecting continuity in the pursuit of education. 
    vi) Acute gaps in maternal healthcare services delivery with a dilapidated maternity ward at one of the health facilities. Inadequate staffing at the health facility as well as inadequate delivery beds further compounds this challenge. 
    vii) Inadequate water and sanitation facilities – both animals and people compete for the limited boreholes.
    viii) The inequitable and skewed criteria for allocation of animals under the Operation Wealth Creation with considerations such as political affiliation and kinship among others.
    ix) Low retention rates in schools, with the girl child worst affected. This is largely attributed to early marriages among other bad cultural practices.

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends the following:

Education

There is need for the Executive to conduct a rural appraisal of the mentioned communities with a view of ensuring that at least every sub county has a secondary school. In addition, there is need to audit the staffing levels of all the public schools in Ik, Tepeth and Amudat to establish the gaps and urgently ensure they are plugged. This should be coupled with more investment in classrooms, hygiene and sanitation facilities and devising a more workable solution to feeding in schools on top of more frequent and effective support supervision by both the local governments and the Central Government. 

The committee specifically recommends that Government explores the viability of availing relevant textbooks to public schools in some of these marginalised communities. The ultimate goal of such interventions should be to, not only increase enrolment, but also retention and improve learning outcomes at all levels of the education value chain.

Security

The state security agents at all levels should strengthen coordination and inter-operability so as to improve the security situation in the areas. This should be coupled with grassroots reconciliation initiatives between the Turkana and minority groups of the Ik, Tepeth and the Pokot.

Road infrastructure

The Uganda National Roads Authority should evaluate the state of all the major roads in the Karamoja sub-region and establish a redevelopment strategy so as to improve accessibility and livelihoods.

Livelihoods

There is need for greater sensitisation and mind-set reconfiguration among the local communities in the Karamoja sub-region with regard to meaningful economic activity, improved farming techniques and market synergies, including cross-border trade. This sensitisation should also include awareness about available Government livelihoods programmes such as Operation Wealth Creation.

Transparency in extractive industries

Given the significant mineral endowments in the Karamoja sub-region, it is imperative that Government ensures a multiplier effect of ongoing exploration and extraction activities on the lives of the host communities. While limestone is being extracted from the region and transported to Tororo for processing into cement, local communities should have a share of any employment opportunities and revenues accruing from such minerals extraction.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the trajectory of governance in Uganda should be recalibrated to ensure greater equity and inclusivity in all spheres of the management of public affairs through the inter alia improving access to quality basic social services, improving livelihoods, ensuring equity and inclusivity in appointments to public offices and peaceful co-existence. 

The Karamoja region that has historically lagged behind in many aspects of socio-economic progress requires greater deliberate effort to actually cause a qualitative improvement in household socio-economic conditions as a strategy to enhance the feeling of nationhood among the populace in that part of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Equal Opportunities for the report. Members will appreciate that it is very detailed but it is not detailed enough to cover all the vulnerable and marginalised ethnic groups in Uganda. Indeed, it mentions the Ik, Tepeth and Pokot but there is an omission of the Batwa and this is also clearly known to be an ethnic minority in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, in your earlier ruling over a procedural matter, which was raised by hon. Mukitale, you observed that for a meaningful and exhaustive debate on this very important report, the line ministers of: gender, labour and social development; education and sports, health, works and transport ought to be present so that they would capture the salient issues that would emanate out of the debate and make a very good response. 

Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for this same report to be debated when those ministers are present like you had earlier wisely ruled?

5.24
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the earlier ruling and I agree that we could - I will inform the ministers to come on Tuesday.

However, in order for us not to bog down the business of the House, I would advise that we continue with the reports. Meanwhile, as we ask the ministers to come on Tuesday, I would like to urge members to prepare ask them questions because I am going to convey the conclusions; I will request them to come and respond to all issues that have been raised. Otherwise, if questions are asked when the ministers are not present, probably, they would not know what to say. 

I will inform the ministers to come and give comments on the report – (Interjection) – that is an unfair question; even you do not know where the ministers are. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a subject which we have been engaging on. When we were at the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) conference earlier in the year, we discussed the issue of the ethnic minorities and I have been asking how we are going to plan for them.

Recently, I asked how many Batwa people we have, how many are in school and what support we have given them? However, in this report, which is very good, there is another small tribe in Nakapiripirit, which I visited in March. They are different from the others but they have not been captured here, although all the principles would apply to them. 

Anyhow, it is important for the ministers to be present because the issue of the lack of examination centres is a serious issue. How can children walk 50 miles? Do they walk in the morning? Do they go there to sleep in a Muzigo during exams? What about the latrines? Imagine children following a teacher into the toilet and the boys and girls following each other. Where is the privacy and sanitation for the girls?

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to give the name of the community you visited some few months ago, in Nakapiripirit; it is called the Kadama. It is one of those communities still practicing Female Genital Mutilation (FGM). They have schools only at the slope of the mountain; there are no schools uphill.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I think this is the first time –

MS AKELLO ROSE LILLY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is also another community in Kaabong District. We have the Ik, Nyangia and the Napore people, which the committee has not considered, let alone visiting them. 

We also have another community neighbouring Kaabong but are in Kitgum District, called Okuri, who are also marginalised like the Ik and the Kadama. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: This is a very serious wake-up call. It is the area of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). We must ensure that we plan for all the communities. I do not know whether we could get some statistics on them - it would delay the report of the committee. Anyhow, we should do a proper job for all those marginalised communities.

MS ASAMO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank members but I would like to say that by the time we visited those areas, this is what was given to the committee; it was only about the Tipeth.

However, I would like to say that the committee has already started doing some work on the Batwa people. In the last session, we went to Batwa. However, when we went to Kabale and Kisoro, we were told that there are other Batwa in Bundibugyo. What we have to do is to go to Bundibugyo. 

We were also told that in Bundibugyo, the Batwa have a king. The committee already has a mini report on the communities visited though we are also planning to go to Bundibugyo and visit the king of the Batwa to understand their level of primitivity.

Otherwise, when we went to Kabale and Kisoro, we discovered that these people - even those who are educated, the local governments said they could not employ them. Amongst the Batwa people, the highest educated person is a diploma holder and so it is only the Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) that are dealing with them.

Madam Speaker, the other challenge with the Batwa people is that while they were moved from the forest, they were not settled. The details will come in the report; we are already working on it. I would like to thank hon. Rose Lilly Akello for mentioning a new group; she should provide the committee with further information regarding where they are based; the committee will start from there. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, certainly we need the sector ministers here. I wanted to give the other subject time but this is very important. Can we divide Tuesday afternoon to discuss these two reports, so that we deal with them together because they are really important? We need to set the parameters for dealing with minorities in this country?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, last time, the Government Chief Whip – when we raised the issue of fall in prices of food, especially maize - she said they would discuss it in Cabinet on Monday and that they would report on Tuesday. I recall you set that date so that we would have time to discuss that matter. I feel we may be clogging the day.

On the issues raised by the chairperson in her report, I notice that some of those problems cut across into those areas that the committee did not consider to be marginalised. We do not have schools. For example, I have only one government-aided secondary school in my constituency. There is a lot of alcoholism. I do not know how you determine minority. Is it by numbers? How do you determine the level of marginalisation? I am only seeking for your guidance, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I appreciate that not all of us afford the services but we are talking about a special group of people who are really marginalised by distance, language, among others. When I went to Kadama, the nearest hospital is in Amudat, which is 100 miles away. I actually went up to the foot of that mountain and noticed there was no a single health facility.

Therefore, while we appreciate what you have raised – I know in Mayuge, in Busoga, there are no secondary schools but it is important that we discuss the situation of these ethnic minorities and instruct the Government how to support them.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate the ministers are not here. However, I would like to inform the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that when they come to answer some of these questions – when we talked about the disaster in Karamoja sometime back, I remember the minister came out and recorded that there are very many dams, which had been decanted and that water shortage was no longer an issue; we want an update. The ministers must tell us the progress because we put money in that sector and it did not come out clearly here.

Madam Speaker, when we were also discussing the problem of Hepatitis B in northern Uganda, we found out that whereas northern Uganda was registering about 15-18 per cent, Karamoja was registering only between 27-30 per cent; I recall that very well. 

Now from the Report of the Committee on Equal Opportunities, we have been told of the absence of health centres. So, how have they been dealing with Hepatitis B? This thing cuts across all sectors. We need to know because when these things come, they just gloss over them. They say, the Government is taking action. Well, the Government is taking action on Hepatitis B but the committee is telling us that there are even no health centres. If that is situation, how do they intervene?

Madam Speaker, we need to implore the Prime Minister to urge the ministers to really be a bit serious when they are answering some of these questions. The population is looking at us and hoping that we care, which we indeed do but we do not have the information. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am committed to have a full debate on the issue of the minority tribes and groups. I have committed to have a debate on the issue of the invasion of immigrants in our business areas but also of course the issue of the plight. So, we shall find time for all of them.

However, Prime Minister, people should not just decide when to come to Parliament. Sometimes they come. Sometimes they do not come. Now, the principle people in charge of the areas we touched are not even here yet this Order Paper was out since last week. This thing has been on the Order Paper for two weeks.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are not discussing the report but we get bothered when we sit here to debate and pass resolutions but they are not acted upon. For example, we had a full debate on the packaging of spirits in these Kaveeras. We recommended that the Government should put a limit on the milligrams of the packaging of spirits; I remember that we recommended 250 milligrams.

Madam Speaker, our communities are going to waste. Our young people are going to waste because of these spirits packaged in Buveera that cost a mere Shs 500. We need to do something as a nation. I do not know why the Government does not act or why the ministers do not act on the recommendations that are made by this Parliament, knowing that everything that we do is for the good of our people.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I know we have pushed this very important debate to Tuesday. However, I want to provide some information. I happened to visit Kaabong District in April because I have a foster son in Kaabong; I went for his ordination. However, what I saw and which broke my heart - and as the ministers come on Tuesday, they must really come with something tangible – was the fact women were struggling to dig the ground for water; you know like digging to get just water to drink. It was so painful and unfortunately, there was really nothing I personally could do. I really hope that on Tuesday, when we come here, as a country and a nation, we need to come up with something really tangible. This is the information I want to give. Thank you.

MR KATURAMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The findings that the committee has revealed to this Parliament are alarming. When one looks at the disparity in some areas in Karamoja - I would like to request the Prime Minister, through you, Madam Speaker, to ensure the line ministers give their reports alongside the performance of Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) in Karamoja sub-region.

This is important because I understand that there is a big number of NGOs, which are offering services in Karamoja sub-region and so this Parliament would be interested to know to what extent they are delivering their services in the different parts of Karamoja. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. All the issues that have been raised are very important. Unfortunately, they have come at a time when we have just concluded the budget yet they would all have translated into budget actions. So, I would like to request you, Madam Speaker, that when the ministers come to give us responses, let them indicate what they are going to do for those areas in terms of budget lines in the next financial year.

That is very important because when they do not commit themselves to that level, we will still keep them going on and on, like it has been all the time. Therefore, we really need to give them targets and time so that we capture these issues when we are doing our budget.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know as she was speaking - we bring here supplementaries for all kinds of things. How can women be digging the ground with a hoe to look for water? Can’t we get a supplementary for those issues?

5.40
MR ALBERT LOKORU (NRM, Tepeth County, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am the Member of Parliament for the Tepeth, which is one of the minority groups highlighted in the report. Actually, the findings of the report are the realities on the ground. I concur with the recommendation that when we are debating the report, the relevant ministers should be present because the situation is really appalling, as per the report.

However, among other things, there are issues of coding of primary schools in this particular community. Many of the community schools have not been coded. There is lack of relevant textbooks for reading. The ones being used are outdated. That is why the relevant ministers should be present when we are debating this matter.

There is a lot of exploitation by investors. These communities are endowed with a lot of minerals. Limestone, for example, is extracted and transported from my constituency. However, if you go and look at the state of the local people - for the last 15 years the investors have been there but there is no change totally. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is not doing anything to help the people. We have tried to write letters to this ministry but sometimes, there is no response.

There is the issue of health, hygiene and sanitation. Imagine one latrine in a primary school. Sincerely speaking, the relevant ministries should really wake up and do something for our community. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, honourable members, as I was looking through the report, I was thinking about the damage to those roads. What is the corporate social responsibility of these companies? It is a free ride, really. They just break our roads and go; then return tomorrow, break and go.

MS KOMUHANGI: On the minerals, they are supposed to give royalty of three per cent to the community as the surface right because while the investor takes the underground right, the surface right is supposed to be three percent. However, none of those investors really give back to the community. The ministry should sanction the investors to ensure they actualise the three percent.

THE SPEAKER: That is why they must be here to commit on the Floor of this House.
5.43
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke County South, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have ever been to Karamoja. It always perturbs me; Karamoja is one of the areas that have been endowed with greater minerals and Government gets a lot of money from those minerals. Karamoja has a special ministry. There is a ministry in charge of Karamoja affairs. 

There is a full minister and a minister of state. When these ministers go to Karamoja, in fact, they do not want to go to the ground. They only stay in air-conditioned hotels. Even when one talks about women digging the ground to get water, they look at it as if it is not a reality. 

So, Madam Speaker, the people of Karamoja support this Government 100 per cent. In Parliament, they vote NRM only. At the LC level, they vote NRM only and even in the last concluded LC 1 elections, they voted NRM again. So, is the problem with the Karimojong or with us? I think the problem is with the Karimojong themselves not with the government. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

5.45
MS BEATRIECE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I thank the committee because it has done a thorough job. 

My concern, however, is that as the ministers come to respond to issues raised by the House, we need them to come with critical information. The report has not gone into the details. If they tell you women have to dig the ground to get water, which is not even clean, what about the people with disabilities? Imagine the children have to travel quite a long distance and mind you, we are already putting up a university in Karamoja. Where are we going to get students to study in that university? We would like these details. 

My plea also -

THE SPEAKER: They will come from Kampala. (Laughter) 

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, it would be like a white elephant. We have Gulu University but when one goes on Government sponsorship list, they would not find students from Gulu or around there occupying the university. 

Madam Speaker, my plea also is that at one moment in time - you know when we talk about a region and especially our brothers and sisters from Karamoja - we need that huge support on this. You know hon. Luttamaguzi was trying to allude to something I do not agree with. The problem is not the Karimojong because they have sent leaders just like we also represent people from different regions and when it comes to national issues, we should all talk with one voice; we should all be concerned about what happens there. Therefore -

THE SPEAKER: One minute, please. I would like to introduce a group from Namutumba; the Uganda Strategic Education and Express Organisation. They are represented by hon. Paul Akamba and hon. Mariam Naigaga. You are welcome.  Please conclude.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker - 

THE SPEAKER: He has harassed you off the microphone?

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, my colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give is in two aspects: first, it is true we have a proposal to give a university to Karamoja. I would like to assure you that the university is going to be full; all the faculties are going to be filled but the majority of the students are going to come from somewhere else. For example, we have a petroleum college in Kigumba but when you go on the ground, the majority of the students are from Bushenyi, Ntungamo, Mbarara and Kampala. There are very few Banyoro there yet the Banyoro are the host of the university. 

So, when we come up with a university for Karamoja, the intake must be strictly for the Karimojong. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable colleague, for that information. As I conclude, Madam Speaker, it is true we are looking at affirmative action. We are looking at equal opportunities in this country and that is why Government has allowed these infrastructures to be created at a regional level. However, it would be surprising to have a university in Karamoja but with only two sons or daughters of Karamoja in that university yet they will be the host. The truth of the matter is that almost all the regions of Uganda have universities. 

Madam Speaker, as we discuss education issues, we need to know that these are very critical matters. Last week, I had a child with disability who missed by just one point to do medicine. I paid for that child at some school in Kitgum and he was the best. I sent him to go and get admission at Gulu University, but he missed by one point. A child with disability could not be admitted because he could not measure up to the cut-off points.

Madam Speaker, education is key; it is the eye of a society and so it should benefit the whole of Uganda. These universities must be given some quotas for the host communities to benefit. Otherwise, we are going to escort everybody while we remain behind.

THE SPEAKER: No, we are not debating. We have already agreed that we defer this debate to the time when the ministers will be here and really, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, they should come. They should not treat this House casually that sometimes they can come and sometimes, if they do not want, they cannot come. We approved them into those dockets and they said they were going to work. So, we expect to see them next week. So, debate is deferred.

However, I wanted to inform the members that the place I went -

MS ASAMO: Madam Speaker, I want to inform the House that in Kamion Sub-county in Kaabong District where we went, we found women with very good honey. However, there was nobody helping them with value addition. We wanted to buy the honey but their jerrycans were very dirty - I remember one of the policemen bought it but we feared. I told hon. Hillary Lokwang to help them get to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives so that value addition can be made to their honey. They also have a lot of things they can do but they need to be guided. 

So, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and the members as we await the debate. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: I have seen the Minister of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives. Can we ask you to take an interest in Kamion Sub-county where the members went - if you could start by assisting those women to improve their products so that they can get some money? However, we expect you next week to come for the debate.

Honourable members, I just wanted to inform you that the place where I went where the Kadama people are is called Moruita Sub-county, Lemsui Parish. So, we have to talk about all of them. 

Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for the work you have done in the morning and the afternoon. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 5.52 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 26 July 2018 at 2.00p.m.)
