Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Wednesday, 31 July 2019

Parliament met at 2.04 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Because of some omissions we made on the Order Paper, I will alter the Order Paper to accommodate two things; designation of Members, which is from the Government Chief Whip and a response from the Minister of Health on some urgent question under rule 46 that was raised. The response is ready.

Honourable members, if you look at the business to follow, we will be handling these things tomorrow for purposes of our planning. I needed to know from the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development what the situation is in reference to a petition by the people of Kassanda South Constituency and where she is with this matter so that we can understand. I referred the petition to the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

Tomorrow, we will be handling the motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2019” which will be moved by hon. Niwagaba.

In addition, I think there are others - hon. Mwiru and another one. I think you should use the time to harmonise what you really want to present to the House because I am not sure whether we can handle three different motions for leave to deal with the issues of Constitution amendment. Therefore, it will be easier if it is harmonised and we present one request to the House.

I also would like to understand where we are with the Sugar Bill. I had a meeting with the minister responsible and she says consultation is still going on. However, to point out, we are already going beyond what our laws say about how we handle Bills that are returned by the President. 

There seems to be some need for further consultation on the Sugar Bill but I think let us try, as much as possible, to abide by what our laws and rules say so that we do not overstep them. They are our safety valves and if you overstep them, there might be a time when people will think there is no need for the regulations and laws and that might be dangerous and a recipe for anarchy and we do not want that to happen. 

Rules are made to be followed and once we have them, we should follow them strictly. That is my advice on this matter of the Sugar Bill. There are Members who had requested for the Floor - honourable Member for Buyaga East County. Point of procedure?

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have communicated about tomorrow’s Bills. However, the Attorney-General came here and laid the Electoral Reforms Bill but unfortunately, no Member received copies. Whatever we read about what was tabled was from the press. 

Mr Speaker, yesterday the Attorney-General held a press conference where he disowned what was reported in the press. My assumption is that the press picked whatever they presented in the papers, from Parliament. I wonder why the Attorney-General would disown what was presented here – and yesterday, we received copies - I do not know whether we are proceeding well with what was presented and what we have in our pigeonholes.

In my opinion, we should have the Attorney-General come here and clarify that actually that is what he presented or lay what he put in our pigeonholes officially at the Floor of Parliament. Are we proceeding well, Mr Speaker, when we have something which was not laid on the Table? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether - maybe you should cite for me the provision where we are allowed to discuss newspaper provisions, it could have helped me. Which provisions are we going to use to start discussing newspaper provisions?

What we received are Bills that were table by Government, I think they were four or five - The Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, The Presidential Election (Amendment) Bill, the Parliamentary Election (Amendment) Bill and The Local Government (Amendment) Bill. Those are the ones we received and they were brought by the Government. 

Therefore, if there are other things that are happening outside there, we do not know. Let them continue happening; what we know that what has been referred to our committee are those Bills that were laid before Parliament.

However, the committee will examine those Bills and come back with them. I do not want to guess what the Attorney-General was discussing in the press because I do not know what it is.

MR NIWAGABA: I think what the Member is raising is very pertinent. When those five Bills were laid on the Table, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi and I asked for copies from this very clerk and he gave them to us. We read through there and then. It is quite unfortunate that what has finally been put in our pigeonholes is totally different from what was laid on the Table.

I think what the Member was trying to drive at is, what is the procedure of having Bills which have not been uploaded or received officially but along the way, they are withdrawn in such manner that puts the integrity of this House in question?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not think I am in position to discuss that matter or even guide on it because I only know those that have been laid on the Table. If you have any other that has not been laid on the Table, maybe you should find the opportunity to do so. However, the ones that have been laid before the House are the ones I am referring to and they are what we referred to the committee and they are the ones the committee is going to handle. If the committee handles something else, that would be completely wrong.

However, my understanding is that a set of Bills was brought and laid at the Table here and they were referred to the committee responsible for handling those Bills and that is the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I am sure they have already begun on the schedule of how to handle this. I have received my own set of the Bills; that is why I am speaking authoritatively about what I have received. Whether they are at variance, that would be for the committee to explain.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I think the issue is bigger than what ordinarily could pass. In addition, it borders on a huge scandal and for us to pass it in this manner would be very unfortunate to this Parliament -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable please, I do not know what you know. What I know is that there were Bills that were laid before Parliament and those Bills have been referred to the committee. I do not know anything else that you know that I should know. Therefore, I am proceeding by what this House allows me to do, which is to receive Bills for first reading. It also authorises me to refer them to committees. That is what I have done. 

If there is a scandal somewhere, I am not privy to it; maybe they will come in due time. When they come, we will handle them but now they are not there. We are now speculating and bringing information that I am not privy to. How do you expect me to guide on it? 

I do not know what you are talking about. What I know is there were Bills that were laid before the House and I referred them to the committee. If there are problems with those Bills, it will be revealed in due time and we will deal with them at that time but right now, we cannot. 

At least if somebody had brought me a copy of the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Act and two variant ones, probably I would say there are two titles of the same thing but they are not the same in content. However, I am now relying on what I have received. You are relying on speculations of something you have heard –(Interjection)– Honourable member, you are showing me a newspaper but I have asked for a Bill. Members, can we proceed? 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, you are on record; sometime back, you guided that if there is anybody that has any constitutional amendments that have not been captured by the Bills, he can as well present them to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Thereafter, that Bill will come as a special purpose vehicle to handle all those amendments. 

I would like to seek clarification from you, Mr Speaker. After the presentation of the Bills for leave to be granted tomorrow, if anybody has amendments outside those, can he also go to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and present his or her proposals so that they are carried back to the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is hardly foreseeable now because tomorrow, we are only handling a motion for leave and content as such may not be what will be examined tomorrow. Therefore, if we should grant leave to the honourable members to present their Private Members’ Bill, that is when probably, the content will become alive on gazettment. 

Like I said, if that Bill is for constitutional amendment and it is before the committee, there might be issues like we handled before. There might be other issues that will come along that also need redress. You can use that same Bill; the Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, to drive these other ones. 

Let me give you an example. When we dealt with amendments of 2005, Article 8(a) was not part of what we discussed. Actually, sadly, it was not even brought to committee; it was brought right here. We entertained it and passed it and now it is an active provision of the Constitution. 

Just like what has been proposed in changing the electoral laws, if there are provisions that might not have been captured, then we can capture them because it is in the same spirit that some of these changes can be made. I do not think it is fatal. After all, the final decision will be made by the House. Those will be recommendations to what the House should do. 

I still maintain that and I think that would be the right way, rather than having a multiplicity of Bills. Like in the Seventh Parliament, we ended up with an omnibus one after – they had to separate them again but it would be smart if when a Bill for a particular purpose is brought, all issues outstanding on that issue can get the opportunity to be addressed. I still maintain that and I think it would be the proper thing to do. Thank you.

2.20
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga County East, Kagadi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the closure of Kagadi District Hospital due to all medical equipment being down. The water system has broken down so the medical personnel have resolved to close down the hospital and yet it serves about seven districts. Therefore, this has brought many challenges within my area. 

The X-ray machine that has worked for the last five years is completely down. The autoclave machine, the dental chair, the water pump and the operating theatre are all not functional. The district health officer, together with the entire medical team, has agreed to close down the hospital. All the pregnant mothers, who had come yesterday for medical care, were advised to go elsewhere. 

Mr Speaker, the situation of Kagadi Hospital is completely worrying. 

So my prayers are: 

    1. That the minister comes up with mechanisms of making sure the hospital is operational with immediate effect and also help us install the water system. This would help our people. 
    2. To elevate Kagadi Hospital to a referral status. Probably, this would help us given that the hospital serves the districts of Kagadi, Kibaale, Kakumiro, Kyenjojo, Kyegegwa, Hoima and Kikuube. That population is very high. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

2.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just have a small correction that Bunyoro has – because the Member mentioned that Kagadi also serves Hoima and yet there is Hoima Regional Referral Hospital in that area. We all know that Kyenjojo falls under Toro and there is Kabarole Regional Referral Hospital there.

I have taken note of the issue raised by the honourable member. I was not aware that the staff – that to me, is industrial action. Nevertheless, allow us to get more facts regarding this facility and then we shall report back. I have no information about the pending industrial action. 

I would also like to inform the House that we are aware that a number of our general hospitals lack certain equipment. Due to this lack of equipment, some of the medical personnel are rendered redundant because they cannot provide the health care that they should be providing to Ugandans. 

Sometime back, we reported on funding from the Netherlands Government a grant of about €23 million, which Government is supposed to co-finance. We are going to use this money to equip all the regional referral hospitals. 

We also have funding from General Electric to a tune of about US$ 41 million. We are going to use this money to equip selected general hospitals and also 50 Health Centre IVs.  This is supposed to be done this financial year but I will follow up on the issue of Kagadi. 

2.24
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, honourable minister. Mr Speaker, this thing of coming to Parliament and telling us about donor funding from the Netherlands – what the Member of Parliament raised is a practical situation where the lives of people is on the line. In addition, two more days, is dangerous for the people of Kagadi.

Last week, I raised concern that there are no anti-malaria drugs in all the health centres in Pader District. To date, there is no report and they said that there is a donor component. Can the minister tell us, in practical terms, how many hours it can take her to have that problem solved? We need to report back to people as we going back over the weekend. I am going back to bury the king over the weekend and I cannot tell them anything about donor funds; they will not want to listen to these things of Netherlands and donor funding but they will probably stone me. I seeking clarification; what are you going to do exactly?

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Odonga Otto, I clearly indicated – of course, he is talking about equipment; we cannot procure equipment today and it is availed tomorrow. He talked about equipment and water. I indicated that this matter has just been brought to my attention. I have already communicated to the Director General, Health Services, to follow up this matter. 

Mr Speaker, I have taken note and we are going to follow up the issue. Also, hon. Odonga Otto, maybe you were not in the House when I responded on the issue of the malaria drugs and my colleague also came and responded later. However, the information that I had given to this House was that we are not short of the malaria drugs. 

During the rainy seasons, we have an increase on the number of cases and the National Medical Stores had closed for stocktaking from 15 June to 30 June 2019. As we speak, NMS is functional and it has distributed malaria drugs to all the health facilities in the country. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I am sure the Member said that the hospital was closed yesterday. I am not sure whether I heard you say something about the closure. She did? Okay.

2.27
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to raise a matter of urgent national importance to do with security of a Member of Parliament as he operates in his or her constituency. 

Last week, on Saturday, at 10 a.m., I was attacked in my constituency while on a journey from my home to a village called Iboa in Palorinya Subcounty; this is a newly created subcounty cut out of Itula Subcounty formerly in Moyo District but now in Obongi District. Obongi was created by Parliament on 3 September 2015 and it became effective on 1 July 2019. 

I was going to Iboa to deliver 50 plastic chairs as part of my contribution to a women group; Women Savings and Credit Association. In Iboa, there is one that had a project of buying 150 plastic chairs plus three 50-seater tents each. In my constituency, if my people come to me as their Member of Parliament –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please state the urgent matter that you want us to address.

MR FUNGAROO: This background is very important. I was taking those plastic chairs as my contribution to a project where we agreed that the members of the group contribute and I also contribute. The 50 chairs were loaded in a tipper lorry hired from Obongi Town Council. When they reached there, a group of people armed with machetes, pangas and arrows descended on the chairs and destroyed all the 50 chairs and the vehicle before I arrived to the destination.

I was ambushed at a place called Andra –(Interjection)– yes, the road was blocked with rocks and logs. When I arrived, I people charged at me, “Where are you going? This is not your area, go back to your area.” People were throwing stones at me. 

It is in my constituency and I have a map here and I would like to lay it on the Table. A map of the old Moyo District before Adjumani was curved out of it and before Obongi was curved out because Moyo had three constituencies - East Moyo, which became Adjumani in 1997 –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please.

MR FUNGAROO: I would like to lay this map on the Table. It is from the Government of the Republic of Uganda. I called the RDC, being the chairman of security and the RDC called the police and the army and they all came. Although they have now controlled the situation, my question is, how shall I operate in my own constituency if situations of this kind continue to prevail?

Secondly, teachers and head teachers organising the primary school games and sports, which are going on everywhere in the country, are faced with the same problem. They were attacked and ordered not to bring the school pupils of Iboa Primary School, Andra Primary School, Palorinya Primary School and Yenga Primary School to participate in the games and sports under Obongi District. They were told to take the pupils to Moyo District.

Lastly, my colleague, Dr Joyce Moriku, Woman Member of Parliament for Moyo District plus the RDC Moyo and Chairperson LCV Moyo, were quoted on the radio. Dr Moriku’s views are quoted in this newspaper, which I have here –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you go into that, you are going to attract responses from Members. The urgent matter is that you were attacked.

MR FUNGAROO: How do I operate in my constituency? The social services like education and health are affected by this; that I should not go to that area. Has Government made any changes in the boundaries of Obongi or in my constituency to the extent that I should not go to that place so that I can inform my people accordingly; that from now onwards, teachers, health workers and all people of Obongi constituency should not go to Palorinya Subcounty, which is cut out of Itula Subcounty in my constituency?

I would like to seek clarification from the Government under what circumstances can I be prevented from reaching that place and other staff of my area? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is this question for the Minister of Internal Affairs? I do not know who can respond to this?

2.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Mr Speaker, when the events happened as described by the honourable member for Obongi, who is the Shadow Minister for Defence; of course, the events were very unfortunate. The security teams took the necessary action, there is enough deployment of the necessary forces in the area and the Member is assured of his security. 

If beyond that, he needs personal security of a different nature, since it is a security issue, we can discuss that confidentially and we shall assure him. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that sufficient, honourable?

2.35
MR KAPS FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Obongi): Mr Speaker, one issue has been answered and I am satisfied with it. However, what about the issue of the teachers and health workers who are equally told not to go to that area? Has Government made a change about boundaries that, that area is now in Moyo District and they should not go and participate there? I need clarification from Government on this matter.

MR OBIGA: I thank the Member for the information that somebody is stopping those children from going for the activities. We shall ensure that those children are secured within the boundary of Paloringa in Moyo. Nothing will be done to them.

Regarding the issue of the boundary, as far as our forces are concerned, Paloringa is now within the jurisdiction of Obongi District. Therefore, all the forces in Obongi and the territorial area of North West Nile Region will secure those people. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we have the Member for Oyam District?

2.36
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Mr Speaker, I rise on the issue of national importance. Today is a very sad day for the people of Oyam, particularly Kamdini and Myene subcounties. A herd of over 80 elephants invaded Kamdini Subcounty and attacked a catechist called Benson Omara as he was going to the garden very early in the morning. They tore his body and scattered it into pieces. 

The elephants moved as far as Myene Subcounty and on their way they met another person and injured him seriously. As I talk, the victim has been admitted at Pope John’s Aber Hospital.

Mr Speaker, there has been a serious problem of the wildlife -human conflicts, involving elephants and other wildlife attacking and killing people as well as destroying crops. We have raised this problem on this Floor many times. In April, we requested the minister to go on the ground but he did not.

Nonetheless, we had a meeting with one of the directors of Uganda Wildlife Authority. In that meeting, we agreed for a temporary measure or mechanical method of digging the trenches. An excavator was sent to dig the 17-kilometre stretch from Kamdini to Apala B. Unfortunately, the excavator dug only three kilometres and broke down. As I talk, the elephants are using the part that was not dug to cross. 

Mr Speaker, we have raised this many times and the minister has never responded to this issue on the Floor of Parliament. The ministry did not also go with us on the ground. I would like that the minister comes to this Parliament and addresses this issue that has gone on and reached emergency level.

Secondly, we also request that the affected persons be compensated. 

Thirdly, it is our prayer that the trenches should be dug all over the affected area, covering 17 kilometres. Another prayer is that an additional excavator should be taken to the ground and the remaining stretch dug.

Mr Speaker, we also requested in that meeting that we need an outpost, especially along Kamdini area, with enough manpower so that as the elephants cross, at least the rangers are there to drive them away.

The Office of the Prime Minister should this time also come to our rescue because for the last four years, all the crops have been destroyed in the area and we have famine affecting people living in this area. As I talk, the rangers are still struggling to drive the elephants away up to the park. Thank you.

2.40
THE MINISTER IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is regrettable; 80 elephants is a battalion. (Laughter) They could have wrecked more havoc than they did. It is really regrettable.

Mr Speaker, we will bring this to the attention of the minister in charge of tourism and if he has been asked for, we are going to make sure that he come and answers. I have also taken note of the other request to the Office of the Prime Minster. Honourable, we will need a letter as soon as possible. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us now go to the Order Paper, as amended.

LAYING OF THE BI-ANNUAL INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT PERFORMANCE REPORT TO PARLIAMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have a Parliamentary Commissioner? I thought that I saw hon. Ogwang here.

2.42
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a bi-annual Inspectorate of Government Performance report to this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to handle.

LAYING OF THE 21ST ANNUAL UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION REPORT, 2018

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the 21st Annual Uganda Human Rights Commission Report, 2018.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Human Rights to look at and advise the House.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES

2.43
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to re-designate hon. Alex Byarugaba from the Committee on Climate Change to the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that request has been made. I put the question for the movement of hon. Byarugaba.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, there are also changes in the sessional committee. I beg to re-designate hon. Ssembatya from the Committee on Public Service to the Committee on Health.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to that proposal.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those two Members stand re-designated to the respective committees. Thank you.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When the Government Chief Whip was designating Members to various committees, hon. Ann Maria Nankabirwa raised a concern that the Government Chief Whip should designate her to the committee she had applied for.

Mr Speaker, I thought that at this point in time since the Government Chief Whip is making those alterations, she also tells us the fate of hon. Ann Maria Nankabirwa. I would like to seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, is it your view that I should rule on which Member goes to which committee? That is a matter for the party to handle not the Speaker. Next item. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. The point of order I would like to raise to one of the senior Members of this House is – the Member very well knows the dress code of this House. Therefore, is the Shadow Minister for Works and Transport, hon. Nzoghu [HON. MEMBERS: “And yourself”] Okay, you will raise another point of order.

Mr Speaker, today, is the coronation of the Kabaka and that is why I am dressed like this. Is hon. Nzoghu, having known the rules on the dress code in this House in order to dress the way he has done?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nzoghu, can we see how you have dressed? Honourable members, in fact, the issue is that he has not worn it the way it should be worn. Actually, that shirt is called “presidential”. The top button should be buttoned according to Mandela but the Member - (Laughter) - Is there no button? That means it is not the presidential shirt. Honourable members, let us take general care on how we keep the decorum of the House. Thank you. 

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION BY THE MINISTER OF HEALTH

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week, on Tuesday, 23 July 2019, hon. Anthony Akol, Member of Parliament for Kilak County raised a concern regarding none availability of the third-line AntiRetroViral Drugs (ARVs) in public health facilities.
	
Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the House that the Ministry of Health adopted the “Test and Treat” approach in 2016 for the Anti-Retroviral Therapy (ART) in this country.  

I would like to also inform the House that provision of ART in Uganda is guided by the current National Consolidated Guidelines for HIV Prevention, Care and Treatment. These guidelines detail the ART regimens for first-line and second-line treatment and guidance on the approach to the provision of third-line ART, for the few individuals failing on second-line regimens.

In these guidelines, provision for the first and second-line ART is based on the public health approach using standardised regimens. However, third-line ART is a more complex and advanced care, that requires clinical decisions informed by resistance genotypic tests to suit the needs of particular clients.

The provision of first and second-line ART can be provided by our health workers in the lower health facilities. However, the recommendation to put a patient on the third-line treatment requires more specialised skilled personnel. This recommendation is done specifically by specialists in the regional referral hospitals and other selected general hospitals. 

As of May 2019, 92 per cent of all health workers at the accredited ART health facilities have been trained across all districts to support provision of first and second-line ART and the capacity for provision of third-line ART management is also being expanded. As we speak, the number of patients on the third-line regiment has increased from 466 in June 2018 to 914 as of December 2018.

As I said, the third-line ART is specialised care and the average health care providers at lower levels are not competent enough to interpret results of the ARV drug resistance genotyping tests that are needed to inform the options for the third-line ART.  
	
Regarding the non-availability of this drug, we made inquiries and found out that the third-line ART is more expensive with limited supplies of this commodity from global supplies that sometimes lead to occasional shortages here. This may occasionally lead to low in-country order-fulfilment and thus, risks of low stock at the facility level, which the ministry is also paying attention to.

Mr Speaker, I would like to indicate that I tried to reach out to the honourable member to find out which specific facility he went to, so that I could make a more informed response but I could not reach him. For purposes of the record, just note that there are challenges with the global suppliers on this. However, I would like to state that currently, we do not have any stock outs of ARVs for all regimens in any of our public health facilities. 

I would like to, therefore, inform colleagues that if they have patients on the third-line regiments and they have challenges in accessing this care, it is because not all facilities that provide ARVs have the third-line. It is restricted to regional referral hospitals and a few selected general hospitals.
Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there a supplementary question from the Member who raised the matter? The Member for Amuru is standing in for the Member for Kilak County. 

2.53
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, honourable minister for your response. The supplementary question I would like to ask is: you highlighted the three lines of treatment and the cheapest is the first-line of treatment and the most expensive is the third-line of treatment.
	
Mr Speaker, the question that was raised was in regard to the third-line. However, I would like to state that usually, the first-line of treatment becomes a bit of problem and that is why adherence becomes a problem. The supplementary question I would like to ask is; what steps are being put in place to ensure that we have strict adherence to the first-line of treatment by making sure that these medicines are in the ART facilities so that we do not jump to the second or third-line of treatment.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I recall that when we adopted the “Test and Treat” approach to HIV/AIDS, there were challenges. There were challenges with districts quantifying the actual medicines that they needed.

As a result, there were some stock-outs but I would like to assure Members that it has been resolved. All the over 1,880 health facilities that were designated as ART facilities have medications for the first and second line. However, just a few selected facilities have the regimen for the third line because it can only be provided by the specialists. So, the Anti-retroviral drugs are available in sufficient quantities in the country. Thank you. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we had this debate and concluded it. But we also had information that the shadow minister responsible for this sector was indisposed and could not be in the House.

However, today she made a request that she should be allowed to say something. I am going to use my prerogative under the rules to give her three minutes to say something before we go to the committee stage.

2.56
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to make an appeal to colleagues before we move to enact the clauses of the Kampala City Authority (Amendment) Bill into law.

This time round, I call upon colleagues to avoid making a law to further complicate the already complicated situation caused by leadership wrangles in the city due to the loopholes left in the Kampala City principal Act.

Laws are not the clauses but the spirit; the spirit, in our opinion as the alternative Government, driving the KCCA Act and the attendant amendments is to limit the power of political leaders and empower the technical people.

I wonder why, as politicians, we are allowing ourselves to be used to render fellow politicians redundant. Parliament should be blind to the fact that at the moment, Erias Lukwago is the Mayor; let us legislate for generations. 

President Milton Obote’s regime made a law for Kampala targeting Bidandi Ssali and abolished elections but instead of failing Bidandi Ssali, the Government failed; Bidandi remained here and he later became a mayor and eventually the Minister for Local Government.
	
This law we are looking at was born on the presumption that we were going into the regional tier set of Government, whereby Government wanted to have the Kampala Capital City under its direct administration as opposed to other districts that were going to fall under the regional Governments.

If you look at Article 178 of the Constitution, Parliament was supposed to create a new Kampala that would give us Mengo City where elections would be held and administered by elected leaders and the Kampala Capital City the seat of Government – something equivalent to Washington DC in America.

That we did not effect the issue of regional tier, we continue to make a district – that has been declared as a district by the courts of law in the Nabilah case - to operate as if it is an Authority. If Kampala Capital City was an Authority, it would not have MPs here; we would not have hon. Nabilah Ssempala here the way we do not have an MP representing Uganda Revenue Authority or UNRA.

I appeal to colleagues that we focus on the fact that we are legislating for Kampala District; only special as far as that issue is related to the fact that Kampala City is the capital of Uganda. 

When we sat with the Minister for Kampala Capital City and her team, we took ourselves through all these and agreed that we shall use the Local Government Act to look at the functions of the chairpersons or even the mayors of our small towns like Mukono. Their functions to be transferred to the KCCA Act as the functions of the Town Clerk will be the functions of the Executive Director. 

That in the end, the lasting solution will be to create Mengo City as we promised Ugandans and to have the Kampala Capital City, something that was done as we reflected on the 1966 crisis, when Buganda told the Central Government to remove its capital from its land. We wanted to have a seat of Government that cannot be challenged by any regional Government. 

Lastly, the biggest problem in Kampala seems to be having a minister who is responsible for only one district because the Minister for Kampala City would behave like the Minister of Local Government, to be the supervisor. The mere fact that we have politicians, the Minister for Kampala City, the State Minister for Kampala City, the RDC, the Shadow Minister, the six RCCs, the Deputy RCCs - all these politicians in the city looking at one district.

Maybe in the future, this Parliament should think about making a law that would make the Minister for Kampala City the minister for cities in Uganda because we are going to get other cities and I do not want to believe that we need to first have Mbarara City before we make that law. Those cities are in the offing; they need the guidance of a minister as they are being set up – Mbarara, Masaka, Gulu, and Arua.

The Minister for Kampala City would be the minister for Kampala and those cities. Even at their formative stage, they need a political person to supervise their formation so that we remove this politician who always sits and looks at the Lord Mayor as an opponent other than an officer working under her.
	
With your permission –(Interjection)– it is not enough, Mr Speaker - the minister has conceded that the election of the Lord Mayor will take place but it is not enough for people to elect leaders. People elect leaders so that they exercise powers on their behalf; that is the true meaning of Article 1 of the Constitution. 

Even if we guarantee the election of leaders and do not give them executive powers to exercise, we would be acting unconstitutionally. How do you expect a person who campaigns in the whole of Kampala District not to be the political head when even the town mayor of my Buvuma Town Council - deep there in the island - is a political head?

Do not think about Lukwago; tomorrow it will be Nambooze, hon. Oulanyah or Tumukunde. That person goes around the city, gets the votes and eventually you say, “Yes, the people of Kampala have enjoyed their rights to vote but you have no executive powers to exercise.” Then why are we crating those offices? If we do not want to empower the elected leaders of Kampala, I challenge you; let us be bold enough - I challenge you to abolish the elections in Kampala and face the consequences, because the consequences would be that we would be acting unconstitutionally.

Mr Speaker, we people in Buganda are saying that we supported the KCCA Act, thinking that we were going to get the city of Kampala. It is immoral and deceptive if we make a law on the presumption that another entity is going to be created and that entity is not created, yet you go ahead and put Kampala under the centre.

I beg to request colleagues and I make an appeal for us to make a law that will outlive us, give Kampala a law that will bring clarity in the administration of the city. Make for Kampala a law that will not cause more problems. We have had enough problems in Kampala of politicians fighting for power.  

The people power is vested in the leaders and the leaders elected should always be allowed to exercise those powers. For us in Mukono, Wakiso and Mpigi, this law annexes us onto the city under the Kampala Physical Planning Act; at least the mother Act. The Act now being made should give us clarity over that because the districts are planning centres by themselves. 

So, if you put planning in another entity where we do not have representatives and we are represented by the CAO - the law says those CAOS who represent us do not have powers to vote - that would be annexing us onto the city and we shall resist that and we know that you will be on our side. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

I would like to inform this House that today is the coronation day for the Kabaka. Some people have said that the Kabaka has made 26 years on the throne. To us, it is only two years and six months, because for a decade under the Kabaka – because of his good leadership, it seems like one year. So, the Kabaka has been in power for two years and six months, but we can always call it 26 years.

However, what I would like to bring to your attention is that honourable colleagues who are very interested in this law are at the function, including all the MPs for Kampala. I do not know how you are going to guide this House. I am here because of one thing; that in Buganda, we believe that some of the Kabaka’s soldiers should remain behind to hold the fort. I am here to hold the fort and to tell you that the MPs for Kampala and all those from Buganda, including our chairperson of the Buganda Caucus, are not here yet we are going to legislate on a very important thing that touches Uganda.

I seek for your guidance. If it pleases you, Mr Speaker, please stay this until some hours later when our colleagues join us. I so beg.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable member has made her submission. However, you will recall that most of these issues were the ones that were discussed yesterday and quite exhaustively and we have reached a stage where we need to move to the next level. Since she is holding the fort, we have no doubt in her abilities to do that so we are all represented. Let us proceed.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 1. Budadiri East?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, clause 1 is dealing with interpretation. I would like to make a proposal that we stand over it because as we go ahead, we may get more definitions. I am saying that because I wanted, at an appropriate time –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think it is a proper request. Let us stand over clause 1.

Clause 2

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Clause 2 is amending section 5. Section 5 deals with Kampala Capital City Authority. I would like to move an amendment here that instead of talking about only Kampala Capital City Authority, let us say, “’The authority’ shall mean capital city or city authority”.

The justification is to take care of any cities, which will be created in future.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, that would shroud the policy. Let us deal with this Bill as it is. When the other cities come, we will have another framework to regulate it. Let us deal with Kampala because this is Kampala Capital City Authority Act. So, let us deal with those ones when they come. Thank you.

Can I now put the question that clause 2 stands part of the Bill? I put the question that clause 2 stands part of this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2 agreed to.

Clause 3

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. In sub-section (2), we are substituting for the words “qualified to be elected a Member of Parliament”, appearing at the end of the sentence with the words, “a citizen of Uganda”.

The justification is to maintain the current qualification for a councillor.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think they are bringing in the principle of treating this area like any other district. Is that correct? So, it is for consistency with the others. Can I put the question to that amendment?

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Chairperson, I would like to plead with the committee chairperson that the qualification of a Member of Parliament is too much for the mayor. It is a little too much for a mayor. Judging from our recent history, if this qualification is to be enforced to the dot, then there are very many people who have been in that office who will not be able to run for that position.

An example is the former mayor, Mr Nasser Sebaggala. (Laughter) He was a very good mayor but when he stood for presidency, he failed to qualify because of the issue of A-level. So, I do not know whether the minister would like to think about it, because there are some people in the city who have not gone to school but can speak English and know what should happen in the city.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the spirit of the amendment.

MS ABABIKU: Actually, we are saying the same thing. We are saying that for the Lord Mayor, the qualification begins from A-level but for other councillors, it is left open like for any other district. That is what we are saying. We have not put O-level.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, what is happening is that in case the Lord Mayor or Deputy Lord Mayor is not available, any of those councillors can take up their responsibilities.

So, if that is the spirit – if you read through it very well – that means for purposes of the authority, even councillors should be at the qualification of an A-level leaver so that in case of mistakes of that - Mr Chairperson, I would like to clarify that one.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what are the qualifications for the district chairpersons? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: A-level.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, are we saying anything new? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What are the qualifications for councilors? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: None.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are we saying anything new? I thought the original principle was that you are going to treat Kampala like a district. Why are we changing now?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, if we are now saying the city authority is equal to a district, then the laws which govern districts should be applicable. Why? The district chairperson is the political head of the district and the district is under the Minister of Local Government.

If we are saying we should take a city authority to be like a local government, then effectively, even the Ministers of Kampala Capital City Authority should cease to exist. Kampala Capital City Authority should then be shifted to the Ministry of Local Government. 

Therefore, if we are not doing that, then there must be modifications – (Interruption)

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you. I seek clarification. If we are to go by your argument, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, are you then saying the  Minister, Office of the Prime Minister (Karamoja), the  Minister, Office of the Prime Minister (Teso) and the  Minister, Office of the Prime Minister (Luweero) should all be gotten rid of. 

I heard clearly hon.  Nambooze’s prayers. That was the import of this Bill way back towards the 2011 elections. Somebody stood there, just like we are - we were not very many in this House – and took advantage. The original idea was to depoliticise the leadership of Kampala Capital City Authority so that we get a mayor who is only a figurehead without necessarily being elected. That was the import.

However, hon. Lukwago, at that time – I am sorry to talk about him when he is not here – dominated the whole debate and diverted us towards what he wanted at the time. I would like to agree with hon. Nambooze that we should look a little bit beyond that if we want an independent city. 

You know, the uniqueness of Kampala is such that I have property here just like someone from Bukonzo or Europe. This is a cosmopolitan area and it should be treated a little bit differently.

When you go to education – recently, I got a town council. One of the young men who are the current interim leaders is so popular. Can I tell you something? He cannot read. His education level is so low. He has actually come to me saying, “Hon. Byarugaba, I beg that I don’t compete.” We are getting all sorts of visitors whom he cannot even sit with on the same table.

I think let us maintain this. This is a district like the rest of the other districts. The standards are already set and I beg that we agree to maintain them although there will be some slight difference because of the uniqueness and nature of the city.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, hon. Byarugaba. That is why even here, we are creating a metropolitan authority. You are going to deal with people who have gone to school and as a result, there will be a serious problem. By the way, if you are not aware, a councillor in Kampala gets a salary of more than Shs 6 million a month. 

Because councillors are going to supervise people who know how to write and read, you need a person who is able to read and write also.  In our justification, we are saying if we are going to put anybody in the council of the capital city authority, he or she should have at least a minimum education level. If you are going to supervise an engineer or a board member who is from Makerere University, you need somebody who can read. That is the justification for councilors to have a minimum education qualification.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. If it is the view of this House, I will have no option. However, we had interactions with councilors of Kampala especially the people with disabilities and the elderly. They put their opinion in writing. We took a decision based on the majority votes that many of the councilors in the city do not have senior six qualifications and they are able to perform.

However, if it is the decision of this House, I will concede but also in future, I would propose that to be a Member of Parliament, we need to rethink the qualification of a senior six leaver so that those who are seated in the city council would appreciate. Let us also increase ours. Thank you.

MR SSEWANYANA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. The law we are making today concerns the life of the people of Kampala. I come from Makindye Division West, which is part of Kampala. 

We come here to represent the views of the people including leaders who are below us. The people of Kampala have that sense of measuring who should represent them in the council. I, for one, was a councillor but with qualifications beyond A-level much as there was no qualification in the law. 

The people of Kampala think that they have the same rights as the people of all the other districts. I thank the chairperson of the committee and the committee at large understanding our concerns as the people and leaders of Kampala by scrapping the education bar that would limit our people from contesting for positions.

The word, “councilor” has not changed meanings. Unless you are introducing another word in the law, the word is councilor. So, if the position is councilor and it is guided by the same electoral laws, it means the qualification should stay as it is for all the other areas. The people of Kampala have the same rights like all the other Ugandans. 

That is my submission, Mr Chairperson. I support the committee for that wonderful deliberation. 

MR MUWANGA: Mr Chairperson, I stand to support the position of the committee that you do not require qualifications to be a councilor. We must be very careful when we are making laws for this this country. If you are a graduate with PHD or Masters, then you will campaign better. Present your credentials to the voters so that they vote for you, given your credentials. If you compete against a man without qualifications and he beats you, it means you are not good enough.

I can assure this Parliament – we made A-level a minimum qualification for this Parliament. Has the quality of our decisions been the best because we have PHD and Masters Holders in this Parliament? We are still making the old mistakes. We are still passing laws that are extremely bad to the people.

Therefore, my humble opinion is that -(Interjection) - yes and it is my strong opinion that if you want to deepen democracy and help people; the ordinary wanainchi, have a voice in democracy. Qualifications are not the best measures. By the way the best governors have not been the best educated people. Governance and education are completely different aspects.

Therefore, when you want to speak to the voiceless and the unheard people, let them make a choice through a free and fair democratic vote and whoever wants to stand does so. These issues of qualification impede participation and crowd out a certain class of people in our democracy. That is why we put these laws and knock out many people.

My humble view is that I support the position of the committee that - and why Kampala? A councillor is the same across the board. If a councillor in Kamuli and everywhere does not have qualifications, why in Kampala? I beg to support the committee position.

MR ROBERT MUSOKE: Thank you very much. I would like to appreciate the committee for the good work. However, I would like fellow Members to look at this. There is now a difference between the principle and the practice. Universal Primary Education (UPE) came 10 years ago, there is also Universal Secondary Education (USE), how do you expect a leader to mobilise a Government programme which he failed to attend to?

Well, councillors at district levels have no academic qualifications. I was a district Speaker and I can tell you the challenges which those people pass through while they are delivering; even swearing in. Remember councillors have another duty of coming up with ordinances and bylaws. How can somebody who did not go to school make up a meaningful ordinance? Therefore, personally, for us to have meaningful leaders, let them have an academic qualification attached. Thank you.

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. On a light note, I would like to say that today is a special day and the only time I have agreed with hon. Muwanga Kivumbi; so this is a good day.

Mr Chairman, our concern today is qualifications of councillors. Qualification of councillors has already been determined at all levels. A councillor is a councillor whether it is for a district, municipality or a city; it is a councillor and qualifications should be the same. The qualifications have been just to be a citizen of Uganda. 

I would like to add that as a member of parliament who follows closely what happens in my constituency and even in City Hall here, there has not been any evil committed by councillors not having academic qualifications.

In any event, I heard an honourable member suggesting that when they go to the council, if they are not fluent in English they face problems. However, the rules of procedure of councils are clear. You can use any language you are conformable with.

Now, I heard my good friend hon. Nandala Mafabi saying that if that be the case, if we are to make it uniform that should apply to all other aspects of governance of districts and cities. That contention of hon. Nandala Mafabi cannot stand because the Article 5(2)(a) of the Constitution recognises that “Uganda shall consist of regions administered by regional governments…;
b) Kampala; and c) the districts of Uganda”, which means, Kampala is different from other districts of Uganda; it is unique, peculiar and there are historical grounds.

However, when it comes to qualifications of leaders, the uniqueness does not necessarily follow. We are talking of the uniqueness at several levels and the uniqueness in other aspects. However, we should harmonise so that what pertains in Kampala pertains in other districts as far as qualification of leaders is concerned.

Finally, in any event, the honourable member here has said the people of Kampala are intelligent enough to know who to elect. If you cannot communicate in English and they think you will not represent them, they will not elect you. By the time they elect you, they will be satisfied that you can represent them.

Hon. Nandala Mafabi said that this is a city -(Interjection)- let me conclude. This is a city occupied mostly by very educated people and -(Interjection)- yes. That is so but it is equally occupied by very successful, flamboyant and knowledgeable people who are not educated. And they are very successful; actually they own this city-(Interruption)

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have benefited from the wisdom of my Attorney-General that the qualifications of councillors cut across. I have also learnt that the community members can elect anybody they want.

From what you have said, I would like to say that since I was the one who was passionate about qualifications for councillors, I withdraw it for the same reason -(Applause) However, I hope that as we go ahead, you will also agree with me to some issues of the councillors. I thank you - (Laughter.)

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. When we proposed the qualifications for the councillors, what we had at the back of our mind was that Uganda has made big strides in offering education for everybody through UPE, USE and other programmes.

However, after interfacing with a number of stakeholders and listening to them and intersecting the population of Kampala to get the percentage of the educated people and also when we looked at how you are treating councillors elsewhere as Government, we decided to concede that we do not need academic qualifications for the councillors. Mr Chairman, I stand here to concede to the proposal of the committee. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I will put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee. I put the question to the amendment proposed to the committee?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We are deleting paragraphs (c) and (h). In paragraph (d), we are substituting for the words “discuss and make recommendations” with the words “review and approve.” 

The justification is that:

    (i) Paragraph (c) is redundant since it is repeated in paragraph (d).
    (ii) Paragraph (h), which requires the council to perform any other functions as may be assigned by the minister, abrogates the principle of separation of powers. This is so because the minister is a representative of the executive arm of Government while the council is the legislative arm. Each should be able to operate independently without interference from the other.
    (iii) To ensure that budget proposals of the authority are approved by the council before presenting it to Parliament.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us just restate that for a clear understanding of what the committee proposes in Clause 4 of the Bill, which deals with Section 6A of the principal Act. The committee proposes to delete paragraphs (c) and (h). It also proposes to make an amendment in paragraph (d) to remove words, “discuss and make recommendations” with the words “review and approve”. The justifications have been outlined. Can we proceed? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Section 6A, which they are trying to insert basically comes from Section 7. In fact, all that has been stated comes from Section 7 of the parent Act.

My proposal is that instead of inserting that, we should deal with those amendments under Section 7. For example, to the proposal “To determine taxation level within a capital city” is also in Section 7(c), Even that of “enacting subsidiary legislation” is in Section 7(e). 

Therefore, my proposal is that we amend Section 7 of the parent Act to accommodate what the chairperson has proposed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is a distinction that is being made here; Section 6A is about “Functions of the Council” while Section 7 is about “Functions of the Authority”. They are not the same.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am wondering whether there is a difference between “Functions of the Council” and “Functions of the Authority”?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is a difference as per the proposal.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It contradicts if the authority is also to determine the tax levels. They have deleted some information under Section 7. Therefore, if we are going to put this under “Functions of the Council” then they must be deleted from those of the authority as well.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: They are trying to separate the council from the authority and give them functions. If the functions are overlapping or are contradictory, that would call for harmonisation.

The question is: Between the council and the authority, who has responsibility to propose for approval of tax measures? A “proposal” is different from “approval”.

Therefore, the function of approval will remain with the council but the proposal will come from the authority, so there is no contradiction. 

The principle of taxation states that there should be no taxation without representation. The representative organ of this particular role is the council.

Can we now adopt the proposal by the committee? 

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The committee proposes to delete sub-section (h), which states; “To perform any other function as may be assigned by the minister.” Their justification is that we should let the council operate independently.

However, the spirit behind this was derived from Article 5(4) of the Constitution of Uganda where Kampala Capital City Authority is administered under the Central Government –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You direct the authority but not the council. 

MS NAMUYANGU: I concede, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us leave the directives by the minister with the authority but not with the council. Therefore, I think the committee’s proposal can be adopted because they have interrogated the matter quite fairly.

I put the question to the amendments as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In sub-section (1)
(a)
    i)  we are repealing paragraphs (c), (d), (e), (i), (o), (p), (q) and (r);
    ii) We are also repealing the word “major” appearing in paragraph (h);
 (b) In sub-section (4), by substituting for the words “Ministry responsible for the Capital City” the word “Minister”.

The justification is:

    (i) The repeal of paragraphs (q) and (r) in sub-section (1) is premised on the fact that the mandate to register persons, births and deaths lies with the National Registration of Persons Authority established under the Registration of Persons Act, 2015.
    (ii) The repeal of the word “major” in paragraph (h) of sub-section (1) is to broaden the provision to cover all drains in the capital city.
    (iii) Sub-section (4) is amended to ensure it remains a specific function for the minister to supervise, guide, and monitor, among others, the activities of the capital city.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the problem I have with the minister is that if we agree that the council is more or less like the authority, just like the normal district councils, the issue of the minister here is becoming interesting. 

The authority is in charge of Kampala Capital City Council. I thought this would now be a responsibility of the Minister of Local Government. The justification is that since -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You see honourable, sometimes you open up debates where there should not be open. Because what they are saying is that, it should just be minister. The designation now would be left with the appointing authority. 

Therefore, they are taking away “Minister responsible for Kampala” and now saying leave it as “Minister”. Now you are opening up a debate, which should not be opened - but that is what they are trying to do now. 

They are now saying the minister should just be called the “Minister” and the responsibility for management now is an appointment responsibility. Therefore, it can be the Minister of Local Government or any other minister or Minister of Trade if you like. Is that a debate we should have now? The committee is saying let us just leave it as “Minister”.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Is that okay honourable members? Yes, honourable minister, do you want to take it back?

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Chairperson, I am not fighting for power, but we need to clarify this further. The committee recommends replacement of the entire clause and that clause had gone ahead to separate functions. When you look at function (g) of the current law, (h) (i) (j) and (k), those are administrative functions. In the Bill, we had transferred them to the Office of the Executive Director. However, when the committee brings everything back and removes only (c) (d) (e) (l) (o) (p) (q) and (r), there will be a problem. 

Therefore, I would like to request that (g) (h) (i) (j) and (k) are administrative functions; we leave them where we put them under the Executive Director. 

Secondly- because you cannot say a function of the authority is to construct and maintain roads- that is a day-to-day work, which has to go to the administration. Give the construction and maintenance of drains and streetlights.

The second issue is that I want to request that we maintain the word “major” which is appearing under (h). Reason being we have different types of drains in Kampala. We have primary, secondary, tertiary and small community drains. Whereas the authority works on primary, secondary and tertiary drains, we do not work on small community drains. These are very small drains, which pass through people’s individual property.

When we say, we are replacing “major” with “all” that means, it would be incumbent on the authority or KCCA to work on even those very small community drains. That is why I am requesting that we maintain the word “major” and not put “all” because we cannot work on all drains.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like the honourable minister to clarify to this House the relationship between the major or even small drains vis-a-vis the physical plans. 

Mr Chairman, it is the mandate of the authority to draw, prepare, implement and supervise the physical plans. Therefore, where there is a small drain or a big one, it still falls within the mandate of the council.

What I would like the honourable minister to explain is how are you therefore going to relate the physical plan, which the authority has vis-a-vis the small and the big drain?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think there is a bigger technical issue here. Because principal laws like this are supposed to declare broad principles within which you extract your administrative responsibilities by instrument. 

Now, you attempt to define what a major drainage is in an Act, then what do you do when you are going to administer the Act? When now you want to say this needs regulation, how are you going to define that this would be like this and that? Now you have all the wetlands being filled- all those things you think are minor might become major by the operations of the changes that might occur in the near future.

Therefore, you might want instead to be given the responsibility to deal with the issue of the definition of which is “major” or “minor” in regulation for administrative purposes rather than have it here.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, that is why I appreciate you. You know when the Chairman weighed in, I had to take my seat. Thank you, Mr Chairman. The minister should be addressing the aspect of standardisation - that is what I would like you to give and explain to this House so that we arrive at the right thing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You cannot say “major” when you are not saying anything else.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Chairman, we thought that when it comes to regulations, that is when we go into the details of defining what we really mean here. However, when we leave it open to all, there are those small drains - the MPs of Kampala can bear witness; it starts from your enclosure and it ends up on somebody’s house. You cannot take responsibility of cleaning that drain which is in somebody’s fence. Those are the small ones and we want to put it incumbent on the owners of the property to make sure that they are cleaned.

However, when we say all, they will think we have to clean all those drains. Somebody will have to open his gate and we go and clean the drain- that was the spirit behind this. We thought that maybe when it comes to the regulations, we shall define it further.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, it is saying to construct and maintain drains- not all drains.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Chairman, my issue is on (h)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What does the parent law say? “To construct and maintain major drains”. However, they are saying just say, “To construct and maintain drains”.

MS NAMUGWANYA: And I take over all the drains in the city?

MR ODUR: Thank you, Mr Chairman. What I need the minister to clarify is that you state a function maybe to construct and maintain roads. Now for roads you have not put a major or a minor road. When it comes to managing traffic and streetlights, you do not mention whether they are minor or major and it is only on drains that you are insisting on the word “major”. Now do you have an equipment that you would be installing on drainage so that it can tell you that this is a “major” because the water or sewage is flowing so fast so that we can then have clarification and deal with it.

MR NZOGHU: Do you agree that it is the authority that approves all the building plans within the authority? Therefore, whether it is a major or minor drain the authority has mandate over it, so what are you talking about?

MR TIMUZIGU: Mr Chairman, I think I am copying the minister’s idea when she says that we should categorise the major and then those other drainages. When you look at the district, for example, we have roads constructed at community level by the villages. Then, we have district roads constructed by the districts. We also have feeder roads as well as trunk roads constructed by the Central Government. 

In this case, I think the minister is referring to those bigger drainages which the city council will be responsible for. Then, the community level drainages can be constructed by the communities. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We have other subsisting laws that we are relating to this; the Town and Country Planning Act, the KCCA Act and the Building Regulations Act. That is what we are trying to relate so that we have a clear law. 

When you refer to the Town and Country Planning Act, it declares the entire country a planning area; then there is harmonisation of that. That is what we are trying to address and that is what the minister should do; whether small, major or minor. That is what we want to harmonise. What is the measurement of that?

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am trying to find a middle ground for my dear minister. When you talk of drains, it may mean a lot, including water collected in a pond in a house. 

However, I would like to propose that we state it differently. For example, we could say, “construct and maintain all drainage systems.” The responsibility of the authority is whichever feeds within that system and whatever does not feed within that system is some other person’s responsibility. 

And I think the authority is already responsible for the drainage system in Kampala. However small or big the drainage system is, it is a responsibility of the authority. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is a major drain defined?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairman, I can see the dilemma the minister is in and I also appreciate the points being made by the Members of Parliament here. Ordinarily, a drainage system is a network of all the drains; whether small or big. And it is the responsibility of the authority. 

However, what they are trying to do here now is that internal water channel in somebody’s house. Take an example of this scenario; I can build a house while hon. Kasibante has got a house behind me. Hon. Kasibante’s water passes through my compound; so I decide to block it and claim that the authority should come and fix it because that is what is stipulated in the law. 

I think we must find a way of giving responsibility to that householder to construct his drainage system at home so that water can now go into the network of the Kampala Capital City Authority. Otherwise, that network of Kampala Capital City Authority is a responsibility of the authority itself. 

MR OLANYA: Mr Chairman, what you stated is very right. We need to define what “major drainage” is all about. Honourable minister, do you mean in terms of cost? What do you mean exactly? This is because we need to understand what you mean by “major drains”. If it is in terms of cost, you may say the drainage that costs a particular amount is what we are calling a major drain. If it is not in terms of cost, then, I think we are missing the point, Mr Chairman. 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, I think what we are addressing ourselves to is the aspect of public health. We all agree that it is the mandate of the authority to approve all the building plans. At that stage, when the authority is approving somebody’s building plan, they must clearly indicate whether the drainage will be big or small and how the network should feed into the drainage system of the authority; without which, your plan should not be approved. 

Honourable minister, I think we are not coming here to define a big, major or even a small drainage. We are simply saying, what is the drainage? 

MR BYABAGAMBI: The information I would like to give to my honourable friend from Kasese - from the mountains – is that the approval is not necessarily the implementation. I can approve that on the paper and say that is how the drainage is going to be constructed. However here, they want to push that work of construction within my home to the owner of the building. If you do not do that and leave it open, I can say that, “You approved the plan and it is in the law that you will be the one to construct every drain,” and ask you to come and do it even at my home. 

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In my view, the manner in which this clause is constructed is in itself self-explanatory. It talks about constructing and maintaining drains. In other words, you are going to maintain what you have constructed. 

The issue of houses and maintenance – that KCCA has not constructed – does not arise. Mr Chairman, in my view, whether it is minor or major, as long as it has been constructed by KCCA, it should be their responsibility to maintain.

MR KASIBANTE: Mr Chairman, I would half-way support my colleague. The provision begins with construction but there is something before that. If we said that the authority should maintain what it has constructed, for some of us, the authority has not constructed anything in the drainage system and we are actually demanding for that.

Therefore, it would then claim that it has not constructed anything there and they have nothing to maintain. What would happen in that scenario? That is the reservation I have. 

And I would insist that the authority be responsible for the drainage system. We all know that when you are constructing a house, it is your responsibility to put the drainage channels. It cannot be the authority to come and put the drainage channels for your house. However, the drainage system is the responsibility of the authority; it has to tell me where the channels I have constructed should go. That is why it has to approve the plans for construction. 

MR RUKUTANA: I have consulted with the minister and I have no difference from her position.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is her position? (Laughter)

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Chairperson, I can restate my position. We are responsible for the drainage system in the city. We construct drainages and maintain them. However, we cannot maintain those, which we call community drains; a drain which is draining water from your house to the channel. 

I would like to inform this House that in Kampala, we even have community roads. These roads are not maintained or worked on by KCCA. They are worked on by the communities under the supervision of chairperson LC1 and LC11, and they have those small tiny drains. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What are major drains?

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Chairman, as I was discussing with the Attorney-General, he guided that if the word “major” is the problem – what we had categorised among “major” was the primary drains, secondary drains and tertiary drains. We were leaving the community drains to the community. He says we can consider this and then put it in the regulation thereafter. He will give us the guidance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: To proceed with which ones? 

MS NAMUGWANYA: He said that we drop the word “major” and then, we shall define what we want in the regulations.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I thought that is what, we had said earlier?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, when you defined the “minister”, I knew you would define this also. In our districts, you get a road, which is maintained by the centre, a road maintained by the district, a road maintained by a sub-county and a road maintained by a community. However, there is no law which says, these roads are main, small or big. It is under specific gazettement. Why did you take long to understand what the –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You have to make a clear guidance on the administrative aspect of it that is contained in some regulatory provisions so that you can implement it by regulation. I am trying to look for it but I cannot see. Maybe, it is because I am scanning very fast. What are we adopting? 

The committee has made some recommendations for amendments and the minister has made some objections to some of them. We are now in clause 5, which deals with Section 7 of the Principal Act. Replace the entire clause with the following: 

“Section 7 of the Principal Act as amended: 
(a) In subsection (1)
(i) By repealing paragraph (c), (d), (e), (l), (o), (p), (q) and (r); 
Honourable minister, do you have any objection to that so that we understand where we are? No, objection. Therefore, the proposal by both the Bill and the committee is that paragraph (c), (d), (e), (l), (o), (p), (q) and (r) of subsection (1) be deleted.  

That is the comprehensive proposal. We are now proposing only because the rest are in the Bill. We are now proposing the amendments proposed by the committee, which is deletion of paragraph (q) and (r). I put the question to that one so that we understand where we are going.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In subsection (4), by substituting for the words “Ministry responsible for the Capital City”, with the word, “Minister”. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which other amendments were there? 

(ii) 	By repealing the word “major” appearing in paragraph (h); Have we now agreed on it, honourable ministers, that you find avenues of classifying them and assigning responsibilities in an instrument. I put the question that the word “major” in paragraph (h) be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We are replacing paragraph (e) with the following:

(e)(i) By substituting for the words “ninety”, the word “thirty”; and 
(ii) By substituting for the word “authority”, with the word “council” 
(ii) Inserting a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (d) to read as follows: 
(e) By inserting immediately after subsection (3), the following:
“(3)(a) The Attorney-General shall, within ninety days of receipt of the Local Bill, submit his or her advice to the minister.”

Justification 

    (i) To reduce the number of days within which the minister has to return a Local Bill to the council where the Attorney-General advises that the Bill contravenes the Constitution or other law made by Parliament from ninety days to thirty days.

    (ii) To provide a timeframe within which the Attorney-General has to review the Local Bill and submit his or her advice to the minister.

Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear? This comes again as the backdrop of bylaws that are submitted and they stay there for long time without being sent back to the councils that pass them. This is specifically to KCCA.

MR AOGON: Thank you, Mr Chairman. My suggestion is that we put 45 days instead of 30 days. Sometimes, the Office of the Attorney-General becomes overwhelmed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the difference between 30 and 45 days?

MR AOGON: It is 15 days and I thought that would do something.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, to come up with any proposal particularly to do a policy or guideline that is going to control the systems; one may require meaningful time for consultation. Personally, 90 days was not too bad because we are aware of the existing structure existing structure within the Authority here. For us to have a middle position, we could put it at 60 days.

MR SSEWANYANA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. There are those urgent local Bills that need urgent attention. When we make these days very many for the Attorney-General, it becomes an excuse for the Attorney-General and, therefore, delay the work of the Council and the Authority. I am of the view that even 30 days are very many. I have ever been there and I saw it. They use it as an excuse not to make things run fast in Kampala. 

For example, we have been having issues of hawkers, which the Council needs to address. If they take those 60 or 30 days, which are being proposed, the Council may get a solution when things have already gone bad. I am of the view that we give 15 to 20 days –(Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: I would like to second my colleague’s proposal by informing him that when we talk of the Attorney-General, we are talking of a learned fellow. He is a lawyer and he is technical in what he handles; we are not talking of a teacher handling a Bill. I do not think a lawyer – who has to argue a case tomorrow if somebody is arrested today – needs 30, 60 or 90 days to understand if the local Bill is consistent with the Constitution. I support my colleague’s view that the number of days should be lowered.

MR SSEWANYANA: Thank you for the information. That is exactly what I meant and it is useful information to this House –(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Mr Chairman, the information I would like to give to my colleague is that –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What information are you giving in discussing clauses of a Bill? (Laughter)

MR AOGON: Mr Chairman, the information is that we cannot hurry to make a law because we can make a mistake. The Attorney-General needs enough time. What would be the benefit to you if you hurry and make a wrong law - the one which contravenes the Constitution? The Attorney-General has a lot of other duties. He does not handle only that local Bill.

MR SSEWANYANA: Thank you for the wrong information. (Laughter)

I am of the view that as we make this law, we must make things run quickly in Kampala because we need development at a quick speed. I think 15 days are enough. Attorney-General is an office of many lawyers who can look into a Bill of a Council very fast.

I remember that during the Togikwatako days, it took about three days for the President to get the Bill to amend the Constitution. What about the local Bill of a small Council of Kampala? I think 15 days are enough.

MR MUGOYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I had the opportunity to work with the Office of the Attorney-General. I must admit that it is a very busy office. It is busy in the sense that it is not just the question of reading the laws but there are a lot of things that this office does in the interest of this country. For example, all contracts that your districts execute are supposed to be perused and approved by the Attorney-General. Imagine those voluminous documents.

It is not a question of merely going through these ordinances. One must understand not only the socio-economic but the legal implications vis-à-vis the current trend of jurisprudence. It is not a simple thing. I, therefore, agree entirely with my brother, hon. Nzoghu, that we give at least 60 days.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Whether they should be 60 or 40 days is not a matter for debate but a matter for a vote. We will take a vote on 40, 60 or 100 days. Is there any issue of principle that you would like to bring out?

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to borrow from the Civil Procedure Act where when you sue Government, the Attorney-General is given protection, which is not the case when you sue another person. You cannot proceed against the Attorney-General unless you have given statutory notice. I do not have it off-head but –(Interruption)

MR BASALIRWA: Mr Chairman, the information I would like to give my brother is that, that is no longer the position of the law. In fact, the Supreme Court has said that giving Government 45 days is preferential treatment, yet the law envisages equality. Therefore, statutory notice is no longer under our jurisprudence.

MR MUGOYA: I would like to add to what the honourable colleague has said. Statutory notice is no longer mandatory but you have a disadvantage in that if you do not issue a statutory notice, you are not entitled to costs under Section 27 of the Civil Procedure Act.

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have worked in the Office of the Attorney-General for four years now –(Interjections)– Mr Chairman, can I be protected from hon. Nandala-Mafabi? (Laughter)

I think the proposal of the committee to give the Attorney-General a limited number of days is good because it will assist in ensuring that there is no delay and backlog. However, considering our capacity, the proposal of 90 days would be on the higher side. The appropriate time we should be given is 60 days. Within 60 days, unless something happens, we have the capacity to process all the requests that come from the districts of Uganda.

Therefore, I plead with honourable members to accept an amendment of 60 days.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Any other proposal? The committee chairperson has outlined quite a few of them. Can we agree now that it is going to be 60 days?

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairman, first of all, these councils have powers to make laws and we should not frustrate them. We are not getting many ordinances from local authorities but one of the problems they point out is that when they pass proposed ordinances, they go to the Attorney-General’s offices and stay there forever. We should empower the councils. 

The issue is that you want to know whether the law passed by the city authority is within the confines of the Constitution. First of all, we have an executive director and his team – which also includes lawyers – who advise the council and the Lord Mayor. We even think that, in the very first place, these people will be able to detect issues that are not constitutional. 

I think we should put the number of days at 30, as the committee proposed. In any case, these councils have powers. They are parliaments at that level and so, they should be given powers to make laws very quickly.

Mr Chairperson, some laws are very important. For example, when they are making a law to cater for a specific occurrence in the city, then, they may have to wait for approval. I think this will not be fair. I, therefore, support the position of the committee that we give 30 days, with assurance that KCCA is equipped with lawyers who can be able to guide the councillors on the constitutionality of the ordinances they will be making. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we need to move from this. We have proposals for 60 days, 45 days, 30 days and I think the 90 days has been moved away from. Can we do 60 days, honourable members?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairperson, I would like to clarify to Members that there are two sets of days. For the Attorney-General, we are proposing 60 days, within which to examine the ordinances and make a recommendation to the minister.

However, when the recommendation is made, we are saying that the minister should take it back to the councillors within 30 days.  At that point, the minister has already been advised by the Attorney-General and the minister knows the default. What the minister has to do is to allot time for the council to sit and consider it. The 30 days are reasonable. After all, at that time, the minister is not making any input except returning the ordinance to the council for consideration of the recommendations of the Attorney-General.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, the clarification I am seeking from the Attorney-General is that he has mentioned when the ordinance has come from the Attorney-General. Supposing council passes a Bill and they are saying it must go through the minister who may sit on it - actually, there is no clause instructing the minister to deliver it within a given period. 


Mr Chairperson, if the council has passed the Bill and it has been given to the minister, how long should it take? Again, if it has come from the Attorney-General, how long should it take? I would like to move that those 60 days are good enough for all sides. In fact, as soon as the minister in charge gets the Bill, he or she should relay it to the Attorney-General and once it comes to the Attorney-General, he or she should relay it to the Council.

Mr Chairperson, we would like to make 60 days so that no one plays with it in the minister’s office. 

MR BYARUGABA: Mr Chairperson, I would like to know whether the President is given a time limit within which to ascent to Bills. If that is what happens, the same should apply to these local councils. I think 60 days are more appropriate to give time to the Attorney-General to look through them and return where necessary or advise accordingly.

MS NAMBOOZE: After the clarification from the Attorney-General, I would like to propose that what we are doing here cannot cure the problem of delays because it only talks about the time when the law comes from the Attorney-General’s Office to the minister. I, therefore, would like to propose that this clause be used to cater for the whole journey of the ordinance from the day it is passed in KCCA to the day it is returned as an approved ordinance.

Mr Chairperson, I propose that we adopt 60 days from the day it is passed by the Council and those 60 days should include the time it should spend at the Attorney-General’s Office and the time it returns to the minister. In any case, the minister should be given 14 days. Otherwise, the minister has nothing to add into the Act. The minister’s work is to - I think these things should be left to us. When we take power, you will give me this position. You gave me the shadow and so, the minister will be a “she”. (Laughter)

What I am proposing is that the 60 days should be the days in which the Attorney-General should look at the ordinance passed, approve and return it to the minister and then, the minister to return it to the Council. We should specifically focus on the time the ordinance spends at the Attorney-General’s office because that is where there is work to be done. Otherwise, the minister will be doing nothing with the law, apart from passing it over to the Council. Even the 14 delays at that level are enough but let the 60 days be with the Attorney-General. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we draw this to a close now? I will have the opinion of the minister and the Attorney-General and we proceed.

MS NAMUYANGU: Mr Chairperson, thank you very much. I appreciate the sentiments of Members but I would like to indicate that at the ministry, we do not just receive and forward.  

First, we do not sit in the Council and so, when we receive the Bill for the ordinance, we read through it and if we find anything that is out-rightly not in order, we advise at that level. That is why we are requesting for 30 days. Then, it goes to the Attorney-General - the Attorney-General will speak for himself but he receives all Bills from the country.

Mr Chairperson, the Local Government Act gives 90 days to the Attorney-General. My request would, therefore, be that we take the proposal of the committee that we give the ministry 30 days and the Attorney-General, 90 days. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the reason these ordinances or bylaws are sent to the Attorney-General is for certification. That certification will never arise from either the Ministry of Local Government, in the case of councils or the Minister responsible for Kampala Capital City. You are supposed to be like a post office to receive and transmit. Actually, you do not have a role. If the Council had access to the Attorney-General, that is what they would do directly.

Honourable members, this business of saying that the ministry will first look at it, is doing double work for nothing. Otherwise, when you receive, you are supposed to transmit it because it is you who can give proper instruction to the Attorney-General. Otherwise, it would have come from the Council itself straight to the Attorney-General. It should just be for onward transition to the Attorney-General because the final decision is made by the Attorney-General. By the time you are spending time to look at again, you are already wasting the Council’s time because you do not have a final say on the matter.  

Honourable members, it is only one office that has that authority and it is the Attorney-General. Your work is to receive, transmit it and transmit back whatever the Attorney-General has said. Would that help?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairperson, I have listened carefully to your interpretation and I agree with you. However, I was thinking aloud; suppose in the Attorney-General’s recommendations or advice, some matters of policy nature are touched on, the minister looks at the recommendations and feels that he should consult with a view of guiding the Council on the matter raised by the Attorney-General; when the Bill goes to the Council.

I was thinking that it is within her mandate if she feels that there are matters of policy nature, to forward the Bill as returned with the comments of the Attorney-General and give advice to the Council on how to treat the recommendations. I am just thinking aloud.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then we will be reading outside the law because the law is very specific. “A local Bill passed by the Authority shall before it is signed by the Lord Mayor be forwarded to the Attorney-General through the minister; to certify that the local Bill is not inconsistent with the Constitution or any other law enacted by Parliament”. It is very specific.

MR RUKUTANA: I now concede because the law is very clear. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The final destination is the Attorney-General. 

MR RUKUTANA: As I said earlier, we would have been happy getting 90 days but my feeling is that when you enact a law, the law has to be operational waiting for three months. So, I still plead for 60 days not 30.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In other words, from the day the Bill leaves the Authority, you start counting; to the day it comes back to the Authority is that what you are saying?

It should be the full cycle because by the time - it should come back by 60 days from the date of transmission so that there is no inordinate delay in the middle.

MR RUKUTANA: Where there is a problem is that our office needs 60 days. If we take all the full 60 days and submit on the last day, what does the minister do then? We submit on the last day.

My concession is that the Office of the Attorney-General is getting 60 days to itself. Let us agree on a period to give the minister, for the minister it can even be seven days because -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The problem that you have with that is that if you give different timelines to different offices, then the enforcement issue will come. If I am giving the minister seven days, the Attorney-General 60 days, then minister another seven days, that would be 74 days.

How will I be able to ensure that the minister has not delayed with the matter in seven days, has it gone there, has she sat with the Bill for a month before transmitting it to the Attorney-General, how will you enforce that?

MR RUKUTANA: It is simple to know who has occasioned the delay because submissions are made by covering notes and they are dated. You can ascertain for the date the documents are submitted or even received and you know the party that was at fault.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman, the Attorney-General is indirectly showing something different. 60 days are two months. A document to leave an office takes one day to be received but the Attorney-General said the he has no control over the period in which the minister will have the document and yet, they are in the same Government and Cabinet.

It should be upon the minister and the Attorney-General to know that we have 60 days in which to certify and finalise this. When the minister receives the document, it should take a day or two to be at the table of the Attorney-General.

He is the one who has more work; he is free to take a month or a month and a half with the document as long as he knows very well that in 60 days, the document must have been received back.

Unless they want to exhibit inefficiency here but if we have to be serious with the work we are doing, there is only one City Council; we do not have a city council in Kamuli. It will not come every time or every day.

Unless you want to tell us that your office has been inefficient but if we have to be serious and serve this country, 60 days is just enough for you to do whatever you want.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Besides, it is not coming from Omoro or Karamoja -(Laughter)- it is coming from City Hall to the minister who sits somewhere around here, to the Attorney-General who is on the same street; really? If it was coming from Omoro or Kalangala, I would understand.

MR OTIENO: Mr Chairman, you know we are making a law, there are possibilities of sabotage in these things. Why don’t we simplify matters and say; “60 days from the date of receipt by the office of the Attorney-General” so that everybody is accountable?

You never know there can be elements of sabotage in any operations. For purposes of making a good law, let us just say, from the date of receipt by the Office of the Attorney-General, the Bill should be worked on within 60 days; there is nothing wrong with it for purposes of clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, we are not just talking about the Attorney-General here but about the Council that enacted it. 

When is the law going to be operational for their administration; if you are only talking about the Attorney-General, what happens if the minister takes two months with the Bill?

What is being accounted for is only the time when it is received in the Office of the Attorney-General and the time it leaves.

If it was coming straight from the Council to the Attorney-General, it would be easy. Then you could count the 60 days because it will come from the Attorney-General back to the Council.

MR OTIENO: We can make a provision that the minister should transmit within 48 hours upon receipt from the Council, it is simple. We put it in the law that the minister should transmit within 48 hours and we solve that issue.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. As you guided correctly that the work of the minister is to transmit to the Attorney-General, I would like to inform colleagues that right now, the ministry has two ministers and we hope it will continue.

If there are two such people, I would like to request that at least, you allow five days for transmission just in case the Bill gets to office when we are out on other activities. 

Five days can be reasonable and then on the way back, five days are also reasonable enough. We get the 10 days add it to 60 to make it 70 days.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, from here to Nairobi is only 1 hour.
	
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: By bus?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: By Uganda Airlines. By DHL, from here to London is 24 hours. So, is the Minister for Kampala Capital City in order to say that from KCCA building to Attorney-General chambers, which is less than fifty metres, can take five working days? Even if it was a train from here to Omoro, it would take one day. (Laughter) Is she in order? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are trying to find something workable and practical. So, let us get to the practical and finish with this issue. If I had known it was going to take all this time, I was going to stand this over.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Chairperson, the word you used was transmission. It can be used interchangeably by conveyor. It can also be a courier or forwarding.

The ministry’s function is purely to convey, forward or courier, if that is the only responsibility you have. In this law, Parliament is deliberately holding the Executive responsible for the period of two months. The minister is part of the Executive. The Attorney-General is the Attorney-General of the Executive.

So, why would a minister want to be put aside as if there are two Governments in this country? I would like to pray that, Mr Chairperson, as you had rightly guided, the Executive, including the minister and Attorney-General, accepts the 60 days and we proceed because we are really over- dragging this matter. I so pray.

MR KASIBANTE: Mr Chairperson, I would like to help the minister. I know she may not be straightforward to point at the problem, which is currently with her. We are talking of two ministers but with no ministry. The minister comes here – and bear me witness – and there is no staff and no Permanent Secretary but we have ministers seated there. I believe that is part of the problem the minister has –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Point of order.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Chairperson, thank you very much. On 11 June 2016, I was appointed a Minister of State for Kampala and my senior colleague, hon. Betty Kamya, was appointed a Cabinet Minister for Kampala Capital City. We were given offices; we have staff. We have been operating and doing work for the last three years.

Is it in order for the honourable colleague to come here and state and put it on record that we are ministers without a ministry? His Excellency, the President created that ministry. Is it in order for him to say so?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think the honourable member for Kampala has never been able to locate the office. (Laughter) So, he may not know where it is but the office actually exists.

MR KASIBANTE: Mr Chairperson, thank you very much. To wind up, I was seeking clarification from the minister to tell this House who the Permanent Secretary and the accounting officer of this beautiful ministry is. Otherwise, we may be at a loss and we do not know and that could be part of the problem with the two ministers we have.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we be relevant to the debate, please? We are not counting staff at this moment. We are dealing with a Bill.

MR RUKUTANA:  What I have discovered now is that it is not the minister to forward. I think it is the clerk to Council because the law says, “It shall be submitted to the Attorney-General through the minister”, meaning the Council can submit it directly but through the minister. 

“Through”, meaning the Bill is addressed to the Attorney-General but through the minister and he endorses. In that event, we can share the 60 days.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Sixty days. Honourable members, have we agreed on this that the full circuit takes 60 days? Can I put the question on the other proposed amendments? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. We have a new insertion; that is 6A, 6B, 6C and 6D.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that before clause 7?

MS ABABIKU: Yes, before clause 7.

6A. The office of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Council 

    (1) There shall be a Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Council elected from among members of the Council; 
    (2) A person shall not qualify to be elected Speaker or Deputy Speaker if he or she is a Lord Mayor or Deputy Lord Mayor; 
    (3) The Speaker and Deputy Speaker shall serve on a full time basis. 

6B. Election of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Council

    (1) The Speaker and the Deputy Speaker shall be elected through a secret ballot. 
    (2) At the elections of a Speaker or Deputy Speaker, a person shall not be declared elected Speaker or Deputy Speaker unless that person gets more than fifty percent of the votes of all members of the Council cast in his or her favour. 
    (3) Where a person does not obtain more than fifty percent of the votes cast, the elections shall be repeated between the first two persons getting the highest votes until one of them gets more than fifty percent of the votes. 
    (4) Where, during the election of a Speaker or Deputy Speaker only one person is nominated, that person shall be declared elected Speaker or Deputy Speaker. 
    (5) A Chief Magistrate shall preside at an election of a Speaker or Deputy Speaker. 
    (6) Except for the taking of oath of the members of the Council, no business shall be transacted in the Council before the election of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker at any time that the office is vacant.

6C. Functions of Speaker and Deputy Speaker –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is 6C. 

MS ABABIKU: Yes, please.
6C. The Speaker and Deputy Speaker shall:

    (a) Preside over all meetings of the Council; 
    (b) Be charged with the overall authority for the preservation of order in the Council and ensuring the enforcement of the rules of procedure of the Council;
    (c) Perform functions, which are similar to those of the Speaker of Parliament, as may be consistent with this Act.

6D. Removal of Speaker or Deputy Speaker from office. 

    (1) The Speaker or Deputy Speaker may be removed from office by the Council by a resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of the members of the Council on any of the following grounds:
    (a) Abuse of office; 
    (b) Incompetence; 
    (c) Misconduct or misbehaviour; 
    (d) Physical or mental incapacitation –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You need to read the sub-clauses.

MS ABABIKU: Okay.   
    (a) Abuse of office; 
    (b) Incompetence; 
    (c) Misconduct or misbehaviour; 
    (d) Physical or mental incapacity that would render the Speaker or Deputy Speaker incapable of performing the duties of Speaker or Deputy Speaker or; 
    (e) Failure to convene to consecutive meetings of the Council without reasonable cause. 

    (2) A Chief Magistrate shall preside at the removal of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker.

    (3) The office of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker shall fall vacant if the holder:
    a) Resigns the office in writing, addressed to the minister;
    b) Accepts appointment to a public office or;
    c) Dies.

The justification is; 

    1) To separate the roles bestowed upon the Lord Mayor by the principal Act to exercise executive, legislative and political leadership. This will ensure the independence of the Council to avoid the clashing roles;
    2) To fill the vacuum that the principal Act creates by vesting the power to convene and preside over meetings of the Authority only in the Lord Mayor, which derails the implementation of fundamental activities of the capital city in his or absence.

Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In your justification, are you using the word Authority or it is supposed to be Council? 

MS ABABIKU: To fill the vacuum that the principal Act creates by vesting the powers to convene and preside over meetings of the Council. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable shadow minister –

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairperson, we are not opposed to that amendment but we should remember that the very reason we are doing this is because we are dealing with a special district.

If the committee chairperson and all of us would bear that in mind when we start to talk about the functions of the Lord Mayor, we do not have any problem with it. However, we do not want a situation where after removing the powers of the Lord Mayor here and then we start talking about his new functions, you will not want to reinstate him in the very position that is held by all the other district chairpersons. 

The biggest thing the Lord Mayor has been doing is to chair the meetings of the Authority. It is fine that function has been removed because you want to separate legislative powers from the executive powers. Once you take the legislative powers from the Lord Mayor, you must give him the executive power. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think that is clear. It has been taken care of. Can we finish with this one, honourable members?

MR MUWANGA: Mr Chairperson, the shadow minister seems to have put a case, which should later be better stated. Let us stand over this clause and go to the functions of the Lord Mayor to examine them to see if there are any functions left for him and then we can come back to this clause. If we move the way we are moving now and take away what ordinarily is the function of the Lord Mayor, then we can as well – 

My humble position is that we cannot consider the functions of the Speaker until we have considered the functions of the Lord Mayor because what we are taking away is ordinarily the function of the Lord Mayor.

Therefore, let us stand over it and go and examine the functions of the Lord Mayor. If there is anything left for him, then we can come back and consider this provision.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairperson, with great respect to my friend, hon. Nambooze, who tells lies about me anyway – that is for another day – is it procedurally correct when we are handling this clause, which is not in any way related to the powers and functions of the Lord Mayor, to stand over this clause even when there is reason to think that there should be a comparison? Isn’t it procedurally correct, since according to hon. Nambooze, they have no objection to this provision, to pass the provisions and when it comes to the clause for Lord Mayor, they relate the provisions, which we have already passed?

You are saying you have no objection. Why don’t we pass this clause? When it comes to the functions of the Lord Mayor and you want to make a comparison, you do it at that particular point in time. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are proceeding because we are agreeing. Let us proceed by agreement. We will stand over this clause and come back to it when we have finished with the others. (Applause)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, the procedural issue is that in the law, we already have the Lord Mayor. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to deal with the Lord Mayor up to the end –? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought that was what had just been proposed. That is why I wondered where this procedure was coming from. 

Clause 7

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 7 is the one that substantially deals with the issue of the Lord Mayor. Clause 7 is supposed to be Section 9 of the principal Act. 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Section 9 of the principal Act is amended in sub-section (3) by substituting for the word, “Authority” the word “Council”. It is a consequential amendment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that Clause 7? 

MS ABABIKU: Clause 7 is in relation to Section 9.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is in sub-section (3). “The election of the Lord Mayor shall be presided over by the –” What are you doing with Clause 7 as it is in the Bill? 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. We are replacing the entire clause with the following: “Section 9 of the principal Act is amended in sub-section (3) by substituting for the word, “Authority” with the word “Council”.” 

The justification is to enable the people of Kampala District to exercise their constitutional right to elect their leader, who is a Lord Mayor, by adult suffrage as opposed to the proposal in the Bill to have the Lord Mayor elected from among members of the council.

Secondly, the provision was premised solely on article 5(4) of the 1995 Constitution which vests-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I have followed the justification but what I have not followed is that you are amending section 9. That means that whatever is in the Bill is for deletion and replace it with an amendment in section 9(3). What does it say?

In section 9, do you want to deal with subsection (3) only? Therefore, section 9(3) says “the Deputy Lord Mayor shall be appointed from among the members of the Authority by the Lord Mayor with the approval of the Authority.” Do we agree to that? Are you replacing the “Authority” with “Council”?

MS ABABIKU: Yes we are replacing “Authority” with “Council”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee? I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee?

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would like to move an amendment that the Lord Mayor shall appoint the Deputy Lord Mayor and executive members from among the members of the Council with approval of the council.

The justification is that the Lord Mayor should also - we are looking at it in relation to district local Government - should also have an executive which assists him or her in his or her duties as the districts.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We have made a new provision for the Lord Mayor to have an executive function to nominate executive members from the Council, to be approved by the Council and even elaborated the functions for the executive committee under section 14. Therefore, if we can be given more time, we shall be able to elaborate on that. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we finish with this particular clause, which is dealing with the - on clause 7.

MS NAMBOOZE: In the parent Act, it is section 9.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Correct but we are dealing with clause 7.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose that section 9 reads that “there shall be a Lord Mayor, who shall be the political head of the Capital City and a Deputy Mayor of the Capital City.” I would like to move section 11(a) upward. 

The justification is that when you read the report of the committee, it states that among the function of the Lord Mayor, being a political head should be deleted. The justification was that being a political head is not a function, which I agree with.

However, it describes the Lord Mayor - why we want him there and to do what. Therefore, when you are defining the Lord Mayor, we say, there shall be a Lord Mayor who shall be the political head of the Capital City and the deputy lord Mayor of the Capital City so that when we are amending section 11, we shall just concede to the fact that we are going to delete the issue of being a political head as a function.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: I would like to second because in the Local Government Act section 12, says that “the district chairperson shall be the political head.” It says there shall be a district chairperson and goes on to say that shall be the political head of the district.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The justification for our removal has been supported by my shadow minister. It is true that it was put under functions and for us it is a position or status from which functions can be derived. However, it also true that when a Lord Mayor is elected, he holds a political position. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you conceding? What will be the proper housing of this?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, yes, for other districts the chairman LCV is the political head. However, for Kampala, which I earlier laboured to explain that the way Kampala was promulgated in this Constitution is a unique area. It is not an equivalent of a district because it is treated separately in the Constitution.

In its treatment, clause 4 clearly expressed that Kampala is located in Buganda shall be the Capital City for Uganda and shall be administered by the central Government. Definitely, the person in charge of the administration is not necessarily the political head.

Therefore, we may infringe-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Learned Attorney-General, if you have universal adult suffrage for the Mayor and he is elected Mayor of the City; what would you describe him as?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, we borrowed this terminology from cities with mayors. A mayor would be described as a mayor because the Mayor of London for example does not have executive powers. Therefore, there is no contradiction of saying he is elected; he is elected as a mayor and nothing more.

Just for guidance, who is the political head of the Authority? After electing the Mayor, who will be the political head if any?

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. As we said, Kampala City is a district with a special status. When you look at the way this law was crafted, it is not the same way the Local Government Act was. Whereas the Local Government Act provides for a takeover of administration of a certain district by the failure of council by the President, it is not catered for under this Act.

The assumption is that the City is directly under the administration of the Central Government and the political head of the Central Government thus becomes the political head of the city. Thank you.  

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairperson, I would like the minister to tell me if she wants to see us writing that the political head of the City is the President of Uganda. 

The President is the Chief Executive Officer of the entire 135 districts this Parliament has created in this country. We are talking about local governance and we elect leaders at various levels. 

At local governance level, those are the political heads. Even my LCI chairperson is the political head of that village. The Gombolola chairperson is its political head. The district chairperson is the political head of the district. 
As I said at the beginning, the court of law has made a ruling that Kampala is a district in as far as everything else is concerned; only that it is the capital city. That is why it has a Member of Parliament.

Therefore, when the committee was deleting that section from Section 11 – do not confuse the chairperson. Mr Chairperson, I beg that the Attorney-General does not confuse the chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I am totally incapable of being confused by anybody. (Laughter)

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairperson, I trust you in that regard. My argument was, and still is, that court has already guided on this. When the committee was deleting this from section 11, the justification they gave was that it is not a function.

The committee did not say that they were deleting it because it is the function of the President but that it is something to describe the Lord Mayor.

Mr Chairperson –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you have made the point. I would like to pose a question, which we need to think over. An election is a political process and it produces leaders. In the case of Parliament, they are called members of Parliament. In the districts, they are called district chairpersons. The political process that brings them into force makes them political. 

If you are elected the chairperson of a district through a universal adult suffrage process, it is a political process. What other name could you be called other than a political leader? (Applause)

That person is a district chairperson and also the political head of the district. If the election process produces somebody called “a mayor” through universal adult suffrage and the Electoral Commission declares that the person has won a political contest, why do you want to call the person something else?

There is the Lord Mayor; but isn’t he or she also the political head of the process of politics? Certainly, the political head will never be the minister because the minister will not have contested and been elected by that group of people.

Honourable members, think about it; let us resume.


MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House to report. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

 REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill titled, “The Kampala Capital City (Amendment) Bill, 2015” and passed clauses 2,3,4,5,6 with amendments; and stood over Clause 1 and inserted Clause 6A, 6B, 6C, 6D and 7 –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those were not part of the Bill and are not until we approve them.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us find an agreed position because this has taken a lot of time. We would have finished this Bill.

The learned Attorney-General, the minister and my colleagues from the Opposition side, we need to agree on this. It is not one of those very difficult things. After all Shakespeare says, what is in a name?” 

What is in all those things to cause confusion when the process is clear about how it is arrived at? This is just describing the process. I think that is why the committee said that it is not a “function”. It is a statement describing that office. Please, go and harmonise this so that we can finish this Bill.

Let me tell you something else. In drafting of laws we say; “Laws are made to pass like razors are made to sell.” If you have a provision that is causing a clog in the process of handling the Bill, you need to look at it. Ultimately, all you want is a law. If it cannot come out, then you cannot regulate.

House adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 5.20 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 01 August 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

