Thursday, 2 July 2015

Parliament met at 2.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I will alter the Order Paper to accommodate a petition from the hon. Dr Jeremiah Twa-Twa to present a petition at an appropriate time.

I wish to also note that in item 3 (B), it is not the Ministry of Internal Affairs but the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. I thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there any minister? Are the papers there? Can the minister lay them?

THE UGANDA ROAD FUND MAINTENANCE PLAN AND EXPENDITURE PROGRAMME FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

2.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As the acting Leader of Government Business, I would like to say that my colleagues are still on the way to Parliament.

I beg to lay on the Table, the Uganda Road Fund Maintenance Plan and Expenditure Programme for the financial year 2014/15. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and it is referred to the appropriate committee. The Clerk can extract a minute.

THE UGANDA REGISTRATION SERVICES BUREAU ANNUAL REPORT 2013/2014

2.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): I beg to lay on the Table, the Uganda Registration Services Bureau Annual Report, 2014/15. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is also referred to the appropriate Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. 

THE UGANDA LAW REFORM COMMISSION ANNUAL REPORT 2014

2.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): I beg to lay on the Table, the Uganda Law Reform Commission Annual Report, 2014. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is referred to the appropriate Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. 

REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE PROCUREMENT OF THE STANDARD GAUGE RAILWAY IN UGANDA

2.08
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (Independent, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. In compliance with Rule 193 (1) of our Rules of Procedure, I beg to lay on the Table the Report of the Select Committee on the Procurement of the Standard Gauge Railway in Uganda dated June 2015. It has been signed by five members of the committee.

At the time of signing, two of the Members - hon. Patrick Amuriat and hon. Xavier Kyooma - were out of the country. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. The report will be debated at an appropriate time. Thank you.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ANTI-CORRUPTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

Clause 3

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: On clause 3, I had requested that the issue of the sentencing and those other things be harmonised. Has it been done?
 
MR SSIMBWA: I thank you very much. Yesterday we had the issue of harmonising the sentencing. 

Mr Chairperson, I would like to cite the law that governs imprisonment, sentencing and fining – The Law Revision, Fines and other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters, Act of 2008.

In the provision of this law, every currency point has a commensurate number of days for imprisonment. When Members read this – yes the time of imprisonment can vary but at the same time the currency point also varies.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the harmonisation? What are you recommending us to do now, based on what you have done? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: The instructions that I have from hon. Tashobya are that the committee stands by its position and that is acceptable to the mover of the Bill.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you will recall that there were other amendments that had been proposed and adopted. This was now in relation to the sanctions of a fine not exceeding 336 currency points or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding 14 years or both. That is where we had reached. 

Can we now proceed to adopt this particular recommendation? Can I put the question to this amendment as it is? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 3, as amended, stands part of the Bill. 
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to

Clause 5, agreed to

Clause 6

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: The committee proposes to amend clause 6 by redrafting section 38 (1) as follows: Duty to give information - 

MS ANYWAR: Order.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, point of order.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. This august House has two sides - one for the ruling party Members and the other for the Opposition and Independent Members. 

Is the honourable Member who is an independent Member of this House in order to sit on the side which is designated for the ruling party Members? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There are only two dispatch boxes in this House. One is on this side and the other is on the other side. An independent member can sit either side.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Chairperson, for your wise ruling. The committee proposes to amend clause 6 in the following terms: 

“38. Duty to give information: Notwithstanding any law, a person from whom a police officer or a special investigator requires information under this Act shall be under duty to give the police officer or special investigator the information, which is in his/her possession or knowledge.”

The justification is to hold the person holding information duty-bound to give the information to the police or the investigating authority.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended agreed to.

Clause 7

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairperson, the committee proposes to substitute clause 7 of the Bill with the following: 

“63. Court to assess benefits derived from the act of corruption: (1) where a person is convicted of an offence of corruption under this Act, the prosecuting authority may apply to the convicting court or any other appropriate court, not later than six months after the conviction, to assess the value of the benefits derived by that person from the act of corruption; and 

(2) subject to Section 65 the benefits derived from corruption by the convicted person shall be: (a) any property or interest held by the convicted person at any time whether before or after the commencement of this Act being property or interest disproportionate to his or her unknown source of income and the holding of which cannot be explained to the satisfaction of court; 

(b) The value of the benefits derived by him or her from the act of corruption, for which he or she is convicted, shall be aggregate of the value of the property or interest therein referred to in paragraph (a) and any other corporeal or incorporeal benefits.”

The justification is to provide for the procedure for the assessment of the benefits derived from acts of corruption.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, hat is the amendment proposed by the committee –

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairperson, there is No. 5, which reads as follows: “The proof and rebuttal under section 3 shall be on the balance of probabilities.” The justification is to provide for the presumption in determining the value of the benefits enjoyed by the convicted person. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the proposal by the committee. I now put the question to that amendment.


(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you again, Mr Chairman. The Bill we are considering is quite important and we are all interested to see that justice is done to it. But following our Rules of Procedure and looking at the number of Members in the House, I would like to ask if it would be procedurally right for us to ascertain the quorum that is enabling us to pass this piece of legislation? 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

2.19
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye East Division, Kampala): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House resumes and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put a question to the motion that the House resumes and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

2.20
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye East Division, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013” and passed clauses 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 with amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
2.20
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye East Division, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, a precedent was created yesterday and we all agreed that this is a very important Bill. We have all realised that this is a bi-partisan issue and so we are all interested in this Bill. So, we felt that the House must be properly constituted when we discuss it. 

Now, the chairperson of the committee is now saying that some clauses have been passed but he forgot to add the phrase, “without quorum.” If he insists that it must be passed then we should add the phrase, “without quorum.” Should any issue arise at least the whole country must know that those clauses were passed without quorum. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.22
MR MUHAMMED MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. I understand that yesterday the State Minister for Internal Affairs presented to this Parliament a statement explaining the death of Sheikh Hassan Kirya who was killed on Tuesday night.

However, I stand here not to undermine the statement that was presented but to bring to the attention of this House and the Government in particular, that the deaths that are occurring in the Muslim community go beyond explaining a particular circumstance of how a known Sheikh was killed.

Mr Speaker, the country and Government of Uganda is aware that there is a list that has been published, not recently but for the last almost half a year, of known prominent clerics and prominent Muslim leaders in this country that are to be murdered. True to the intention of the killers, they are knocking off the members, particularly on that list, one by one.

The Government of Uganda responded when that list was brought to them by providing VIP protection to those particular clerics and prominent Muslims in the country. To our dismay, the conduct of the VIP protection falls far short of what they call VIP protection because if you are given a bodyguard on a particular day to guard you 24/7 - I can go through all these prominent Muslims on that list but I will not - and I compared this list with the government operative and the Minister of Internal Affairs and he is aware.

You are given a particular bodyguard whom you deposit at night at a police station and then you drive home alone; so, how professional is that policeman or that bodyguard of yours?

Secondly, all that we hear when these murders happen in Government is typical of what the minister did yesterday; to simply rush in at 2.00 p.m. and make a statement explaining circumstances of how one was killed, when the funeral service is going on. What else does Government do? They send the Inspector General of Police himself with a brown envelope of condolence and with the usual statements; “We are going to investigate, we will do all that is possible under the law, we will bring the culprits to book.” 

The killers are using the same method. They approach you on a boda-boda and gun you down. This list has prominent members. I may mention one or two; there is Prince Kassim Nakibinge as a principal person to be murdered. It has Sheikh Obed Kamulegeya, Prince Khalifani and the Lord Mayor of Kampala. It has a number of prominent Muslims that I can mention; all the known Sheiks. We happen to represent in some way these constituencies where these Muslims come from. 

Mr Speaker, there is tension. There is a feeling of let down and a lot of explanations are not being given. All that we hear from Government is that it is the ADF. May the country know the strength, the capacity and the capability of the Allied Democratic Front because if it is working at ease and knocking off prominent people in this country, how strong is it? We heard reports that the ADF is in Congo. The suspicion among the Muslim community and I will be very particular, is that Government is not doing all it can to protect them and there could be a conspiracy.

Therefore, we stand here to reject the casual statement that will be given by the Minister for Internal Affairs once I am knocked down at 2.00 p.m. because next day, it may not be a Muslim; it may be a prominent politician in this country knocked down the same way. I do not think the late judge was Muslim and a lot of people are simply saying Muslims are killing each other.

It is far beyond it. Some people are saying that there are simply conflicts among the Muslim community. Muslims have had conflicts since time immemorial and we have had factions and we belong to various faiths. I am a Sunni, others are Ahmadiyyah, others are Tabliqs, others are Shias and our fathers were but they never killed each other. 

Mr Speaker, as I speak - (Interruption) 

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give to this august House is that hon. Muwanga Kivumbi has talked about the hit list and indeed many have been killed on that list. However, there is also a hidden list which is not known because Dr Muwaya in Mayuge and the other Sheikh in Mbale were not part of the list and others have been killed in a similar manner. Therefore, we are not only looking at that list which is there - it is true that the list is there and some of those on the list have been killed but there is another hidden list. 

I believe that as a country, we must wake up. We must seriously handle and investigate to the bottom the root of all these killings because we cannot lose around 12 clerics in just a space of one to two years and many of them have been killed in the same manner. I believe that the government has not done enough. Today, we are here; I may be on the other hidden list and others -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now debating?

MR SSEBAGALA: I am not debating but giving information that there is a hidden list; that we should not only concentrate on the known list but there are other hidden lists going on and if I am knocked down tomorrow as the Imam of this institution, I should not expect the government to come and attend my funeral because they have really failed in their duties.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to give thanks to hon. Kivumbi. There is a state of fear and panic. The information, which is available outside among the Muslim community and even Christians, is that there is infighting between security and because we give a lot of money to the police. Therefore, other arms of Government are uncomfortable and so in order to demonstrate that police cannot protect anymore –(Interjections)- so, is there a sign of state failure? This is very serious information. 

If we do not talk today, tomorrow if we are not there, we shall not be able to talk. This matter is very important that we really need action because if the State was very serious, hon. Kivumbi, to protect the Muslims, the form of killing - because it is a matter of leaving the Sheiks who are on the list without escorts and then have cars trailing them and you will get these fellas who are murdering people in cold blood.

Putting security 24 hours and tomorrow after 10 minutes somebody is killed shows that there is collaboration within security. How can you rule that out, Mr Speaker?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Therefore, Mr Speaker, I thank all members for that information. Where are we going when the IGP has now admitted that he is tired? While at a burial in Kibuli yesterday, the Inspector General of Police said he is tired; he can no longer do anything. Therefore, may we get a solid statement from Government other than a casual explanation of circumstances of the death of the 12 Sheiks I have here and what the police has done so far to investigate and bring the culprits to book. 

Otherwise, a mere 2.00 p.m. explanation to Parliament about circumstances of my death - I saw myself on one of the lists but I am a small person in the Muslim community; they may not target me. However, all that we demand is that Government comes up with a solid statement and assurance to the Muslim community. Otherwise, I do not want to bring to this Parliament the conspiracy and the messages we are getting from the public.

They are simply saying that perhaps the entire Government is giving up on the protection of the community. Yesterday, while at a burial, a serious statement was being given to Muslim followers in the country to protect themselves and to that extent, we will go. If your Government fails, we are not simply going to be murdered one after another yet we pay taxes. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, as I wind up, I would like to take hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi’s information – (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, hon. Kivumbi, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give hon. Kivumbi, who I would like to thank for making this point, is that the statement of the Inspector General of Police yesterday at the burial is suspicious. For one to say that “We are tired” is an implication that even the government we are talking to is tired. We need justification that Government is not party to the statement the Inspector General of Police made yesterday. We are also tired of them.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I think the Government of the Republic of Uganda needs to go beyond the casual statement given at 2.00 p.m. every after death and reassure Muslims or else, as we keep saying, we will not be here to make these fine speeches; we will find a way of giving protection to our people. They will not be murdered one after another while we look on and continue to pay taxes. 

Therefore, may we get a solid explanation? I have a list of - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are winding up, honourable. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: The Speaker says I am winding up - (Laughter) - I will allow you give information and I wind up.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, hon. Kivumbi, for giving way. I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker. 

I recall on this Floor of Parliament, I raised the issue of the training of the police. I am glad that Gen. Kale Kayihura has accepted that he is tired because he is not a professional policeman. You can even see the way the policemen are acting. 

Yesterday, people were walking to Najjanankumbi peacefully to nominate a flag bearer of the FDC. However, to our surprise, a police officer, a one Asiimwe who is a DPC, just pulled a pistol and shot at a peaceful Ugandan. Therefore, these people we see in police uniforms are not police officers and they are not trained to be police officers; they are military people wearing police uniform. This is very clear. 

Ugandans are clever people; you cannot fool everybody. They know what is going on in the country. The so called policemen are trained in Kabamba; they are military people. Therefore, we must take this as a very serious -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the record has captured that the people wearing police uniforms are military people. Would you like to substantiate?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, the Inspector General of Police, Kale Kayihura -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is one person but you said the people wearing uniform.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Yes and this can be substantiated because they trained together with one member in this House in Libya and everybody –(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to insinuate that the military people and whoever you see wearing military uniform has a role to just shoot and kill people anyhow? If you allege that the problems we have that hon. Muwanga Kivumbi has ably put across are because of what is alleged that the police is full of military people, that insinuates that military people are supposed to just kill. They do not undergo training and that we should not trust them. Is he in order to insinuate that military people actually just cause problems?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Mbale Municipality, the statements you made have those implications that the shootings or the killings are because the people who are wearing police uniforms are actually military men. The implication of your statement is that military men are supposed to kill civilians anyhow. Would you like to withdraw that statement?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, Gen. Kale Kayihura yesterday, while making a statement in Kibuli -

THE DEPUITY SPEAKER: Honourable member, is it true it is your statement on the record of this House that military people in this country kill civilians anyhow?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: That is not what I said, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You said the killings are because the people in police uniforms are military people; that is why this is happening. Therefore, they are not trained as policemen but they are trained to kill civilians. Is that what you are saying?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, I said the training is different. Policemen and military people are trained differently. Now for a policeman properly trained to guard the lives of Ugandans and he pulls the trigger to shoot - that is what I said. We were shocked.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, it is still your statement that it was a military man who picked a pistol and shot a civilian and it is normal business for the military in Uganda. Is that your statement?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: No, that is not what I said. What I said, Mr Speaker, is that the training of policemen is quite different from the military. However, what we have seen in this country is that policemen are now being trained in the same camps with military men and we know that there are many military men wearing police uniform including the personal assistant to Kale Kayihura, Joshua Muhwezi. He was a Captain and he had been promoted to Major in the police.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude your statement.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, as I conclude, there are a few things we want to see; that the Inspector General of Police withdraws from politicking and concentrates on police work. More often than not, we see him making political statements than policing.

Secondly, that the training our police officers are receiving seems to be not up to date. It is because the VIP protection they give including to you - if that is the way they are going to conduct themselves, then even you and the Speaker are in deep trouble because she is protected by VIP police. If all that we see is what is going on, then we have a report to say that all is still wanting.

Lastly, we demand a comprehensive statement from Government to explain the following – How and how far they have gone with the investigations into the killing of Sheikh Kirya, Sheikh Rashid Abdul Wafula, Sheikh Mustafa Bahiga, Dr Muwaya Mkwanga, Sheikh Abdul Karim Sentamu, Abubakari Kawesa Hajji, Yunusu Abdul Baker Mundungu, Ahmed Maganda, Abdul Jawal Sentunga. All these have been murdered in the last 12 months in cold blood. These are the prominent ones but even smaller Muslims are being killed incommunicado.

Therefore, we want an elaborate statement - not the casual one that was given about how at midnight and at what time the trigger was pulled - to really explain what is going on. 

Reassure the country that a tired IGP, who has admitted to being tired, should not resign. It is because the IGP on his watch has a constitutional duty to protect people and their property yet on his watch, life and property are being lost. It is high time that the IGP - who is tired - resigned as the IGP and the government appoints a professional and trained police officer to take charge of this difficult situation? I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what has happened is bad. The killings are bad but that is not a license for Members to make statements that are un-researched and unfair to institutions of this country. We should exercise caution and restraint when making contributions on this debate, because to state on the record that military people are wearing Police uniform and that is why they are shooting people is incorrect. For an honourable member to state that on the record of Parliament is not proper.  

2.44
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. It is indeed very sad for us to lose people whether they are Muslims or non-Muslims.

I was not here yesterday when the Minister of State for Internal Affairs was making his statement, because I was attending Cabinet and the meeting took long. However in Cabinet, we were informed of the tragedy. Whenever we get such a tragedy, it becomes a matter of national importance, which cannot pass without Government making a statement on it.

The Minister of Internal Affairs had to come and inform this country, through this august House, of what had happened because it is a matter of concern. If the statement is lacking, it is because the incident had just happened and what he gave us was preliminary information.

I will agree with hon. Muwanga Kivumbi that indeed, we need a more comprehensive statement because we want to know the details. However, to castigate the minister that he hurriedly came here and gave a statement is not proper according to the way I see it. 

When somebody loses a person, many people go there to sympathise with that person. You may go empty handed or take a condolence package like the IGP did. If somebody stands up on the Floor of Parliament and talks about the brown envelop, which was taken by the IGP as a condolence to those who were in agony because of their loss then we are missing our culture –(Interruption)

MR NGANDA SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable Member of Parliament for Butambala has raised a matter of national importance demanding a comprehensive statement from Government, not specifically on the murder that happened on Tuesday but on a series of them. 

The procedural point I am raising is, immediately he finished the statement, the Chief Whip rose up. I actually do not know whether she is now giving the statement that hon. Muwanga is demanding for or whether she is debating and all of us who have opinions to express can now get ready to express them, or whether she is also doing what she is accusing hon. Muwanga of doing and that is castigating him for raising a matter of national importance. 

Is the honourable Chief Whip procedurally right to debate without stating whether she is issuing a statement that the honourable member is asking for? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable Government Chief Whip was making a commitment to the House that, that statement would be made, except that she took long in making that statement. Please, wind up.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am doubling as the Leader of Government Business. The Prime Minister has assigned me the duty -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you do not have a statement now so please -

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: There were issues, which were hinted on –(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am standing on a point of order. It is on record that over nine Muslim clerics have been massacred in recent times. Knowing well the magnitude of those occurrences, Government has never given any explanation concerning them. 

Is the honourable minister in order to continue meandering over a matter, which has already been expressed in terms of concerns that action must be taken? Does she deserve to be the Government Chief Whip?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The last leg of your question is for the President not for the Speaker. Honourable members, as I said, the Chief Whip is making a commitment on what is to follow. Let her wind up.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I stand here to inform this august House that Government has been committed and will continue to be committed in regard to protecting all Ugandans, challenges notwithstanding. Therefore, the Minister responsible for Internal Affairs will be duly directly to make a comprehensive statement regarding what hon. Muwanga Kivumbi has presented to this august House. (Interruption) We can give a time frame of maybe three weeks or two weeks from now so that we can get a comprehensive statement from Government. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She has the prerogative to accept clarification or information. It is not for the Speaker to do that. Honourable members, we will wait for this statement and when it comes, let us look at it and examine it and have a debate on that issue.

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have Ms Esther Nakagingo and Ms Maria Bridget Nassali from Ambassador for Women and Girls in Uganda. They have come to inform Parliament of the launching of the national trophy to end teenage pregnancy in Ugandan Schools under the theme, “Pregnant at 16: Be proud to be responsible.” Please join me in welcoming them; they are up in the gallery on my side. You are very welcome to Parliament. (Applause)

Honourable members, this House will be suspended for 15 minutes. The bell will be rung for the Members to come and we can take decisions.


(The House was suspended at 2.54 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.11 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 3.12 p.m. and was adjourned until Tuesday, 7 July 2015, at 2.00 p.m.)
