Thursday, 16 July 2015

Parliament met at 2.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you may recall, on the 25 June, 2015, the names of members on the sectoral committees were presented to the House but the House did not proceed to approve the composition because some committees, for example the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee and the Committee on Natural Resources were oversubscribed; others were under subscribed for example the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Committee on Information, Science and Communication Technology. 

Consequently, the Rt hon. Speaker directed the Clerk to bring to the attention of the Whips the oversubscribed and under subscribed committees for them to re-allocate Members using their powers under Rule 176(5) of the Rules of Procedure of this House. I have received the re-constituted committees and I will ask the Clerk to read out the names of the new composition of the sectoral committees.

However, I note that the Committee on Natural Resources is still undersubscribed by one person and I see more Independent Members who are not on any committee. May I call upon one Independent Member of Parliament to volunteer and join the undersubscribed committee? 

Honourable members, due to technical reasons, we will not be able to proceed with the matter of reading out the names in the committees and thereby constituting them thereafter. Once the printed list comes, we will then proceed with that.

Honourable members, on Saturday the Irene Gleeson Foundation will be commemorating the achievements of Mama Irene Gleeson, an Australian who came and did tremendous work in Northern Uganda, particularly in Kitgum. She has now built a hospital that is going to be opened on Saturday. The President is expected to attend and transport has been arranged for Members who would like to travel to Kitgum for this purpose. 

I do not know the exact time that the transportation will be leaving but it will be very early on Saturday. We will be there for that function and thereafter come back. Members who would like to come and attend this function in Kitgum, you are very welcome. That arrangement is in place for you to attend. Personally, I will be attending so I invite all of you to come and join us there. Thank you very much.

2.11
MS ALUM SANTA (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance, which was raised on Tuesday by hon. Joy Atim who represents Lira. Yesterday, it was also raised during the Prime Minister’s question time.

This issue concerns the outbreak of malaria. As I talk, this issue has reached epidemic levels and there is therefore a very urgent need for intervention to save lives. For example, in Oyam District, 31 people have died in the last one week and 12,914 patients are admitted across the different health centres in the district.

Mr Speaker, there is also a challenge regarding management of patients who are anaemic because the blood bank in Gulu, which we depend on, is currently lacking blood. This is despite the fact that there are very many pregnant women and children who are affected. 

I therefore request the Ministry of Health, the World Health Organisation and UNICEF to urgently come to our rescue because at this rate of 31 people and more than 12,000 admissions per week in only one district, with more in other districts, I feel that we shall get finished if the ministry and the other organisations do not come to our immediate rescue. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, this matter has now come three times. I think it is getting serious. You might need to do something about it.

2.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I thank the honourable member for raising the matter. It is true that there is a resurgence of the malaria epidemic in Northern Uganda. 

Earlier on, we had been carrying out indoor residual spraying in the areas of Acholi and that phase had been completed and we had shifted to the Lango region. However, as the House recalls, some months back, Government distributed free insecticide treated nets all over the country to all families.

It is true that there is resurgence and the Ministry of Health has been informed about this. We have sent three teams to Northern Uganda, one to the area of Lango, another to the northern part of Kitgum-Lamwo area and the third team will cover Gulu and Amuru area. The teams left this morning. 

As ministers, we shall join them tomorrow to assess the situation on the ground and see whether – (Interjection)– Yes, I know tomorrow it is Eid but as medical people, we work 24 hours. We would like to assess what the problem could be and whether the chemicals we are using for indoor residual spraying namely Icon may not be effective.

We should be able to come up with quick interventions. When this information came to the ministry, we have since responded by sending more quantities of drugs to treat malaria and I can promise that maybe next week, if you give me time, we can have a written statement about the situation in northern Uganda and the responses that the ministry is undertaking to address that challenge, which we have in that area – (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable minister. The case of malaria in Northern Uganda is a very serious one; it is an emergency. When you talk of dispatching teams, how many people are in those teams? People are dying in large numbers. I do not know whether you have appealed to WHO to come in and assist Uganda because this is an emergency. It is so alarming when you see many people dying in each district. You should request WHO to come and assist the ministry.

Actually, you need to dispatch a number of teams and not only one team because the situation is alarming, Mr Minister.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, there has been a program of spraying houses in the Lango sub region and I happen to have gone on radio to popularise this program because there were some farmers resisting, thinking that if their homes are sprayed then they would not be able to sell their simsim and cotton. 

During the program, we were told by its organisers that the district of Oyam had been able to show success in reducing malaria because the district embraced spraying of houses. 

Mr Speaker, I am now baffled and I do not know who is telling the truth because Oyam is supposed to a model district in Lango sub region as they embraced the spraying of houses a long time ago and they have been consistent but to date, malaria is still rampant in the district. Can the minister clarify to us what exactly is happening? Is it dilution of the chemicals, misuse of chemicals or are the people you are sending on the ground using the chemicals for some other things? 

There is a possibility that they may sell the chemicals and over dilute it so that its effectiveness is not seen. I think it is important that this matter is investigated because in Lango sub region, Oyam is supposed to be a model district for the success of that program. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the honourable member had risen on clarification.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When indoor residual spraying was being done, especially in my district of Amuru, I can tell you that in many hospitals, there was completely no malaria. Immediately the indoor residual spraying was stopped last year, the prevalence of malaria went high. When I consulted my District Health Officer (DHO), he explained to me that at that time when the spraying was being done, people’s immunity was resistant to malaria since there was completely no malaria. Immediately it was stopped, the people’s immunity became very low and therefore, they are more vulnerable to malaria attacks. This is a medical term.

The clarification that I would like to seek from you is, when is Government resuming indoor residual spraying since the results were very effective because it managed to control malaria during that time and immediately it was stopped, malaria prevalence rose up? Therefore, I would like to inquire whether you intend to resume the spraying. Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much. To start with your information, it is true that when you carry out Indoor Residual Spraying (IRS) in a community, it changes the immunity status of the individuals. Ordinarily after you have stopped the IRS, there is a surge and therefore when you carry out that kind of program, you must have an exit plan so that you do not completely cut off. Therefore, an increase would be expected but apparently, it appears that it is too much in northern Uganda and that is why we are dispatching teams to assess and see whether there could be a problem with the programming aspect.

To answer him, yes I did say that we have dispatched three teams to Lango and Acholi areas. Actually, my colleagues should have left today but because of the Tobacco Control Bill, I came to Parliament but I will join the teams tomorrow. We are sending technical people and we work with World Health Organisation (WHO). WHO has a presence in Uganda and we work with them. They are part of the teams that we are sending to assess the situation and see whether there is a problem, which we must rectify.

However, IRS is a known measure that prevents malaria. As you recall, before the spraying started in Northern Uganda because there was lot of mistrust, the Ministry of Health started by spraying south western Uganda including Kanungu so that we could build confidence among Ugandans. Indeed for a number of months, I visited Kambuga hospital and it had no malaria cases following the indoor residual spraying. Therefore, it is a tested measure that controls malaria and the chemicals, which are used, are safe for humans –(Interruption)– Just hold on a bit.

The assurance I would like to give you is that we are equally concerned as a ministry and that we have sent technical teams, which will be backed up by political leaders and we should be able to get this information. Next week, I will come with written information to give to this House. [Dr Bitekyerezo: “Information”] I can take your information.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you so much, honourable minister. I would like to inform the House and you that I do not believe that the malaria in Kitgum, which we are now hearing about, can only be wiped out by indoor residual spraying because of the following reasons: one, the carriers of the malaria parasites are children who are below 15 years and these are school going children. 

There is a study, which was done by a doctor in Mulago. They were testing all children in eastern Uganda and some parts of the north and they gave them massive treatment with Fansidar but they also needed something to eat and the malaria went down.  This means that you cannot only use one method to wipe malaria out of this country. We need to do:
    1. Indoor residual spraying to make sure that you kill the mosquitoes, which could also be carrying malaria parasites.
    2.  Massive treatment of those who are very sick since they are carriers of the malaria parasite.
    3. Prevent people from being bitten by mosquitoes by giving them insecticide treated mosquito nets. 

Therefore, there are three things that the ministry must do. If somebody goes to Northern Uganda and treats you with only indoor residual spraying, they will be giving you nothing because you need to have three things working at the same time not only one method. I thank you very much.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I think the information that hon. Bitekyerezo has given is actually what is in the current policy of the government; that we use a multi-prolonged approach to manage malaria. In addition to IRS, we also treat the cases and provide the nets and curtains. 

We are also carrying out studies on the importance of larvicidal materials and chemicals, which we explore and see whether we can use at a wider level in the country in the future. Therefore, we are using several approaches to manage malaria.

MR BALYEJJUSA: Thank you, honourable minister for accepting the clarification. A few months back, I accessed some literature concerning the mechanisms by which mosquitoes transmit the malaria parasites. The studies were saying that between early evening and around 10:00 p.m. to 11.00 p.m., mosquitoes generate the most lethal bites on humans and that is the time that the malaria parasite is transmitted.

However, when you talk of the preventive method of giving out mosquito nets, these are usually applied after midnight when most people are going to bed and spreading the nets on their beds. What do you have to say about that, honourable minister from your medical point of view?

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, for the good of those of us who are here and maybe for the good of those who read the Hansard, I have heard the minister saying that in order to build the confidence of people in northern Uganda about the spraying of homes, they first tried it out in Kanungu.

The clarification I am seeking is whether it is a policy of the Ministry of Health that programmes to other areas of Uganda, especially northern Uganda, are first experimented in Kanungu and why Kanungu in particular, honourable minister?

MS ALUM: Honourable minister, as you are aware, the people of Oyam totally embraced indoor residual spraying. At the same time, the people of Oyam are dying in great numbers: 31 per week and more than 12,000 admitted in the health units. What will your ministry do as far as the eggs and the larvae are concerned?

This is because we are being treated, we have been given four nets per family and our houses were sprayed. What are you going to do since we are still suffering? We have got all the three services that Dr Bitekyerezo talked about.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, honourable members. Yes, it is true that the anopheles mosquito usually rests indoors at night and feeds at night and that is when it bites humans. Therefore, part of the message that we give in our health education is that when it gets to the evening, we have to make sure that we avoid this mosquito.

First of all, for the children, they should be put on long dressing to cover their legs and hands. However, while the concentration might be between those hours, I am sure all of us have experience that even at midnight and beyond, mosquitoes are active.

Therefore, the message is that as much as possible, we should be indoors and avoid this mosquito biting us, especially the children and pregnant women. For your information, we insist on pregnant women because during pregnancy, women emit particular chemicals, which have high affinity for mosquitos. They attract mosquitos and that is why pregnant women are bitten more by mosquitos compared to those that are not pregnant.

Regarding the issue of Kanungu, there was a debate about spraying and which chemicals to use. We had some of these debates on the floor here. There were sentiments that maybe some of these chemicals could be harmful. The ministry therefore looked at the endemicity and the epidemicity patterns of malaria.

You very well know that Kigezi was one of the areas, because of the climatic conditions, that never used to have malaria but because of environmental degradation, temperatures have risen in areas like Kabale and malaria has now become a big problem.

Therefore, it was on that basis that Kigezi was chosen because of the epidemiological reasons that I am giving you. Once the IRS was done and was successful, it gave confidence to Ugandans that Icon, which was being used, is safe and that is why leaders from northern Uganda embraced the programme.

I would like to thank the political leadership of the north because they have been part of this programme and have helped in mobilising the people. There was nothing to do with politics; it was really the epidemiological characteristics of the malaria epidemic in Uganda.

Lastly, I would like to beg my sister to be a little bit patient so that we get the technical information. We are saying malaria but what if there is something other than malaria? We are going to ascertain the problem and we shall definitely come up with measures. If, for instance, we need to carry out mass treatment so that we raise what we call hard immunity because sometimes you may need to treat 80 per cent of the population to disrupt the transmission of a disease – 

However, we shall contain all those measures in the presentation that we shall make next week. After doing a technical assessment of the situation on the ground, we shall then come up with measures as the Ministry of Health, to contain that problem. Already the ministry has been in touch with the district health offices and that is why I said that when we got these reports, we increased the amounts of the anti-malarials and laboratory reagents that we sent. Work is being done and we should be able to address this challenge.

MR KAFEERO: Thank you, honourable minister for giving way. Has Government considered other measures of preventing malaria infections? For example, on the market today, we have a vaseline that repels mosquitos. Government should consider mass distribution of such Vaseline because as you talk about putting on long sleeved attire, vaseline can do better.

If Government can identify a source, which is moderate in prices, procure and distribute massively, I know it will do a lot better than long-sleeved attire. That is the information that I wanted to give.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, it is good to have short term solutions. I would like to bring to the attention of the minister that sometime back, in the interest and goodwill of the President, there was a move to spray the whole of Uganda with DDT; the American approach. 

I know the hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi’s came up, as environmentalists of this country, to say that when DDT was sprayed - There is a book called, Silent bird in the springs, which was used by environmentalists to say that every bird went silent after DDT was sprayed in the US, people developed mental disabilities and so on. 

However, where is the tangible of that? Mr Speaker, in 1952, malaria was a big issue in Nebbi, along the belt of River Nile. It was DDT that was sprayed and no one died. We are still here and we are actually the offspring of those people who lived then.

I would think that we have enough scientific capacity; we have scientists and medical personnel who can look into the validity or the dangers of using DDT to kill mosquitos once and for all.

I hear they are doing an experiment of having mosquitoes that cannot spread the parasite in the laboratories. I do not know how far that will take us.

Honourable minister, you are the right person in the right docket. You are a doctor and these are ventures that you should be looking at because with incidents of drug resistance to Coartem and combinations of Chloroquine and Quinine, it may not help.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much. Hon. Kafeero is talking of Vaseline. Yes, there are very many measures but we usually look at whether they promote cost effectiveness. At an individual level, people can buy vaselines and there are other measures but we have not taken it at that scale that we procure vaseline for all Ugandans. However, we shall look at all those measures, especially in epidemic places like northern Uganda.

On the issue of DDT, this debate has been here before especially in the Eighth Parliament and Government had wanted to use DDT but there was a lot of resistance from those who were making arguments from the environmental point of view. However, I would like to assure the House that DDT is safe. 

It is true that there are many countries that have actually eradicated malaria like the United States, South Africa, China and others because they have used DDT. The difference is that in places like the US, they did aerial spraying and that is why the population of the black eagles in the United States rapidly went down.

However, what we wanted to do was the indoor residual spraying where you spray inside the dwellings or houses and not spraying for agricultural purposes. Due to that controversy and disagreement, we resorted to using Icon and the challenge with Icon is that it is more expensive than DDT. If, for instance, we had agreed and built national consensus to use DDT, maybe we would have covered the whole country.

Maybe we shall bring this debate back on the floor and take a decision. However, I would like to say once again, for the benefit of hon. Nambooze that Kanungu was one of the areas where DDT was used in the 1960s and you can see that we are very healthy. I did say in the Eighth Parliament – (Interjections) Yes, hon. Mbabazi and all the Kanungu people. 

People have lots of fears and misconceptions about DDT but it is safe. I said something in the Eighth Parliament, which I want to repeat that if it becomes necessary, I am ready, as a medical doctor, to drink DDT before this Parliament for you to know that DDT is not as dangerous as claimed by many people who make all sorts of arguments about it. 

As Ministry of Health, we shall bring the debate here and maybe we shall be able to take a decision because malaria is a very big problem in this country and we must come up with clear measures, which will help our people. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you should not make that request formally because it will be rejected by the Speaker. (Laughter)

Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of St Phillips Equatorial Secondary School represented by hon. Kenneth Kiyingi Bossa and hon. Sarah Nakawunde, Woman representative, Mpigi. They have come to observe the proceedings, please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers of New Hope Nursery and Primary School, Bugiri represented by hon. Stephen Baka Mugabi and hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba. They have come to observe the proceedings, please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers of Yunus Nkuutu Junior School, Iganga represented by hon. Abdu Katuntu and hon. Olivia Kabaale, Woman representative in Parliament for Iganga District. They have also come to observe the proceedings, please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)-

Honourable members, it has now been brought to my attention that tomorrow will be Eid. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate our friends and colleagues from the Islamic faith for the holy month and its celebrations and pray that those festivities and the observations of the spiritual things that you conducted have cleansed and renewed your spirit and given you a new momentum to help this Parliament to move forward to achieve what we must achieve to help the people of Uganda. (Applause) I congratulate you very much for this and hopefully, we will be joining you in the festivities tomorrow. Congratulations.

2.41
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have just congratulated our colleagues; the Muslims upon the successful completion – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is not the matter you rose on.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I was also congratulating them but I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Mr Speaker, for a period of one month in Mukono district, there has been an epidemic of a strange disease that is killing our pigs. Entire piggery farms have been whipped out with one farm losing over 400 animals of their stock. The local people refer to this disease as a strange disease but according to descriptions by others, it presents symptoms similar to those of swine fever.

Mr Speaker, as the problem escalates especially in the past one week, there has not been any intervention from the local or national level. We fear that there is a danger that people may eat the dead pigs, either knowingly or unknowingly, yet it is not known what the effects of eating the carcasses may pose to human life.

There has also not been any response from the district. When I raised this matter in a question last week, some councillors went to court and the court raised an injunction against the district budget. Therefore, in Mukono, there is no Government in operation at the district level.

Mr Speaker, pigs in Mukono are as important as cows in some parts of this country and we are praying therefore -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is the urgent matter you would like to rise?

MS NAMBOOZE: The urgent matter, Mr Speaker is that we are concerned that this may spread to other farms and we do not know the dangers it poses to human life yet we do not see any interventions from both local and national levels. 

We are therefore appealing to the ministry to tell this House what they are doing about this problem in Mukono and also about the possibility of sending a team to ascertain the effects of this disease and how we can be able to cure our animals. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. General, would you want to – On this matter?

2.44
GEN. JULIUS OKETTA (UPDF Representative): Mr Speaker, I would like to add a few points on this issue of diseases. I have been traversing the country from my own place in Amuru to Gulu and Kitgum. This morning, I have come from Kamuli into the city. What I would request the Minister of Health to do is that we should increase surveillance and community awareness. Some of these diseases may become endemic in some areas because people use local ways to treat themselves. They do not report timely but buy drugs and treat themselves.

In some areas, they are not using mosquito nets; they are not even there. Therefore, it appears that medical information in remote areas of the communities is not vibrant enough. I therefore request that the minister constitutes a special team to go out to campaign and educate the people so that this enhances the surveillance component of the ministry about the different diseases in the community. In that way, he can easily respond effectively. Thank you.

2.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I would like to thank hon. Nambooze for raising this issue. As a matter of procedure, if a Member has an issue, he or she could raise it with the respective minister so that attention is given and action is taken. Nevertheless, after here we will inform the Minister of Agriculture to send a team to Mukono so that we address the situation as fast as possible. Therefore, we should have the team on the ground latest by Saturday.

MR SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO SECTORAL COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULES 175 AND 176 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you will notice from my communication, this matter had come up and the Speaker deferred the confirmation of the names of the members on the sectoral committees because some of the committees were oversubscribed while others were undersubscribed. There has been some rearrangement and realignment but still, there are committees that are undersubscribed and I think there is one committee that is oversubscribed. We will be asking for some adjustments and then we can make the approvals of these committees.

I also noted that there are five Independent Members of Parliament who have not indicated which committees they belong to so as we speak, they do not belong to any sectoral committee. If they are here, it would be a proper time for them to identify the committees, which they would like to go to so that we can confirm this and let the committees operate normally. I will now ask the Clerk to proceed with this matter of reading the names and we pronounce ourselves on them.

Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development

    1. Hon. Margaret Komuhangi, Chairperson
    2. Hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara, Vice-Chairperson
    3. Hon. William Nokrach, member
    4. Hon. Margaret Baba Diri, member
    5. Hon. Rosemary Nauwat, member
    6. Hon. Theopista Nabulya Sentongo, member
    7. Hon. Dorothy Nshaija, member 
    8. Hon. Achia Terence, member 
    9. Hon. Aboud Kitatta, member 
    10. Hon. Lucy Akello, member 
    11. Hon. Joshua Anywarach, member 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the approval of these names for the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will notice that we have four members still missing on this committee. If there are Members who would like to join this committee, they should indicate as such. Thank you.

Committee on Public Service and Local Government

    1. Hon. Grace Kwiyucwiny, Chairperson
    2. Hon. Mabel Bakeine, Vice-Chairperson
    3. Hon. Florence Kintu, member
    4. Hon. Raphael Magyezi, member
    5. Hon. Ignatius Besisira, member 
    6. Hon. Florence Mutyabule, member 
    7. Hon. Kiiza Rwebembera, member 
    8. Hon. Birungi Nanyondo, member
    9. Hon. David Muhumuza, member
    10. Hon. John Bosco Mubito, member
    11. Hon. Boaz Kafuda, member
    12. Hon. Betty Nambooze, member
    13. Hon. Santa Alum, member
    14. Hon. Roland Mugume, member
    15. Hon. Joseph Matte, member
    16. Hon. Kenneth Kiyingi, member
    17. Hon. Christopher Acire, member

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that those names of Members read become members of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee On Tourism, Trade And Industry

    1. Hon. Flavia Kabahenda Rwabuhoro, Chairperson
    2. Hon. Grace Namara, Vice-Chairperson
    3. Hon. James Bahimba, member
    4. Hon. Stephen Kasaija Kagwera, member
    5. Hon. Everline Tete Chelangat, member 
    6. Hon. Peter Mugema, member 
    7. Hon. Beatrice Mpairwe, member
    8. Hon. Stephen Mayende Dede, member
    9. Hon. Felix Okot Ogong, member
    10. Hon. Patrick Nakabale, member
    11. Hon. Elizabeth Karungi, member
    12. Hon. John Mulimba, member
    13. Hon. Moses Balyeku, member
    14. Hon. Victoria Businge Rusoke, member
    15. Hon. Margaret Aleper Achilla, member
    16. Hon. John Kamara Nizeyimana, member
    17. Hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba, member
    18. Hon. Rose Namayanja Nsereko, member
    19. Hon. Nabilah Naggayi Sempala, member
    20. Hon. Lucy Ajok, member
    21. Hon. Kenneth Lubogo, member 
    22. Hon. Godfrey Lubega, member 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that those names read constitute the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Information and Communication Technology

    1. Hon. Vincent Bagiire, Chairperson
    2. Hon. Kabajo Kyewalabye, Vice-Chairperson
    3. Hon. Mary Turyahikayo, member
    4. Hon. Anthony Ssemmuli, member
    5. Hon. Jacquiline Amongin, member 
    6. Hon. Edward Baliddawa, member 
    7. Hon. Geoffrey Omara, member
    8. Hon. Nulu Byamukama, member
    9. Hon. Micah Lolem, member
    10. Hon. Bernard Atiku, member
    11. Hon. Benson Ogwal-Obua, member
    12. Hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire, member
    13. Gen. Elly Tumwine, member

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that those members now constitute the Committee on Information and Communication Technology.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will notice that there are two Members still lacking on this committee and I will ask for Members who would like to join this committee to come forward.

Committee on Physical Infrastructure

    1. Hon. Ephraim Biraaro Ganshanga, Chairperson
    2. Hon. Peter Aleper, Vice-Chairperson
    3. Hon. Sulaiman Balyejjusa Kirunda, member
    4. Hon. Emmanuel Dombo, member
    5. Hon. Robert Migadde Ndugwa, member 
    6. Hon. Waira Kyewalabye Majegere, member 
    7. Hon. Robinah Nabbanja, member
    8. Hon. Amos Mandera, member 
    9. Hon. Samuel Ssemugaba, member
    10. Hon. Tophace Kaahwa, member 
    11. Hon. Stephen Mukitale, member 
    12. Hon. Iddi Isabirye, member
    13. Hon. Stephen Kangwaje, member
    14. Hon. William Nzoghu, member 
    15. Hon. Cecilia Atim Ogwal, member
    16. Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba, member 
    17. Hon. Patrick Amuriat Oboi , member 
    18. Hon. Mohamed Kawuma, member
    19. Hon. Elijah Okupa, member
    20. Hon. Stephen Ochola, member 
    21. Hon. Robert Kafeero, member
    22. Hon. Gilbert Olanya, member
    23. Hon. Gen. Edward Katumba-Wamala, member 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that those members constitute the Committee on Physical Infrastructure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries

    1. Hon. Mathias Kasamba, Chairperson
    2. Hon. Huda Oleru, Vice-Chairperson
    3. Hon. Gilbert Bukenya, member
    4. Hon. John Amos Okot, member
    5. Hon. Peace Kusasira, member
    6. Hon. Jalia Bintu, member
    7. Hon. Dorothy Mpiima, member
    8. Hon. Stella Namoe, member
    9. Hon. Kase-Mubanda, member
    10. Hon. Fred Badda, member
    11. Hon. Margaret Kiboijana, member
    12. Hon. Kasirivu Atwooki, member
    13. Hon. Francis Epetait, member
    14. Hon. Kassiano Wadri, member
    15. Hon. Betty Amongi, member
    16. Hon. Lt Gen. Jim Owoyesigire, member

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that those members now constitute the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs

    1. Hon. Benny Namugwanya, Chairperson
    2. Hon. Emmanuel Eriaku, Vice-Chairperson
    3. Hon. Milton Muwuma, member
    4. Hon. Simon Mulongo, member
    5. Hon. Patrick Mulindwa, member
    6. Hon. Frederick Mbagadhi Nkayi, member
    7. Hon. Michael Mukula, member
    8. Hon. Margaret Makhoha, member
    9. Hon. Peter Okeyoh, member
    10. Hon. Saleh Kamba, member
    11. Hon. Sarah Nakawunde, member
    12. Hon. Proscovia Alengot, member
    13. Hon. Dr Sam Lyomoki, member
    14. Hon. Hassan Kaps Fungaroo, member
    15. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, member
    16. Hon. Christine Bako Abia, member
    17. Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda, member
    18. Hon. Rose Milly Akello, member
    19. Hon. Cyrus Amodoi Imalingat, member
    20. Hon. Kezekia Mbogo, member
    21. Hon. Martin Bahinduka Mugarra, member
    22. Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, member
    23. Hon. Brig. Phinehas Katirima, member

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that those members now constitute the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development

    1. Hon. Robert Kasule Sebunya, Chairperson
    2. Hon. Anthony Okello, Vice-Chairperson
    3. Hon. Henry Musasizi – member
    4. Hon. Xavier Kyooma – member
    5. Hon. Rose Akol – member
    6. Hon. Isaac Sejjoba – member
    7. Hon. Timothy Lwanga Mutekanga – member
    8. Hon. Lilly Adong – member
    9. Hon. Hatwib Katoto – member
    10. Hon. Amos Lugoloobi – member
    11. Hon. Emma Boona – member
    12. Hon. Michael Ayepa – member
    13. Hon. Martin Mugabi Muzaale – member
    14. Hon. Ochwa David – member
    15. Hon. Ekanya Geoffrey - member
    16. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi Nathan - member
    17. Hon. Odo Tayebwa - member
    18. Hon. Mathias Nsubuga – member
    19. Hon. Franca Akello – member
    20. Hon. Maxwell Akora – member
    21. Hon. Isaias Ssasaga – member
    22. Hon. Kevinah Taaka - member
    23. Hon. Jack Sabiiti – member
    24. Hon. John Bagoole – member
    25. Hon. Capt Susan Lakot – member

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that those members whose names have been read now constitute the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee On Presidential Affairs

    1. Hon. Fred Mwesigye – chairperson
    2. Hon. Hellen Kahunde – vice chairperson
    3. Hon. Peter Ogwang - member
    4. Hon. Tom Aza - member
    5. Hon. Agnes Nabirye – member
    6. Hon. Judith Amoit - member
    7. Hon. Florence Nebanda - member
    8. Hon. George Ekuma - member
    9. Hon. Naome Kabuule - member
    10. Hon. Michael Mawanda - member
    11. Hon. Dr John Baptist Lokii- member
    12. Hon. Susan Amero - member
    13. Hon. Peter Omolo - member
    14. Hon. Odonga-Otto - member
    15. Hon. Jacinta Ogwal - member
    16. Hon. Jesca Ababiku – member
    17. Hon. Patrick Nsanja - member
    18. Hon. Maj. Gen. Julius Oketta - member

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that those members whose names have been read now constitute the Committee on Presidential Affairs.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Foreign Affairs

    1. Hon. Sam Okuonzi – chairperson
    2. Hon. Peter Lokii – vice chairperson
    3. Hon. Juliana Auma - member
    4. Hon. Abdi Chemaswet - member
    5. Hon. Sempala Mbuga - member
    6. Hon. Onyango-Kakoba - member
    7. Hon. Ogalo-Obote - member
    8. Hon. Stanley Omwonya - member
    9. Hon. Hellen Asamo - member
    10. Hon. Ahmed Awongo - member
    11. Hon. Asupasa Isiko - member
    12. Hon. Hood Katuramu - member
    13. Hon. Rose Mutonyi - member
    14. Hon. Jack Wamanga-Wamai - member
    15. Hon. Winfred Kiiza - member
    16. Hon. Issa Kikungwe - member
    17. Hon. Fred Ebil - member
    18. Hon. Latif Ssebagala- member
    19. Hon. Hussein Kyanjo - member
    20. Hon. Andre Allen - member
    21. Hon. Manoah Achile – member
    22. Hon. Lt Gen. Charles Angina – member

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that those members whose names have been read now constitute the Committee on Foreign Affairs.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs

    1. Hon. Stephen Tashobya – chairperson
    2. Hon. Stephen Baka – vice chairperson
    3. Hon. Remigio Achia- member
    4. Hon. Denis Hamson Obua - member
    5. Hon. Lynda Timbigamba – member
    6. Hon. Yonah Musinguzi - member
    7. Hon. Jovah Kamateeka - member
    8. Hon. Kabakumba-Masiko - member
    9. Hon. Alex Ndeezi - member
    10. Hon. Annet Nyakecho - member
    11. Hon. Alex Byarugaba - member
    12. Hon. Connie Nakayenze - member
    13. Hon. Monicah Amoding - member
    14. Hon. Betty Mbabazi - member
    15. Hon. Richard Todwong - member
    16. Hon. John Ssimbwa – member
    17. Hon. Harriet Ntabazi - member
    18. Hon. CD Lowila Oketayot - member
    19. Hon. James Kakooza - member
    20. Hon. Abdu Katuntu - member
    21. Hon. Medard Sseggona – member
    22. Hon. Joseph Balikuddembe - member
    23. Hon. Florence Namayanja – member
    24. Hon. Paul Mwiru - member
    25. Hon. Krispus Ayena - member
    26. Hon. Fox Odoi – member
    27. Hon. Sam Otada-Amooti - member
    28. Hon. Jennifer Mujungu – member
    29. Hon. Lt Col. Sarah Mpabwa - member
    30. Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba - member

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that those members whose names have been read now constitute the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS

    1. Hon. Tonny Ayo – chairperson
    2. Hon. Sarah Nyirabashitsi – vice chairperson
    3. Hon. Sarah Mwebaza - member
    4. Hon. Veronica Babirye - member
    5. Hon. Nelson Sabila – member
    6. Hon. Sarah Kayagi - member
    7. Hon. Nakato Kyabangi - member
    8. Hon. Safia Nalule Juuko - member
    9. Hon. Olivia Kabaale - member
    10. Hon. Rosemary Nansubuga - member
    11. Hon. Anne Auru - member
    12. Hon. Baker Ssali - member
    13. Hon. Amama Mbabazi - member
    14. Hon. Peter Nyombi - member
    15. Hon. Ruth Achieng - member
    16. Hon. Susan Namaganda – member
    17. Hon. Mariam Nalubega - member

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that those members whose names have been read now constitute the Committee on East African Community Affairs.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Education and Sports

    1. Hon. Sarah Lanyero – chairperson
    2. Hon. William Kwemara – vice chairperson
    3. Hon. Sylvia Ssinabulya - member
    4. Hon. Jacob Opolot - member
    5. Hon. Yahya Gudoi – member
    6. Hon. Lydia Chekwel - member
    7. Hon. Khiddu Makubuya - member
    8. Hon. Christine Acayo - member
    9. Hon. Gertrude Nakabira - member
    10. Hon. Angelline Ossege - member
    11. Hon. Joseph Ssewungu - member
    12. Hon. Mary Nalubega Tunde - member
    13. Hon. Julius Maganda - member
    14. Hon. Moses Kasibante - member
    15. Hon. Rose Iriama - member

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that those members whose names have been read now constitute the Committee on Education and Sports.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON HEALTH

    1. Hon. Medard Bitekyerezo – chairperson
    2. Hon. Ruth Lematia – vice chairperson
    3. Hon. Dr Kenneth Omona - member
    4. Hon. Margaret Iriama - member
    5. Hon. Naome Kabasharira – member
    6. Hon. Dr Jeremiahs Twa-twa - member
    7. Hon. Justine Khainza - member
    8. Hon. Barumba Rusaniya  - member
    9. Hon. Nantume Egunyu - member
    10. Hon. Dr Patrick Mutono - member
    11. Hon. Olivia Katwesigye - member
    12. Hon. Dr Michael Bayigga - member
    13. Hon. Betty Aol - member
    14. Hon. Femiar Wadada - member
    15. Hon. Ronah Ninisiima - member

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that those members whose names have been read now constitute the Committee on Health.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Natural Resources

    1. Hon. Kafabusa Werikhe Michael – chairperson
    2. Hon. Eddie Kwizera – vice chairperson
    3. Hon. Anna Maria Nankabirwa - member
    4. Hon. Jacob Wangolo - member
    5. Hon. Alex Ruhunda – member
    6. Hon. Mudimi Wamakuyu - member
    7. Hon. Anifa Kawooya- member
    8. Hon. Grace Byarugaba - member
    9. Hon. Godfrey Kiwanda - member
    10. Hon. Julius Junjura - member
    11. Hon. Bakaluba Mukasa - member
    12. Hon. Syda Bbumba - member
    13. Hon. Samson Lokeris - member
    14. Hon. Martin Drito - member
    15. Hon. Yorokamu Katwiremu - member
    16. Hon. Wilberforce Yaguma – member
    17. Hon. Vicent Mujuni - member
    18. Hon. Reagan Okumu - member
    19. Hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi - member
    20. Hon. Yokasi Bihande-Bwambale - member
    21. Hon. Beatrice Atim Anywar – member
    22. Hon. Florence Ibi-Ekwau - member
    23. Hon. Alice Alaso Asianut – member
    24. Hon. Jimmy Akena - member
    25. Hon. Deogratius Kiyingi - member
    26. Hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro – member
    27. Hon. Jacob Oboth - member
    28. Hon. Benjamin Cadet – member
    29. Hon. Aja Baryayanga - member
    30. Hon. Haruna Kyeyune – member
    31. Hon. Col. Innocent Oula – member

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a problem with this committee; it is over-subscribed by one member. So if I can have one of the whips re-assigning or a member whose name has been read on this committee to move to another committee that would be proper. Otherwise, it is over-subscribed and we cannot handle it at this stage. Is there a member who would like to move from this committee to another committee that is under-subscribed? The last one is a UPDF member; is there a UPDF whip here? Hon. Lakot, would you like to re-assign one of your members?

CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT: Mr Speaker, we have only one member of UPDF on that committee; so it becomes difficult to remove that one member. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Unless the member for Busongora North is coming to withdraw his name, he will not access the microphone.

Honourable members, you know the names that have been read; otherwise we will have a problem constituting a committee that is over subscribed. It will be in violation of Rule 176 of our Rules of Procedure. Is hon. Haruna Kyeyune here; Clerk?

Honourable members, I know that the rules do not give the Speaker the authority to do this but because we have to constitute this committee, I will withdraw hon. Haruna Kyeyune, the member from Kyotera from this committee and reassign him to – yes, member.

MR BAHINDUKA: Rt. Hon. Speaker, there are so may NRM MPs on that committee –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you withdrawing from this committee?

MR BAHINDUKA: I am not but I was just supporting –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please! We will move the honourable to one of the committees that is under subscribed - is that committee undersubscribed? We will move hon. Haruna Kyeyune to the Committee on Local Government and Public Service. 
 
May I now put the question with the withdrawal that has been made on No. 30? I now put the question that the members whose names have been read with the exception of hon. Haruna Kyeyune from Kyotera now constitute the Committee on Natural Resources.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have received a request from hon. Phyllis Chemutai from Kapchorwa. She has requested to be put on the Committee on Gender. I now put the question that she becomes a member of this committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there any other member from the Independents who has not yet joined any committee? Can I now put the question on the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for the inclusion of hon. Haruna Kyeyune? I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there any member from the Independents who would like to be assigned a committee? These are honourable members from Lira, Mityana County South, Masaka Municipality and Tororo Municipality. They do not belong to any committee as of now but we shall leave it like that for now. I thank you honourable members; next item.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE TOBACCO CONTROL BILL, 2014

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we stood over clause 11 – we had reached clause 11 but we did not take a decision on it. I had requested for some harmonisation on it. Where you able to do something on clause 11 which is now agreeable to the members? Can we please have it?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Chairperson, we agreed on 50 metres.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The 50 metres was only one of the items. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairperson, that provision in the Bill is about creation of 100 per cent smoke free environment in the prescribed public places. The contention was whether it should stay that way or have designated smoking areas. 

We had consultative meetings and we agreed that we make them 100 per cent smoke free areas and in the Bill, there had been a proposal that in the radius of 100 metres, there should be no smoking. However, we reached a compromise that we reduce it to 50 metres and we agreed with the mover. It was the position of the committee. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Are you on 50 metres? Can I put the question on the 50 metres from 100 metres and then we move to the next issue, or it is on the same issue?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, first of all, before we deal with the 50 metres – it is true that we agreed on the 50 metres but if you take Parliament as an example, it means after 50 metres around Parliament, it will be a smoking area. But we said that for us to avoid it being a smoking area, there must be a designated place. If we say 50 metres, people will know that that ring is a smoking area. We were therefore saying that we must designate an area where to smoke so that everybody in that area can smoke.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In other words (11) (2) (d) should not be deleted? 

MS OPENDI: Mr Chairperson, (d) should be deleted because we have even seen that under the current regulation, most of the owners of these public places like hotels are supposed to designate specific areas for smoking but we have seen this being abused. This is why (d) should be deleted. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you did not read what that provision is saying.

MS OPENDI: I have read.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, you have not. Please read it again. Read from 2.

MS OPENDI: “A person shall not smoke in any outdoor space that is designated a non-smoking area by the person responsible for the premises.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So why do you delete it?

DR BARYOMUNSI: The understanding was that the in-door place within the public place should be smoke free plus the radius of 50 metres. Then outside that we can say

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What this provision is saying is that the building plus 50 metres should be designated as non-smoking area, that is what it is saying, so why do you want to delete it?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Chair we concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

DR BITEKYEREZO: Rt. hon. Chair on the issue of display of notices, we want to amend clause 12(1) and insert “Swahili” between the words “language” and “and” appearing in line three. The justification is that Swahili is the second official language under Article 6(2) of the Constitution.

In clause 12(3) we want to substitute 10 currency points with four currency points. The justification is that we want to ensure that the currency points are proportionate to the term of imprisonment prescribed under the provisions. 

Then (c), clause 12(4) to draft a provision to read as follows: “A person who contravenes this section shall on subsequent convictions be liable to a fine not exceeding 12 currency points or to imprisonment to a term not exceeding 6 months or both.”The justification is to avoid ambiguity since it is not clear as to what amounts to continuous contravention.

2) Revocation or suspension of a license is such a harsh punishment for that offence. In clause 12(5) we want to delete sub clause 5. The justification is that there is no need to transfer the enforcement expenses on individual employees of a corporation since a corporation can bear its costs.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members those are the proposals for amendment from the committee.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: On clause 12(3) we would like to reinstate the earlier clause in the Bill to maintain the 10 currency points that were suggested in the Bill and the justification is that we need a deterrent measure that people are going to abide by. 

Clause 12(5), we would like to amend it to read as follows: “where this section is contravened by a corporation or partnership -”, we delete the manager, director, officer or their legal representatives and then we insert that “that corporation or partnership shall bear responsibility for the cost incurred in the enforcement process”. Here we are exonerating the manager or the director but the owner of the partnership or the corporation bears the burden of the law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do I take it that you agree with the rest of the amendments proposed by the committee except these two.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Yes, please.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The clarification I am seeking from the movers is whether they intend that when it comes to corporations, partnerships and companies, they will on top of paying the fine also pay the law enforcers. Is that what they are trying to say under clause 12(5)? Would that be fair that a person pays a fine and then meets the costs for enforcement of the law?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is a corporation, where the section is contravened by a corporation or partnership.

MS NAMBOOZE: Still, Mr Chairman, I still wonder why a corporation has to pay the law enforcers because we assume the law enforcers are already paid by Government. Why should we be picking money from offenders to pay the law enforcers and how shall we determine the amount?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Chair, we believe that when the law is not upheld definitely the law enforcement officers will be running up and down and this is to deter the repetition of the same offences that if the corporation failed to abide by the rules, then it bears the burden of law enforcement. In any case the regulations will be in place to address that gap that you are talking about, so the ministry will come up with regulations.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chair we sat with very many people. As a committee, we took trouble and decided to be as humane as possible. Rt. hon. Chair and colleagues, I want you to look at that 12(5) and this is how it reads: “where this section is contravened by a corporation or a partnership, the manager, director, officer or their legal representative shall bear the responsibility for the cost incurred in the enforcement process”. We said we want to delete this. The reason is that there is no need to transfer the enforcement expenses on individual employees. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: They have proposed that it will be the corporation only. 

MR NZHOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am constrained, on the fines which are being proposed, whether it is 10 currency points or 4 currency points that is for 12(3) and 12(4).

When you look at the objects of the Bill, 3(d) says: “to protect the health of the population in light of conclusive scientific evidence demonstrating the debilitating illnesses, diseases, disabilities caused by tobacco and exposure to tobacco smoke and to address tobacco related environmental and social harms”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think let’s proceed like this so that we can deal with these other issues. There is clause 12(1), is there any amendment in clause 12(1)? 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: we agree with clause 12(1)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 12(2) the issue here is that the movers of the Bill want to retain the currency points in the Bill, the committee wants to reduce it to 10 currency points. So 12(2) is okay. Then we come to 12(3)

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, as a Committee on National Economy, we visited the Cancer Section of Mulago Hospital earlier this month and we saw the real situation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, first state for me what you want to do then you can explain.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, I feel that the 10 currency points, which the mover wants to reinstate, is not even enough –(Interjection)– They had earlier on proposed four from 10 and she was saying now they want to reinstate 10. I want to propose that we increase this because the damage that it causes on the taxpayer –(Interjection)– I do not want that information –(Laughter)– I had read (d) (iii) of the Object of the Bill and if my colleague was not listening, he should refer to that. 

I am proposing that we should at least move this to 50 currency points because 10 currency points is only Shs 200,000. Now, what can Shs 200,000 really do as a fine? It does not even inconvenience the payer - the defaulter. We must make this as deterrent as possible and move it to 50 currency points.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You will have to harmonise it with the imprisonment terms, because you cannot change the currency points and leave the jail sentence as it is. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, I think if we go to the title on clause 12, it says “Display of notices”. That is why I was asking: what is the danger? It is the danger of not displaying. For not displaying, Shs 200,000 is good enough. That is why I was asking. 

He is looking at smoking holistically, - failing to stop people from smoking - but we are talking of not displaying the notice. That is what this clause is all about. Mr Chairman, I would think that the 10 currency points are rather ok. 

My other query is on (3), where we refer to a person responsible; I did not look at the definition of what amounts to a person responsible. We need to define that and be specific. Are we talking about the owner of the premises, the person managing the place, or the guards? Thank you very much.

MS OPENDI: I think the concerns of the member from Padyere are answered in (5) and it says, “Where this section is contravened by a corporation or partnership, the manager, director, officer or their legal representative shall bear responsibility…” - (Interjection) - Have you deleted it? I did not follow that. Okay, I agree with you that we have to define the responsible person.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there need to define a person responsible for the premises? Is there need to define that? If it needs defining, can you propose the definition?

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, proposing a definition right now may be a little difficult but we are going to define it in the course of -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, it is actually defined - “Person responsible for the premises means the owner, manager or other person in charge of the public place, workplace or means of public transport.” It is defined. 

On the issue of the currency points, there should be consistency with the imprisonment terms; we cannot lift one and - 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: I concede to the amendment by hon. Nzoghu and it should be commensurate with the imprisonment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, remember the statement from Padyere, that this is about a failure to display a notice. Are the sanctions you are imposing commensurate with the violation that you are looking at? This is a failure, an omission, to display a notice. Think about it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, I think we have not read this thing very well. “A person responsible for a premise where smoking is prohibited shall display…” It means now the Clerk to Parliament shall display around here notices saying that this is a no smoking area. I do not know how many signposts one would need to display such notices in the whole of this area. That is why we had said it would have been better that a person designates a smoking area –(Interjection)– just give me time, I want to develop my case. If you read it-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, I would like you to propose what you want to do and then explain it because we are at committee stage now.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, first of all, it is going to be a cost for every public place.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What are you proposing now? Do you propose to delete the whole clause? If so, propose and then you speak to it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I propose that we delete clause 12 or we change it the other way round, to say, “A person responsible for a premise shall display a designated smoking area”. That is a small place you can put - (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairperson, this is very plain English. It says “A person responsible for a premise where smoking is prohibited shall display in a conspicuous place…” It does not mean that the Clerk will put notices in the chamber or everywhere. The Clerk can put a notice at the entrance saying that this Parliament is a no-smoking area. Therefore, I do not think that the interpretation my brother is giving is the real one. We are not saying that you put notices on every seat here.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, I am raising this because we have already said that there will be a distance from the main entrance to where smoking is allowed. Now, if it is known that this is a public - the display will show that this is a public area - that means it is a no smoking area. The best thing is to display that this is a public area, and the law says when it is public, you do not smoke. You can then designate an area that is a smoking area. I am telling you that this law - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The honourable member may have a point but it is a different point from what we are dealing with here.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairperson, I am a doctor but I have struggled to read law and this is what I have understood: There is a law that prescribes that one month in prison is equivalent to two currency points. Therefore, whatever currency points you are proposing should comply with that principle. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We passed that law here. Right now we are not dealing with currency points. The point the honourable member for Budadiri West is making is that, ok this is a public place and at the entrance you can say “this is a smoke-free zone”. What about the fifty metres outside this building? How will you give the notice? I think that is the issue he is raising - how will you display this? 

He then makes a second point that instead, you should now designate where you should smoke. I think those are two separate points. Let us deal with the one that is in this clause, which is about display of notices where there should be no smoking. That is what it is saying in 12.

DR BARYOMUNSI: First of all, the responsible minister will issue guidelines and regulations to give details about this. He will give regulations on what kind of notices – the information to be displayed on the notices. This notice will say, “This Parliament is a no-smoking area, but you are allowed to smoke 50 metres from the entrance of Parliament”. That is the kind of notice. 

It will be displayed in a prominent place where everybody who enters Parliament should be able to read that notice in English, Kiswahili and the common language spoken in that area. Therefore, the notice will include all that information – that do not smoke here and you can only smoke 50 metres away from this building.

MR AMURIAT: I would like to indulge the House to take note of what the Member of Parliament for Budadiri West is pursuing. If the objective of the Bill is to stop smoking in public areas and it is known that there is a law and the law is popularised that there shall be no smoking in public places, drawing from the example of this Parliament, which is a public place, I think it would be a waste of time and resources and it would also not be necessary to have notices displayed for no smoking. This is because it is a known fact that the law compels us or anybody who wishes to smoke in public not to smoke in public. 

Therefore, these people who would wish really to smoke should not smoke in public. Having a designated area where they can go and exchange their smoke would probably be a perfect solution to this. By saying those of you who wish to smoke and yet the law does not allow you to do that-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you are taking me back to the point I made. We need to be relevant to the debate. We are discussing clause 12, which is about display of notices.

MR AMURIAT: I think that needs to be deleted altogether. In my view, if you would like to bring it to contest, I find it unnecessary, Mr Chairman.

MR BAHINDUKA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would equally support what hon. Nandala was suggesting. This would mean that there would be a display in very place. If you look at Jinja Road, for example, there would be notices everywhere and it would look like a mess. Why don’t you just designate an area? It is obvious that it is a public place and there is no smoking allowed there; why do you need everyone to display? I think it is unnecessary.

Mr Chairman, my suggestion is that we delete this clause. It is unnecessary.

MR SABILA: Mr Chairman, I look at this clause as very relevant. The only difference between having that clause and deleting it is that this smoker will fail to find a non-public place. When you look at the annex, even if you are going to designate a smoking area, where is that one going to be? 

Fifty metres away from Parliament will take you to a restaurant or a bar. I think the whole issue is that the smoker maybe runs away to a rural setting somewhere. Therefore, this provision is still very relevant. I expect that it remains the way it is.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We are making the law for everybody. We know there are people who smoke and people who do not smoke. To protect those who do not smoke, we must designate a place. In society, there are people who smoke and, therefore, we must designate that this is a smoking area and this is a non-smoking area. We must cater for these ones who smoke.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can we deal with the issue of notices? We are going back to something else. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I think the issue here is about notices. A public place has already been defined. If you delete clause 12, you will make a mistake. This is because I am going to walk into Parliament and smoke saying I did not know it was a public place. That is precisely my understanding. I will put a very clear defence that I did not know that it is a public place.

A public place has been defined, if I may read it: “Public place includes an area, permanent or temporary, fixed or mobile, that is accessible to the general public or for collective use by the general public regardless of ownership or right of access.” Clause 12 is just saying we are putting notices. It is just a kind reminder to you that this is a public place. 

If you delete clause 12, I am going to walk into a church or a small bar and smoke there and say I did not know it was a public place. We are going to be bogged down by many people putting the unnecessary defence that they did not know it was a public place. Why don’t we reinforce the definition of a public place by demanding the owners of all such premises to put that notice there – “no smoking” – so that when they find you smoking inside, you will have no defence?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, is that clear? Can we move forward on this now? You see, there are small signs – a cigarette with a ring round it and a cross. It is a small thing that they put on a door to say “no smoking”. I think that is the kind of thing that we are talking about, to alert somebody that when you are here or approaching here please, no smoking. That is what it is saying. 

For the owner of the premises who fails to do that, – he leaves his premises empty or open and a foreigner or somebody comes and does not know about the existence of the law and just starts smoking - what are you going to do? That is what the notice is about, so that everybody is alerted that as they come, there is no smoking from a certain point. 

That is what it is saying in clause 12. It does not talk about a designated place for smokers. This clause is not about showing where you can go and smoke. It is about where you should not smoke. Can we deal with clause 12 first and then bring other issues of getting places for smokers later?

MR BAHINDUKA: Yes, Mr Chairman. There is no problem with displaying-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If there is no problem with displaying, then let us make progress. Please!

MR BAHINDUKA: Actually, I have a problem with displaying. This is because every other area is a public place. Where will it not be displayed? Let me use the example of this road of ours; every place here is a public place. Therefore, why is it necessary to display all over the place? Why don’t you just designate an area? It is much better than having everyone display. I will display at my gate and everywhere else. Honestly, it does not make sense. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you show me in the provision where they are saying “all over the place”? They said a conspicuous place where everybody approaching the premises can see.

MR BAHINDUKA: Yes, a public place.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does that mean everywhere?

MR BAHINDUKA: Yes. Even my gate would be a public place, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us make progress on this particular issue of displaying. Have we agreed on the currency points under (3)? There should be concurrence. We passed a law here on miscellaneous things - things to do fine fines, sentences and things like that - that there should be correlation when you are doing that. So, when you say “currency points”, there is a corresponding imprisonment term that goes with it. Can we harmonise this and move forward? This is for display of notices - if you fail to display notices.  Can we now make progress on this? 

The committee has proposed four currency points or two months imprisonment. That is in accordance with the law because the proposer of the Bill had said two months’ imprisonment. So they just said it is four currency points that corresponds to two months’ imprisonment. If you want to lift it, you lift both. Can we make progress?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, since we are discouraging owners of public places from not displaying, two months is little time. The only way to not go to prison is to display. Therefore, we should push it up to six months to make them know the implications of not displaying, so that we deter them. You do not risk unless you want to go to prison for six months. 

Two months sounds a little kind for something we want to prohibit in public places. Therefore, I move, Mr Chairman, that we put this at six months with the equivalent currency points.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I do not want to write a law that is going to cause problems here. My committee is still thinking that we must be reasonable to Ugandans because we are representing them. I do not know how many of you have slept in prison. By the way, even one day in prison is a very complicated experience. I slept in the bush for eleven days and it was not very good. Therefore, sleeping in prison for two months is enough punishment. My committee’s stand is two months.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The chairperson is talking about two months’ imprisonment and I think that time is reasonable enough. However, if you reduce it to currency points, it does not seem reasonable at all because a currency point is Shs 20,000. When we are talking about four currency points, we are simply talking about Shs 80,000. Really, this is not prohibitive. We could either have said it should be this or both, but if we are giving an option that somebody can simply be given a fine of four currency points, that is not much motivation for somebody to go and display.

I would rather we leave it high as he is suggesting such that should somebody opt to pay the fine, then it should be something higher. Twelve currency points would be Shs 240,000 or something like that. I would think it needs to be something in that range. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairman, the information I would like to give my honourable colleague is that when you look at clause 12(4) and (5), you will see that in addition to the penalty, there are other issues that are being introduced against the offender. If he does it continuously, for example, there is the punitive measure that will see him have his licence revoked. If it is a company, corporation or a partnership, then they will even have the responsibility of bearing the enforcement fees.

Therefore, I think the fear by colleagues that this is not punitive enough will be catered for under clause 12(4). If that person does not learn, then he will have his business closed for a period of not less than six months.

MS KAABULE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Under clause 12(3), I suggest that we go with 10 currency points and six months’ imprisonment. When it comes to continuous offenders, we then step it up to 10 because I do not see anything wrong with somebody putting a display. If you do not want to go to prison, then why do you contravene the law? 

It is simply putting a signpost or a post saying, “no smoking in this area.”  I do not think we should be so lenient and start thinking that people are going to prison simply for the sake of - I think we are being lenient to those people. Let us say six months and then in clause 12(4), we say 10 months.

MR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I feel we should come up with something that will send a message that there should be no smoking at all in public places. I feel two months is not good enough. I am looking at public places and I have been offended many times when I see parents coming to schools and they are all over the compounds smoking. If a head teacher does not put that sign there, he should know that if he does not he will go to prison for six months. If not six months –(Interruption)

MS OPENDI: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Mr Chairman, I just want to inform my colleague, the minister; I am trying to compare what we are proposing here with what is happening in Kenya. Kenya passed their Tobacco Control Act way back in 2009 and it states that, “a manager or owner of a prohibited smoking area, who fails to display the smoking prohibition warning as prescribed in subsection (1) and (2), commits an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding Kshs 150,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to both.”

You can imagine how much this would be in Ugandan shillings. The Kenya shilling is quite stronger than our currency. Honourable minister, that is the information I wanted to give you. I think we should make this punitive so that whoever is responsible knows and takes appropriate action.

MR MUYINGO: I thank you very much for the information. Honourable members, we need something that will send a message to whoever is in charge of a public place that if you mess up, you will go to prison for a minimum of six months plus something else – (Interjections)- Something that will really send a message to wake up everybody that this is not a joking matter. (Laughter) Mr Chairman, that is why I am in for either six months or 10 currency points.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, for purposes of harmonising with my colleagues here, my simple mathematics is: if we talk about five or 10 currency points, we are talking about five and not six months’ imprisonment. That is the mathematics. Therefore, as a committee, we can concede on 10 currency points, which is an equivalent of five months’ imprisonment.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I have been listening attentively to this issue. Tobacco smoking in Uganda is increasingly becoming a menace. What would it cost you if you are the owner of a bar to display a notice? Are you aware that your attempt to ignore that notice boils down to open negligence and negligence is punishable and it should be strictly punishable?

I, therefore, propose that we move away from two months to five months, so that the degree of seriousness is borne right from the beginning. Remember, Mr Chairman, you have a young generation who are attracted to smoking. If they begin seeing a disclaimer everywhere they go, “no smoking”, they will begin to understand the issues we are talking about. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have pupils and teachers of Dove Education Centre from Luweero District, represented by Dr Edward Khiddu Makubuya and hon. Brenda Nabukenya. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. 

We also have women groups from Mukono Municipality represented by hon. Betty Nambooze and hon. Peace Kusasira. We also have students from Kagongo Senior Secondary School in Ibanda District represented by hon. Xavier Kyooma and hon. Margaret Kiboijana. They have all come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. 

Honourable members, there seems to be a severe disparity between the currency points’ situation and the imprisonment term. What we passed here may not be correlating very well. However, there is also the possibility of imposing sentences without the option of a fine. That is also permissible in law. If anxiety is being caused about the amount of money that somebody can pay, when you violate the notice you go and pay Shs 20,000 and you can pay it over and over. Even with continuous violation, you can still be able to pay. You may want to consider that as well.  

Can I now move forward on this and put the question? Honourable members, there is a proposal in (3) to reduce from 10 currency points to four currency points. That corresponds to two months imprisonment. 

There is another proposal for a term of imprisonment of six months that puts the currency points at 12. That would be about Shs 240,000. I will start with the proposal from the committee, unless they have now moved away from their initial proposal. 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Chairman, we have agreed to have six months’ imprisonment and 12 currency points. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Is that the situation? Chairperson, have you agreed?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Let me say no, we have not agreed because we have not had any meetings. My committee believes in 10 currency points, which have already been put in this Bill, which is equivalent to five months in prison, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You see, I have looked at the laws in this country and I have never found one which has five months’ imprisonment. It is usually six or three months. I have never come across five months.   

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I concede on six months in prison. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What do you concede to? 

DR BITEKYEREZO: I concede to six months in prison, which is equivalent to 12 currency points. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay, honourable members?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.
	
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there a problem in (4)? 

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairman, I find the word, “continuously” ambiguous. I would rather have a law that properly stipulates the number of times a person should be apprehended before his licence can be revoked. 

The issue of a trading licence is very important. If we leave the law with that word, “continuously”, it will be prone to abuse. “Continuously” is like how many times the person should be found in breach of the law. 

MS KAABULE: First of all, the information I would like to give the honourable member is that this was changed; the word, “continuously” was deleted. It now reads, “A person who contravenes this section shall on subsequent conviction be liable to a fine not exceeding 12 currency points.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is what the committee has proposed.

MS KAABULE: I am proposing that we step up the period to 10 months because this is someone who is continuously or subsequently contravening the law. We have already put this at six months; we cannot have a person who is continuously contravening the law have the same punishment as a person who has done it the first time.

The justification for 10 months is that for subsequent conviction, we should have more time. That is why I am suggesting the 10 instead of the six months. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman and colleagues, there are some people who have got too much money. They will make mistakes and know that they will go to the courts of law. They will get convicted and possibly, will not be put in prison and they will keep paying the money. The reason we say, “A person who contravenes this section shall on subsequent conviction…”-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is no problem with that. The issue is the currency points. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I still believe that 12 currency points - You know, if judges were going to behave like they are behaving - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You have 12 currency points in (3). For subsequent conviction, you also want 12 currency points. 

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. I would like to propose that we put the term of imprisonment to one year and then we get the equivalent currency points. 

This is because in 12 (3), this will be a first offender. If we are giving a first offender six months’ imprisonment and then 12 currency points, it is not fair that a person who contravenes the law subsequently is given the same punishment or penalty. I would suggest that we double it and make it very deterrent because this person is very adamant and stubborn. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Doubling would mean 24 currency points and one year imprisonment. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, I am sorry to say that the submissions of my two honourable colleagues are misleading us on this law. In sub clause (3), we are talking about a person being punished and the punishment is that you either pay that amount of money equivalent to 12 currency points or you are imprisoned. In the worst case scenario, both apply.  

In (4), we are saying since you are a continuous offender, we are now suspending you out of business for a minimum of six months. We are not talking about imprisonment again of the same person or another similar term for somebody who is continuously offending. It is about your business not remaining in operation for at least six months.

MS KAABULE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. My honourable colleague should read the redrafting. The clause you are reading is in the Bill but we are looking at what has been amended by -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, it has not yet been amended. It was proposed.  

MS KAABULE: Okay, the proposed amendment. It reads, “A person who contravenes this section shall on subsequent conviction be liable to a fine not exceeding 12 currency points or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or both.” That is what the committee is proposing and not the original version you are reading. We are, therefore, debating based on what the committee is recommending for amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the Bill was proposing suspension of a licence but the committee is proposing punishment for the individual. That is the point of departure.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Chairperson, we believe that a person who continuously contravenes the law is given warnings. They have been monitored but they continue to behave the same way so their licence should be revoked. That is what we would like to maintain.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If it is Parliament, a licence to do what?  (Laughter)  

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to concur with honourable colleague from Mubende. If the first offender is fined 12 currency points and/or six months’ imprisonment, it cannot be fair to have a serial offender having his license revoked and the case stops there. We need to add another component so that it becomes really deterrent. 

I would like to propose that on top of revoking the licence, we also add a fine because this is a serial offender. I would like to add, as the honourable member from Mubende proposed, that the fine should be 24 currency points and one year imprisonment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Twenty-four currency points or one year imprisonment. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I would like to concede and I am being realistic. Let it read as follows: “A person who contravenes this section shall on subsequent conviction be liable to a fine not exceeding 24 currency points or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or both.”

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I would like to submit as follows: I do not know if the issue of revoking the licence has been removed in the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is removed.

MR ODONGA OTTO: You know, those who smoke know that there are different types of cigarettes - Supermatch, Rex among others, and there are cigarettes where each costs about $100. It, therefore, becomes very tempting. Someone does not become a subsequent offender just because he is notorious but because these rich cigarette smokers will say, “how much is the fine?” (Interjections) No; the moment you remove the display, someone will walk in like there is no display. 

What I am, therefore, suggesting is that on subsequent conviction, we remove the option of a fine and we only leave the option of imprisonment. This is because we are going to have mens rea; those who can afford will keep doing it and they will keep paying. We will now know that the moment you have passed this stage of warning two three times and you are still continuing, your money will not save you. There are people with billions of shillings and they will just pay. (Interruption) 

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairman, I would like to plead with colleagues. Of course, none of us supports smoking but we are talking about the offence of displaying of notices. Look at the example of UNRA; it has been displaying road signs along the roads but they are removed by criminals. You might even have your signpost removed by somebody who wants to sabotage your business and yet you are proposing a year of imprisonment for this businessman.

Mr Chairman, I would like to plead with colleagues. It might not be good to over penalise businessmen for such a small offence of displaying of notices, well knowing that somebody can sabotage them and remove the notices - mere sabotage - and it causes them imprisonment.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Hon. Nambooze, thank you for the information. By giving that information, you are already giving a defence for those who do not want to display. Take an example of a vehicle. All vehicles must have number plates but some people who lose their number plates make effort to get others. You do not have to drive for one year without a number plate because someone stole it.

If you are a proprietor and owner of a business, it must be up to you to ensure that the sign is there. In any case, my honourable colleagues, they do not just come and take you; there is a normal process of trial I pre-suppose. There is also a normal process of a hearing where you can hire a lawyer and say, “this signpost was here yesterday.” It is not just coming to collect you and close your place for malicious reasons.

I, therefore, plead with Members that for a habitual offender, on the last instance they must know that the option is one year in prison. If it is 24 currency points, even some of us who operate small businesses shall just pay and continue with the business.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, would you like to consider the discretion of the judicial officers to exercise whether to apply the fine or both or do you want to legislate them out?

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I think we need to give the judicial officers discretion. Twelve currency points is Shs 240,000. This is way beyond the cost of putting up a simple signpost. Nobody would want to go to court and pay Shs 240,000 and the yet they could spend Shs 20,000 or Shs 40,000 to have a sign printed. It would not be common sense to do this. I think we should maintain the option of a fine and then leave it to the discretion of the judicial officer. I would like to submit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, so the final proposal is that we deal with 24 currency points or one year imprisonment or both and we leave it to the judicial officers to determine which way it goes. Honourable members, I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In (5), there was a proposal to delete “the manager, director, officer or their legal representative”. That was the amendment that was proposed by the committee; so it would be, “Where the section is contravened by a corporation or partnership, the partnership shall bear responsibility for the costs incurred in the enforcement process.” Should I put the question to that now?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have never seen a company or a partnership kill or display a notice. It is an individual to display. In most cases, people who manage companies are not the owners. They will say even if it happens, it will be a cost to the company or to the partnership. 

Therefore, for us to penalise a company, which has employed somebody to do a job and he does not do it, is wrong. The person who is responsible should be the manager. He should be held personally liable because it is his responsibility to make sure that the signpost is displayed. It will be up to him to say, “I asked for the money from the company to pay and they refused and that is why I never did it.” That is when you can go for the company. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: The information I would like to give hon. Nandala-Mafabi is that in law, a company is a legal person. You cannot distance responsibility from that legal person.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: And a partnership?

MR NANDALA- MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am aware; I am a lawyer. (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I would like to inform Members that there are statutory offences created under the Companies Act. What we should do as Parliament is to ensure that that company engages in an illegality; when a company engages in illegality, it forms a basis for it to be wound up. Let us just create that illegality and then the statutory offences under the Companies Act will prescribe what to do with the company. 

If you are engaged in treasonable activities, for example, the Police and security agencies will just descend on the company basing on illegalities the company has been involved in. So, what we should do now is see how we create that illegality so that the companies do not engage in it. How the companies will be dealt with when they engage in it is provided for under the Companies Act. I do not know if it is part of the cross-references.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you rightly asked about a partnership; a partnership has never been a legal entity. It is only a company that is a legal entity; it can be sued or it can sue. However, in this case, we are saying, “who is supposed to be display?” It is the company. If the company is the one to display and the person responsible for displaying, like the manager, has not done it, you will not arrest the company; you must arrest the manager. 

You are saying that people are going to prison. Are you going to take the company to prison? A few minutes ago, you just passed that. Therefore, you should put the manager or the company’s agent in prison. Few minutes ago, you just said you will take the manager to prison for twelve months.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairman, I propose that we maintain the position to delete this particular sub clause because it is quite unprecedented that enforcement costs are transferred to the offender. How will you determine the costs because in the law we have not determined the amount? It is not common in our laws that enforcement costs are transferred on the offender. I beg that we go with the idea that this particular clause 12(5) be deleted.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I wish to propose that we maintain this clause as it is, word for word. My argument is that the previous four sub clauses refer to a person. Sub clause (5) of this clause brings in the element of organisations, corporations, partnerships and whichever kind of business you are talking about. These institutions will have managers, directors and legal people managing them. So, my reading of this particular sub clause is that the drafters would like to bring in these people and see how to deal with corporations. 

If we deleted this particular sub clause, we would be limiting this clause to individuals and not organisations. This is why I would like to insist that we maintain this sub clause as it is because it covers all the areas that we would like to cover under this Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, what is the real justification for the taking away of the individual responsible for this? That is the debate.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, our justification was that we were scared for young managers who are looking for jobs in hotels of very big men who have money. These are small graduates who have just come out of university and the biggest boss of the company will say, “Do not display because if you display, we shall lose business.” The man wants the job and does what he has been told to do and eventually, he ends up bearing the consequences and paying a fine. 

That is why we said that there is no need to transfer the enforcement expenses on individual employees of a corporation since the corporation can bear its cost. I need your help on that as a chairperson. This is what we did but let this House decide. (Laughter)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, the chairman of the committee says he needs help. First of all, we must appreciate this. Somebody said this is a small offence but it is not a small issue either for the manager or whoever is responsible to refuse to do what the law requires. Under company law, the corporate veil can be lifted so that if it is you, the manager, who has been refusing to have a notice, then the law catches up with you. 

Definitely, like hon. Odonga Otto said, there will be a whole process of trial and they will establish who exactly refused. If the manager, for instance, wanted to put the notice and the owners of the premises refused, that evidence will be adduced and the burden will now be on the ownership. I beg that we agree with hon. Amuriat and we maintain the original formulation for both the company and also the managers so that if they refuse, the law should catch up with them.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You see, hon. Nambooze, the enforcement costs are judicially determined through a process. You cannot put it in the law and then say, “they will pay this”. They will adduce evidence to the court and say, “this is what we spent doing this” and the other one will say, “No, it cannot be like that” and then they will give their word as necessary. So, there will be a process. 

Mr Chairman, are you withdrawing your amendment now so that I do not have to put a question to this? 

DR BITEKYEREZO: As a committee, that is what we had thought about but since the whole House is - I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The amendment as proposed by the committee has been withdrawn. Honourable members, there is an amendment proposed for the deletion of sub clause (5). I now put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13

MR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, clause 13 is on the comprehensive ban on tobacco advertising, promotion and sponsorship. We intend to delete the entire clause 13(4). The justification is that enforcement of this provision is not practical.

Under clause 13(5) (a), substitute the word “ministry” appearing in line six with the word “minister”. The justification is: for specificity.

Under clause 13 (5), insert a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (e) to read as follows: “(f) publication of information required by the law.” The justification is that there may be a statutory requirement for companies to make public some information, which could easily be construed to be an advert.

Under clause 13 (7), substitute “one hundred currency points” with “twenty-four currency points.” The justification is: to make the currency points commensurate with the term of imprisonment.

Under clause 13 (9), substitute the word “shall” appearing in line two with the word “may”. The justification is: to allow the judicial officer to use his or her discretion in applying this provision.

Finally, insert a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (e) to read as follows: “(f) publication of information required by the law.” The justification is that there may be a statutory requirement for companies to make public some information which could easily be construed to be an advert.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, those are the amendments proposed. We will process them one by one. We start from 13 (1). Is there any proposal? The chairman has not proposed anything.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, it is unfortunate that I will propose the deletion of the whole of clause 13. I will tell you why. We recently licensed a gentleman in this country, he has opened up a very big factory in West Nile and he has done investments. Mr Chairman, it is my right to smoke but it is not my right to infect another person. However, if I am going to be smoking, I must get the right information about the cigarette that I am going to take. If we want to prohibit advertisement - comprehensive prohibition even of information about what is available - in brief we are saying, we do not need the factories here and we do not need tobacco products generally. 

I would think this very clause is going to the gist of why I was suspicious. There seem to be some international businessmen fighting a war amongst themselves. For us, we have joined along the way with good intentions of health. However, what happens to my grandmother back home who gets little money out of tobacco, or to the whole of Arua? Let us delete clause 13, honourable members. Let us not act as if we are in –(Interruption)

MR OPOLOT: Thank you, hon. Anywarach, for giving way. I would like clarification from you. From what you have said, you are indicating that there could be some international forces that could be fighting and by implication, we have joined the fight on whichever side. Could you clarify to us whether even the other laws that this House has been making have been as the result of the fight? 

I would like to be sure that I am not part of a fight that is not benefitting my country. I would like to fight a war that is useful to the people of Uganda. Can you clarify, honourable colleague?

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, I wonder how you clarify on suspicion. I said I am suspicious. What clarification would you like me to give you?

The law for controlling tobacco smoking –(Dr Baryomunsi rose_)- The honourable minister who is standing on point of information was a very good friend of BAT and he is standing on a point of information. What should I receive from him, really? He will submit later. He was a very good friend for a very long period of time. (Laughter) Yes, he is aware. 

If we are controlling for health reasons, then let us leave the business component out. Why are we suffocating them out of business?

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I would like to give information to my colleague. In business, advertising is very important for you to be able to promote and market your product. Under clause 13 (1), promotion or sponsorship is provided for under the third schedule. Mr Chairman, if I may refer the House to the third schedule, and citing just one short paragraph, it says that display or visibility of tobacco products at points of sale and any other commercial display of products is prohibited.

That means, Mr Chairman and honourable colleagues, that cigarettes are going to be sold from below the shelves. You are not going to be allowed to put your products on the shelves –(Interjections)– This is what the third schedule says. I am creating nothing of my own. In essence, what this clause is saying is that there should be no production of tobacco, no production of cigarettes and there should be no consumption of those two.

We need to say this in plain language. We need to think very seriously about clause 13 and whether it does anything to trading in tobacco and its products. The information I would like to give my colleague is that I am -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Did you rise on information, honourable member?

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, the other information I would like to give my colleague is that I am not a smoker and I will probably not have interest in this. However, I see this killing the business in tobacco and affecting the economy as a result.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, to conclude, I would think that if displaying of tobacco on the shelves is now prohibited, then let us not even display condoms. If we can display condoms in public, sell them everywhere and we are encouraging immorality, which is the very route through which you acquire HIV/AIDS, it beats my understanding 100 per cent!

Mr Chairman, let us keep pi as pi. If we are here controlling tobacco smoking for the sake of health, let us go –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Hon. Anywarach is not comparing what is comparable because condoms are for prevention. With tobacco and cigarettes, you take them live. (Laughter) Therefore, is he in order to compare what is not comparable in this case, when we are protecting the health and lives of Ugandans?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member for Padyere, you now have that analysis that the two are not comparable. Had you finished? Oh, you had concluded.

DR LULUME BAYIGGA: Thank you, very much, Mr Chairman. The honourable member for Padyere brought certain insights, which I would like to allay because I admire the passion which he is using to bring out his point. 

When we talk about rights, I have not really observed the right to smoke. If people had this right, it would be out of ignorance because they do not know the consequences. Therefore, we would advise him to review the Bill of rights.

Secondly, what sense does it make to advertise something that is potentially dangerous to human life? This means the honourable member will also oppose the percentages we are proposing for actually indicating the health dangers tobacco has to human life because that will be the marketing anyway. However, because this is a public health legislation, I hope that will allay his anxiety. Thank you very much.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think we need to focus on what advertising does and its power. I have been seated here attentively listening for a long time. What goes on in my mind every other time I hear defensive positions is the young people in this country who are easily lured and trapped by the power of advertising. They watch anything on television and they think that is the way to go.

Therefore, to me, the provision that regulates that appeal of tobacco smoking on television, radio or whatever is the way to go if we are going to curtail consumption. I think that we should uphold the provision to regulate advertising. If anything, we should be asking tobacco companies to be responsible for giving information on the dangers of tobacco smoking. They should be the ones telling people the dangers associated with smoking; but to advertise and keep telling people all sorts of things - “you see, this is a new packet” - the way they do with cigarettes these days, I think is a very dangerous thing. Actually, if we do not get a halt on that, we probably will have got nothing from this thing.

COL. (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Honourable colleagues, I am perturbed about the whole business because we have killed the industry. The industry is no longer here; it has shifted to Kenya. I am wondering about those peasants who have been earning a living from tobacco growing. What do we do with them? 

I would like to propose that this whole process should be gradual. Even the growing, if you are to phase it out, let it be gradual so that these people can have an alternative source of income. I do not agree with advertising because it is very dangerous but let us also have a way of doing it. 

In other countries they say, “this is an area designated for selling dangerous materials”. So, it is not for everybody and everywhere. If we can do that, I would be very happy. The have an area for adults where they can go and procure these dangerous items but this other area - If we can do that as legislators, I would be very happy but not putting a total ban on the industry. Okay, let us close it then for good! (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I thank the honourable member for allowing me give information. 

First of all, on the issue he is raising, we already passed that provision in the Bill. However, the information I would like to give the honourable member is that the Government of Uganda has identified enterprises to promote amongst our farmers. Actually, 17 crops have been identified to be promoted amongst our farmers across the country and tobacco is not one of them. 

In a number of areas, including Kigezi, farmers have realised that tobacco is not a lucrative business and they have shifted, on their own, to tea, coffee and rice growing. Therefore, the position of the Government of Uganda is that tobacco is not a crop of the future.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, my colleague, for that useful information. However, I am calling upon you and asking, as legislators what gradual position are you putting in place for the poor peasants who have been earning a living from tobacco growing? Let us find a way of evacuating ourselves from this dangerous thing –(Interruption)

MS NYAKIKONGORO:  Mr Chairman, hon. Mwesigye is talking about alternatives for those people that have been growing tobacco. Nyabushozi never used to grow coffee but this same Member sometime back took us to Nyabushozi and we toured the whole constituency and people are shifting from cattle keeping to coffee growing. Therefore, it is a gradual thing. 

We are not saying, “please stop rearing cattle and grow coffee”. We are stopping tobacco growing but gradually, so that people can transit to –(Interjection)– We are not saying that people stop growing tobacco. It is a gradual process and that is why in the wisdom of – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now you are debating. (Laughter)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much honourable for allowing me to give you additional information. You are worried about the transition and I thought that I would remind you that recently, the President launched a programme called “wealth creation”. Our soldiers are everywhere in the country teaching people how to transit. So, as a UPDF representative, you do not need to worry because it is happening. (Laughter)

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you very much, colleagues, for the useful information. That was my concern and if it can be taken care of, I would be very comfortable. Otherwise, I thank you, Mr Chairperson.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. This clause is on information, advertising, promotion and sponsorship of the industry but I have heard colleagues talk as if there is a ban on production. There is no ban on production. It is about the information going out to the public appealing to people to smoke.

Therefore, I do not see why we are suggesting or proposing that this clause should be deleted. It is very important that we keep it and that we control the advertising, promotion and sponsorship of tobacco so as to save this country from the degeneration that is being caused by tobacco smoking. Thank you.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I rise to support the position that this clause remains. I think we are debating because we know that tobacco is very bad. Tobacco is killing us; it is very poisonous and that is why we are bringing this law to control it, so that we do not get infected because of smoking. If we begin advertising to say that smoking is good, very tasty and very nice, everybody will want to taste it especially the youth. They will want to taste and see how it looks like before they get addicted to it. 

If something is poisonous, should we really advertise it so that people go eat it and die? Therefore, I am suggesting that we keep this clause. Actually, we are one step towards banning tobacco altogether. We said we cannot do it at a go because some people like those in West Nile are used to it, so let us do it gradually. However, in the end we shall get rid of tobacco in Uganda and we stop people from smoking. We should keep this clause. Thank you very much.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We have spent a long time on this issue and all members know that Uganda made a commitment and is one of those signatories to the WHO Framework Convention of Tobacco Control. This particular clause 13 is derived from what we committed ourselves to do. If I may read Article 13 of that convention, you will realise that it states very clearly thus: “(1) Tobacco advertising, promotion and sponsorship: Parties recognise that a comprehensive ban on advertising, promotion and sponsorship would reduce the consumption of tobacco products. 

(2) Each party shall in accordance with these constitutional principles undertake comprehensive ban of all tobacco advertising, promotion and sponsorship and this shall include, of course subject to the legal environment and technical means available to that party, a comprehensive ban on cross border adverting, promotion and sponsorship originating from its territory….” It goes on talking about this ban. 

Therefore, Mr Chairman, with this convention that we committed ourselves to, is it procedurally right for us to continue talking about this? We are now legislating - I am just trying to find out whether is it procedurally right for us to continue arguing, when we already made a commitment to this?

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Chair, thank you very much. I exactly wanted to say that, but I would only like to add that yesterday, while discussing this same Bill, we pronounced ourselves that we were domesticating that WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control. We also agreed that we had to take cognisant of the provisions in there. The provision that the honourable minister has just read out is embedded in that convention and advocates for a comprehensive ban. 

Mr Chairman, is it procedurally right for us to continue challenging an article, which is part of the convention we are trying to domesticate?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there are questions we need to ask and which probably might guide us. Do we want to continue advertising tobacco in Uganda - putting billboards about cigarettes?

Secondly, do we want to go promoting tobacco or cigarette smoking in this country? Do we want to sponsor cigarette smoking? I think that is what this clause is about. It is not about production and all these activities that go in the process, but should we be allowing advertising, promotion and sponsorship? That is what this clause is talking about and saying comprehensive ban on these activities: advertising, promotion and sponsoring. That is what it is saying.

Do we need to debate this matter anymore, honourable members? I don’t think so because the spirit of this law was that we regulate, control and that is why these matters are being raised.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I earlier said I am not a fun of smoking. I am not a smoker either. But I would like this House to view cigarette production as an industry that resides among countries, including Uganda. When you talk about promoting tobacco growing and you would like to make it an offense to do that, what you are telling the companies is that they should not, at any one point, advance money to tobacco growers because that amounts to sponsorship.

I do not like this House to pretend. I would like to discourage you from even exercising double standards. What you are saying about tobacco being poisonous yet at the same time saying okay, one can smoke it in the meantime –(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Is the member in order to mislead this House, when clearly on the packaging of some of the cigarettes manufactured here, there is information to the effect that tobacco smoking is dangerous and harmful to health? That information is given out to the public by those who earn from tobacco production. So, is the honourable member in order to mislead us by saying that we are laying double standards in saying that tobacco smoking is dangerous to our people?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think even in the submission that we had before from people who manufacture and sell cigarettes, is that even if one said so there are people who will buy cigarettes. They know the dangers because there are warnings on the packets of cigarettes saying “smoking kills,” an admission from the people who make them. 

So, honourable members, I think let us take this in the spirit of what we are doing because if we divert from the principles of the Bill then we might not as well have the Bill.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, hon. Patrick Amuriat, for allowing me to give information. The information is that tobacco, in its natural form, has about 4,000 chemicals and once it is processed into finished products like cigarettes, it has about 7,000 chemicals and up to 70 chemicals of those are known to be carcinogenic; they cause cancer and the evidence is there.

The principle here is that items which are harmful can be made lawful, but are regulated. For instance, guns kill people, but they are allowed on the basis that their sales and distribution is regulated. That is why you will not find guns on Kampala road being sold, but you can buy them if you want. Firearms are lawful, but their sale and distribution is regulated. 

The intention of this Bill is that we know that tobacco kills but we have taken steps not to ban it although we have that right too as Parliament. 

There are three categories of people: they are those who smoke; those used to smoke and they have abandoned; and we have the majority who do not smoke. The purpose of this Bill is to protect all these three categories: those who do not smoke not to start; those who smoke, to reduce or quit, if they can; and those who have abandoned smoking keep there, but without hurting the interests of those who do the business in the tobacco industry.

This is a public health Bill that aims at offering protection from the harmful effects of tobacco, especially the health effect. I just wanted to bring you on board by saying that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, the information that my good friend, the hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi, has given is vital. I am not disputing the fact that tobacco is dangerous and causes cancer. But this afternoon, the Parliament of Uganda is just being shy –(Interjection)– it is! If we would like to save the lives of our people, the bravest thing to do is to have a complete ban. I will move with you - there are no halves or fractions in this; we have to be wholesome in this. That is why I said we should stop playing the ostrich, my dear friends. Let us be brave enough. As we know that tobacco is carcinogenic, we should precisely say that; have no tobacco in our environment and let this be known to the tobacco companies. That is why earlier on I said this House is exercising double standards. You can’t eat your cake and have it at the same time -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I think you have made the point.

MR AMURIAT: I rest my case. (Laughter)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Chair. I appreciate colleagues for their input. Mr Chairman, on this particular provision, members will agree that one, tobacco is a substance that becomes addictive once one starts consuming it. And as somebody who comes from a tobacco-growing region, I have seen children become addicted – actually most of the smokers from West Nile get addicted while working in tobacco gardens. They eventually become smokers and some of them have consumed until they have died.
 
So the argument raised by the previous speaker that we should be moving to ban tobacco is not far from the provisions that are being provided for in this clause. This is because I believe that if these stringent provisions are made within the law, eventually people will begin to drop the habit. Those who have been affected will automatically get health attention and also with the stringent conditions, people will begin avoiding getting involved in this habit.

So I support the chairperson of the committee on this provision and it should be upheld as provided for. Thank you.

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also support the committee chair and the provision as it is for a complete ban on tobacco advertising, promotion and sponsorship. 

The issue is that what we are trying to do is to make sure that people, especially the young, are not attracted by the advertising and promotion to start the habit. For those who are already adults and have made a conscious decision to smoke, what we shall try to do is to make sure that when they smoke, they do not affect other people through second-hand smoke.
 
So, Mr Chairman, I support a complete ban on advertising, promotion and sponsorship. It has been done in other more developed countries and those countries have been able to achieve what they aimed at – and that is where we are also going. Thank you.

DR MUYINGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I feel we should all remember that nobody is born a smoker. These are habits we pick on because of advertising, promotions and/or because one has seen somebody somewhere doing it. 

When a member says we are banning the companies is misleading to us. What this provision is saying is that those who have not yet picked the habit should not be encouraged to do so. But those who are already addicted or those who are already sick, we are not telling them to stop smoking.  I think this is where the honourable member from Kumi –(Mr Amuriat rose_)– no, thank you. You are my friend but not now.

Mr Chairman, we have spent quite a good time discussing this and what is clear is that all Ugandans do not want to spend more money on our children who become sick because it is a fact that tobacco-smoking is carcinogenic. What we are seeking is to at least prevent those who shall be born tomorrow by passing this provision. That is the reason, Mr Chairman, I would like to persuade my brother from Kumi that let us not advertise or promote so that the young ones who have not yet learnt that habit will have nothing to look at. Thank you. (Applause)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. While people have not known the business of cigarettes I have. When you say that you will not advertise, promote or sponsor, you are going to encourage illicit trade –(Interjection)– URA has been around and Supermatch cigarettes came into the country – I am just giving you a simple example. The “enjaga” that some people smoke is not advertised.

Mr Chairman, I would have been happier if they were saying that whoever is advertising must provide for half the advert and half the dangers of smoking. These are the reasons I am raising this. If you say that sponsorship – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, there is a whole clause on packaging and labelling which now you seem to be touching; it is the next clause. It is about packaging and labelling.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, that is very good but even in advertising, the billboard, for example, must read: “Smoke Rex made by X but know very well that you are endangered in the following way….” That is how they do it abroad.

Mr Chairman, I wish I had come – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Procedure? 

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, the way hon. Nandala-Mafabi is arguing, one gets the impression that he is for advertising and promotion and so on, of cigarettes. The procedural issue I am raising is: can hon. Nandala-Mafabi declare his specific interests in the industry? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is not a procedural matter. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I do not smoke; I don’t grow tobacco. I grow coffee but I do business and I know that one cannot do business without advertising.

For some of you who walk at night on these roads, you see these prostitutes standing. Is it legalised? Definitely not but they keep advertising their “goods”. (Laughter) They know the labelled places.

As to why I am saying sponsorship – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Order.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is my friend and I did not want to put him to order. But is he in order to divert us from discussing issues that are very pertinent to the health of our country and the people of Uganda, to the display of women and continue to demean women by saying that they advertise their “goods” everywhere for consumers? Are you in order? Do they put those adverts in the media?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The honourable member for Budadiri West, the member has strong objections to what you have just said. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you are right and I do withdraw. But what I was trying to say is that they do not advertise but they are in the market on the streets and in places where they can be found. If you do not know, drive around Speke Road in the night and you will see for yourselves. So, even if you do not advertise –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, prostitution is prohibited by law in Uganda and I expected hon. Nandala-Mafabi to know that. Is he in order to argue as if prostitution is allowed in Uganda? Is he in order to argue as if it is lawful for those young girls to parade themselves on the streets?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Any debate that suggests that an illegality becomes a legality is wrong.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you very much for your wise ruling. The reason I am raising that is that if we do not allow promotion, advertising and sponsorship, the illegal market will surface – (Interjection)
 
DR BAYIGGA: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is raising a point on illicit trade. He is worried that if we curtail advertising, illicit trade will emerge but without proof. There is no proof to that and there is no scientific research to that effect.

Actually the information that I would like to put to him is that where illicit trade exists, there is usually lack of administrative processes and legislation to curb it. Those weaknesses like porosity of borders and so on can be administratively addressed and cannot be an encouragement from the lack of advertising. That is the information that I wanted to put across.
   
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think that we have enough debate on this matter.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, no, Please. I think that we have had enough debate on this matter.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have got information –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Just a small bit of information, Mr Chairman. Thank you very much, and I also thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. Actually if you look at the Bill and specifically Clause 15 (3), there is -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now you are anticipating.

MR AMURIAT: This is part of the Bill, Mr Chairman. Please read it in totality. I would like to advise - actually, we are going towards making this trade illicit because sub clause (3) states as follows: “A person shall not display or make visible a tobacco product at any point of sale other than being visible momentarily at the time of a sales transaction.” 

In other words, you are just pulling it from somewhere and somebody with a mukeeka bag can move with their merchandise and when he sees Dr Baryomunsi who wants to smoke, he picks it from there and momentarily sales by receiving the money. But with that we won’t be able to check who is going to pay tax and who is not. That is the information that I would like to give to you.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, Arua grows tobacco and whoever buys it will say that for having sold us tobacco, we need to sponsor two or three children in this university. That is sponsorship. 

If you are saying that the farmers will grow and you do not want social responsibility – (Interjections) - no, the chairman has asked me to conclude.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members. If you need to make a contribution on this matter, just make your own contribution. But for now, I think that we need to make progress one way or the other.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, why I am saying this is that in business, there is sponsorship, advertising and promotion. The only thing that we are saying is that we should indicate that it is dangerous to smoke, grow or process tobacco. That is all that it should be. In fact, if you looked through the law, it says to regulate –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Procedure.

MS NAMUGWANYA: I thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We are deliberating on issues to do with advertising, promotion and sponsorship. But when you look at the definitions of those three words - if I can take the example of advertising – you realise that they all have something positive in them. For instance, advertising can be a notice or an announcement in a public media promoting a product, service or event or publicising it.

When a member says that one can put something negative like “Tobacco kills” that will not be advertising. Is it procedurally right for him to continue misleading us that people can negatively advise, promote and sponsor? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The honourable member for Budadiri West stated that you can tell the farmers that growing tobacco is bad. Is that promotion? When you say that growing it is bad or dangerous, are you promoting it?  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I mentioned something about scholarships and I said that farmers can say after selling their tobacco and made money, they now want to sponsor two children at the university –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, are you now trying to suggest that this sponsorship relates to the sponsorship of students? (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am coming. Give me an opportunity to make my case.   
    
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, but hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you cannot, in this context, say that this sponsorship relates to the tobacco companies sponsoring students in schools. This sponsorship is very specific to the promotion and the advertising; they are linked.
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think you have a lot of invitations or writings from boys and girls saying, “We need balls for football or netball; we need uniform….” They keep asking Members of Parliament. Sports is good because it make us healthy.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Chairman, the sponsorship we are talking about is sponsorship in regard to promoting tobacco consumption because you cannot expect, for example, BAT to sponsor a football match and thereafter begin distributing their products to the young people. That would mean they are encouraging the young people to get involved in smoking; that is the sponsorship we are talking about. We are not talking about the one of school fees the way he wants us to believe. 

So, I don’t think the honourable member is in order to continue dragging us around well knowing that what he is talking about is different from what we are discussing.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Chairman, she got up on a point of information but in the end she put me to order. That is bad debating. Anyway, what we have done - we have put up a case that in business one needs to advertise, promote and sponsor. It is up to the businessman or company to make a decision that they don’t want it done. Otherwise, if you wanted to do this, you should have brought a law just to stop tobacco in Uganda but not to just regulate. The moment you want to regulate, you should even regulate advertising, promotion but not banning it. I rest my case.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there has been a proposal for the deletion of Clause 13. The Member for Padyere moved that the entire Clause 13 be deleted. I now put the question that Clause 13 be deleted.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the committee had proposed some amendments to Clause 13. Can I put the question to those amendments as proposed by the committee? They were read to the House.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Chairman, in Clause 13(7) we wanted to reinstate the earlier position in the Bill because it talks about reducing the currency points from 100 to 24. We wanted to maintain 100.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, you can’t maintain it; it is the provision of the law that there must be correlation, because if it is one year it has to be 24 currency points. That is a matter of law not a matter of opinion.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: We maintain one year with the corresponding currency points.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, that is what I said. In other words you agree with the committee?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Yes, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question to the amendments as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, Clause 14 is the one that deals with packaging and labelling of tobacco products. We move to amend clause 14(2) to substitute the phrase, “75 per cent” with the phrase, “60 per cent.” 
The justification is to ensure that the manufacturers or trademark users are left with some reasonable space on the package for their use for those who have completely refused to stop.

And, Mr Chairman, when somebody is a smoker and he has become an addict –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairman of the committee, I would like you to proceed.

DR BITEKYEREZO: And in Clause 14(4), we move that we substitute the phrase, “one hundred” currency points with the phrase “twenty four” currency points. The justification is to make currency points commensurate with the term of imprisonment.

In clause 14(6), we move to substitute the word “shall,” appearing in line two, with the word “may.” The justification is to allow the judicial officer to use his or her discretion in applying the provisions.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Any further amendment on Clause 14?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, on Clause 14(2) I would like to say that the time I was in the Philippines I saw that theirs is even 90 per cent and there must be a picture on the pack of cigarettes.  I am saying this because in 14(2) they are recommending only the text. The text can be played about with. For example, they can write the words “prohibited across” – I move that we delete the text and insist on the picture which must be approved by the committee or the minister before it is put on the cigarette. In Philippines, they use a picture of somebody with destroyed teeth, with the mouth open and it is placed behind the packet of cigarettes.

So, I would like to urge members to object to the suggestion of the committee chairman that we reduce the space occupied, from 75 to 60 per cent. They can play around with the beauty cigarettes on the remaining side. Actually we should push it to 80 per cent so that 80 per cent of the packet one is buying has a picture of someone who has suffered from effects of cigarette. That picture must be approved by the minister or the authority we have set up. We should not reduce it to 60 but leave it at 75 per cent.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I concede to put the picture and that it should cover 80 per cent.

MR BAHINDUKA: Mr chairman, when you look at Clause 14 in its entirety, where it is giving someone a license to trade and do business in this country prescribing for that person how they will package their products or how they will do their business – honestly, the direction of this Bill would actually have been either a ban or something nearer to that because how do I come, invest money and I am paying taxes close to Shs  2  billion per month but you start directing me on how to do business? It is better you just close me out. So I don’t know how we are moving with this but -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What do you propose, honourable member?

MR BAHINDUKA: That it is deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, the proposal is that Clause 14 be deleted as moved by the honourable member for Ntoroko County. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I will now put the question to the amendment. Can I put the question to what has been proposed by the chair of the committee?

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, when you look at clause 14(6), the committee is moving that we substitute the word “shall” appearing in line two, with the word “may.” However, when you read (6) it says: “Notwithstanding the penalty prescribed in subsection (5), the court shall order the seizure, forfeiture or destruction of any prohibited material at the cost of the offender.”

So, when they say we substitute the word “shall” I see that there is a danger because we are then shifting away from the real intention of this Bill and therefore, if we are to maintain and move with the intention of this Bill, Mr Chairman, I propose that we maintain as it was proposed and drafted in the Bill than to move away from “shall” and to have “may”.

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to concur with hon. Nzoghu. 

Clause 14 (6) it is talking about prohibited materials and if you are talking about prohibited material and you replace “shall” with “may”, what is the intention? I would like the chairman to be serious with this. Somebody is dealing in something that is not allowed and then you are leaving it to court to decide whether this should be seized, forfeited and destroyed at the person’s cost and you say you are serious with this? I really would like to request the chairperson to concede that this should remain as “shall”.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, the committee put the word “may” because we have some very poor men who do some business at the border in Busia - and the people from Busia will bear me witness and even near Kikagati and Rwanda. Sometimes they may import too much tobacco that must be destroyed. If you say that the destruction of this material must be paid for by the offender, sometimes you may capture a very poor man who will not even bear the cost; that is why we wanted to leave it at “may” so that maybe Government can also take part in destroying them instead of just putting everything on this poor man who cannot afford the money.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No. Honourable members, the “may” which is being proposed or the “shall” which is in the Bill, operates in relation to either seizure or forfeiture or destruction because it is not “and” it is giving options. That is my understanding of what this provision says. If it had said seizure, forfeiture and destruction of any then by the operation of the wording, it would mean it is a mandatory thing for the court to do. However, you are now giving the court the option of either seizure or forfeiture or destruction. That is where the operating word becomes either “may” or “shall” depending on what you really want to achieve.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, my problem is with tobacco products packaging and labelling.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, can we deal with this first. Can we finalise with this then we come to that one? The one on (6) which has come up from -

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, you have properly guided that we are giving the options to the presiding judicial officer that he or she can order for seizure or forfeiture or destruction. Therefore we can maintain “shall” then the options are within those actions because these are items which have been produced in offence to the law and therefore they have to be withdrawn in one way or the other. You cannot again allow them to remain in circulation in public. We want to beg that we maintain the original composition because the judge still has an option through those different actions.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairman, I request that we take “may” so that we do not tie the hands of the judicial officers handling particular cases; that they will have the opportunity to look at the circumstances of a particular offence and then in their discretion decide what is appropriate in the circumstances. I beg to move.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you. I do concur with hon. Bakireke that for as long as there are options to choose from, the word to use is “may”. If we had only one option, then it would be “shall” but since there are options to choose from, it is “may”. Thank you.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think we are not just doing this for the sake of doing it. We are simply saying we should be consistent right from the start up to where we have reached. However, for us to begin deviating in the middle actually erodes the whole intention of this Bill. 

Why should we give an opening? I want to compare it with what is happening in court in regard to people who overload their trucks and destroy our roads. The law is just ambiguous; that is why people continue overloading and yet there are supposed to be restrictions. Therefore, Mr Chairman, let us not leave it open ended; let us close it so that people can understand that we are really moving in the right direction.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if I can guide. The words “seizure, forfeiture” or “destruction” are not in the same line. However, the words “seizure” and “destruction” could be on the same line. Forfeiture means surrender, thus the real option is between seizure and forfeiture. If you want it to be “shall” then you need to take out “forfeiture” so that it becomes “shall order for the seizure and destruction of any prohibited material” so that it is clear and strict and nobody can manoeuvre anything out of it. However, the minute you use seizure and forfeiture, those are not on the same line.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I have accepted your guidance so that it now reads “seizure and destruction”. Let me just read it again. To substitute the word “shall” -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there any possibility that we could benefit from the prohibited material?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Let us put the word “shall”.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, the new formulation will be “Notwithstanding the penalty prescribed in sub section (5), the court shall order the seizure and destruction of any prohibited material at the cost of the offender”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put the question to that?

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairperson, I am still breathing because we are talking about packaging. First of all, the problem might be with packaging but you might find that since we have not totally banned tobacco, we might pick this tobacco, repackage it and benefit from it. (Interjection) – Yes, this afternoon, I have been made to understand that we are not banning the industry. Therefore, this is about packaging. These are cigarettes which have not been packaged -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Packaging is not a prohibited material. Therefore, it does not apply to it. This is talking about prohibited material. I do not think packaging would be a prohibited material.

MS NAMBOOZE: I withdraw. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can I put the question? 

MR KWIZERA: I would like the chairperson to clarify on this because we are dealing with packaging and not the content. Therefore, what is prohibited here?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The issue is, what is the prohibited material?

MR KWIZERA: What if the content is not prohibited but the act of packaging – the way they have done it – is what is prohibited. Therefore, we remove the packaging. Someone can be ordered to repackage.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I think the major issue -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Oh, it is packaging and labelling; alright.

DR BARYOMUNSI: We are saying that the manufacturers of tobacco products must package in a particular manner and label in a particular manner. For instance, we are about to agree that 80 per cent of the space of the package will have pictures and text to show that tobacco kills. The ministry will give guidance on what kind of message is put. If somebody produces a package which is just plain without information as the law requires - first of all, the process of producing this package is lengthy. It means somebody has deliberately done it. 

For you to go through the process and produce packets which do not conform to what the law says means you have just done it deliberately to defeat the law, and we are saying those products must be surrendered. They should not be allowed to continue in the market.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It should be surrendered?

DR BARYOMUNSI: It should be surrendered.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, in light of my attention being drawn to the issue of packaging and labelling of tobacco products, then the guidance I had given on (6) may not hold. Therefore, we may need to review what was in (6) properly. In that case, (6) might need to remain the way it is with the exception of whether it is “shall” or “may”.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, that is why I was rising on tobacco products packaging and labelling. It is now the package; it is not the product inside. Therefore, what are you seizing? Are you seizing the product or the package? They are saying, packaging and labelling of tobacco products. Even if we go down to 14, it is about packaging and labelling of tobacco products.

By the way, we do not even need packaging and labelling. This is because this product is not supposed to be sold on top. It is supposed to be under. Therefore, I can get it in my fist and say “go”. That is what you are legislating here; you are making it worse. Even this one may not now be necessary –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: The information I would like to give the honourable member is that firstly, the reason it is suggested that the person selling the cigarettes should keep them in the counter is that there is evidence that public display of these products results in impact purchases especially by the young people. The evidence shows that if you just display that information, it compels people, who are non-smokers, to actually start smoking. If you send a young person to buy sugar but because you have attracted him with the advert, he ends up buying the cigarette. Studies have been done and evidenced is available.

Secondly, the reason we want this labelling on the package is that the manufacturer or the one dealing in the tobacco or cigarette has a responsibility to tell the consumer that this tobacco kills.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I go back to the same question I asked at the beginning; in this particular clause and when you come to (6), what is the prohibited material?

DR BARYOMUNSI: The prohibited material will be the package which has been produced and does not comply with the provisions of the law. For instance, the law will say the cigarettes package will have 80 per cent of the space with a health warning in text and pictorial form. However, if somebody goes and only puts the text on 40 per cent, that will be a prohibited product because it does not conform to the provisions of the law. We are therefore saying that if you deliberately distort what the law provides, then you should lose those prohibited products because it will be illegally packaged and labelled that way.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, the option of destruction would relate to the packaging but not the product?

DR BARYOMUNSI: The wrongly and illegally packaged product will have to be surrendered and destroyed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: He gave me information, which became a debate; it was very unusual. Mr Chairman, a package can never have material which is prohibited unless we have to change. You package material. Unless you are saying it is the packaging material which has a problem. Therefore, the only thing you would destroy is the packaging material and not the product. 

Mr Chairman, I do not even understand –(Interjection)– before I can make a case, you are up for information. I was in Mwiri for six years. (Laughter)

What I am trying to put across is that first of all, you are saying we are going to put pictures and messages at 80 per cent showing that cigarettes are dangerous. Now you have made the dangerous product and it must be displayed to show that this is a dangerous product. If you put it under, the person selling the product will be taking time to say, “This is called Rex; this is called Sportsman; this is called cigar”. In the process, he might even convince –(Interruption)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Chairman, hon. Nandala-Mafabi is discussing a clause which we are not discussing right now. He is confusing packaging and display of the tobacco products in the shelves or wherever he thinks. Is he procedurally right to continue confusing the different clauses when we are discussing the packaging and labelling of tobacco products? Is that how Mwiri behaves? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this whole clause imports this kind of confusion in the debate. This is because sub clause (1) is talking about the product and the packaging which does not conform. It is combining both. The issues as they progress and come to the sanctions in sub clause (4), you do not know what the proceeding clauses are referring to – whether it is still about packaging and labelling of tobacco products or it is also about the labelled tobacco itself.

MR KWIZERA: Mr Chairman, of course in business, advertisement is an element. Labelling is also advertisement in business.  The way you label, you can advertise. When people are saying that you can say negative or positive advert, you are making the product popular. Therefore, we should be aware that labelling is not different from advertising. 

MS ADONG: Clarification.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clarification from whom, honourable member for Nwoya? Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, please conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, there is reason why I raised this; you have clearly said it is a mixture of product packaging and labelling. It is because a few minutes ago, we passed a clause which says no advertising, promotion and sponsorship. Here we are now bringing packaging and labelling. I can put all those bad words but package it in such a way that is attractive; that is for packaging and labelling. However, here when you go further in (6) in which you clearly say you want to destroy the material - material for what? Is it the packaging or the product inside?

These are two different things; I think we are thinking about Eid. [Ms Nyakikongoro: “Information.”] Let me make my case. I gave you time to talk and you have no information anyway.

What I am trying to put across, Mr Chairman, is that packaging and labelling on the packet are two different things. The material inside is tobacco and you cannot say you are going to destroy tobacco because it was wrongly labelled or packaged. No, if you want to say that then you should say, “Any material that is wrongly packaged or labelled should be destroyed” and that is what you should - (Interruption)

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for yielding the Floor. Honourable members, why are we legislating in a way that will make this law almost un-implementable? Why don’t we leave the rest to the regulations? It is because all those who will be in charge of this law will have some leeway to find a way that practically enforces the law that we are making. I think hon. Nandala-Mafabi, we should not labour so much because we are not experts at packaging or branding. Therefore, why are we labouring where we shall not make a breakthrough?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us look at Clause 14(1): “A person shall not import, manufacture, distribute, sell or offer for sale a tobacco product in Uganda unless the unit package of tobacco product or outside packaging and labelling of such product conforms to the packaging and labelling requirements prescribed by the minister by statutory instrument.”

Now when you do that and then you come to sub clause (5) where we are: “Where a person convicted under this section is a corporate…” then you come to sub clause (6), “Notwithstanding the penalty prescribed in sub section (5), the court shall order the seizure, forfeiture or destruction of any prohibited material at the cost of the offender.” In (1), what is the prohibited material? Is it the tobacco product or the package? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, first of all, the tobacco product is defined and if you look at the copy of the Bill on page 11, a tobacco product means products entirely or partly made of the leaf tobacco as raw material, which are manufactured to be used for smoking, sucking, chewing, snuffing or consumed by any means. That is a product; the processed tobacco in different forms.

The prohibited material in this case means this tobacco product which has come on the market and does not conform to what the law provides in terms of packaging and labelling. It is because the law is saying you must package it this way and label it this way. If you deviate from that -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, you have just defined what a tobacco product is; it is not about packaging. I am just trying to see that there is some issue here that you need to harmonise properly.

DR BARYOMUNSI: It is the tobacco product which is packaged and labelled in a particular manner prescribed by the law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then what becomes the prohibited material? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: The prohibited material is that product which does not conform to the law.

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I do not know whether we are about to get tired but I get the issue. First of all, packaging has become an integral part of a product. You cannot separate the product from the package. Therefore, when we talk of prohibited products, in this case when we are talking of tobacco, it is that tobacco product which is packaged in a way that does not conform to the standard as provided for in our law. Therefore, it becomes a prohibited product because it does not meet our requirements.

Therefore, I think that we should not separate the tobacco product from the package because the packaging is the one that embodies or displays the product. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I want to thank hon. Opolot for that explanation. Mr Chairman, working with the Uganda Revenue Authority and in the manufacturing sector, we were faced one time with a case where the product - bread from one of the bakeries here on Entebbe Road - did not meet the size prescribed and also was not packaged properly. We did not seize the bread because it was not provided that you ask the manufacturer to go and remanufacture to fit the specification of the size of the bread. Instead of being a half kilogramme, it was 75 per cent of the half kilogramme. It was provided that you just destroy.

Therefore, in this case here, we are trying to deter and discourage someone who is attempting to dodge the law by using the packaging. We must deter that person that in case you are tempted to do this, there is a cost to it; you forfeit even the product. That is what I read from what the minister and the committee are bringing in matter. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In which case, sub clause (6) then would remain as it is or would it change to “shall” or “may”?

MR ANYWARACH: He has no copy of the Bill.

MR OKUPA: I have it here, honourable member. When we were in the Commission, we provided you with iPads; that is why we have these items. (Laughter) - If you do not mind, I can read it for you. Mr Chairman, we shall use the word “shall”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Shall? Okay. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairperson, I concede and we go back to where we were and it becomes “shall” instead of “may”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is a proposed amendment in (2) to 80 per cent; did we take a vote on that already? We took a vote on that. 

DR BAYIGGA: I think the chairman of the committee and the minister could help us because you raised a pertinent issue, which can cause us problems in implementation. We talked about material on one hand and we talked about products on the other. I think we need to harmonise that. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think the honourable members have clarified on that. There is no differentiation when you come to these matters. We will go by that and take the trend of the debate. If there are issues for determination, they will be sorted out later at another stage. I am going to put the question to this provision now.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, given the explanation that you have just given and considering that “material” is being used under sub clause (6) and it is meant to mean the same thing as “product” as is used in sub clause (1), why don’t we just use one expression or one word for both instead of using “material” on the other side and then using “product” on this side, yet we really intend to mean that they are actually the same? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Should we say “prohibited product”? 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, if I was allowed to interpret coming from the trade that I practise, I would call them “packaging material” and let the product that you intend to sell - it is actually the cigarettes that you are selling, not the paper. That in my view, given that it is not included in the interpretation clause, is actually the product. The material remains the paper - the wrapping material. It is used to facilitate the conveyance of the cigarette itself. I would like to contest the school of thought that these two are one and the same. 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think the challenge we are having is an attempt to use a new thing totally called “the prohibited product.”

Suppose, going forward, we drop those two words, “the prohibited product” and we created a sentence in drafting that merges the substance and the package to the extent that we probably have something like, “Any tobacco product that does not conform to that provision of 14 (1) above….” 

Clause 14 (1) talks about how you package but our interest is the tobacco product together with the packaging. This is in order for us not to try to manufacture a new prohibited something. We are talking about a tobacco product that does not conform to the provision of clause 14 (1) and then we subject it to confiscation and whatever else we want. 

In this case, we are not trying to come up with a new definition and we are also not trying to be ambiguous. We just know that we stipulated in Clause 14 (1) how it must be. Anything that falls short of that, court may order for its confiscation. 

Mr Chairman, maybe if that is the spirit, you will allow that we stand over this and we try to craft that spirit and substitute, “prohibited product” with a new proposal. 

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like clarification from hon. Alice Alaso because sub clause 14(1) is quite specific. It is on packaging and labelling of tobacco products. Her phrasing goes back to the tobacco product, yet we wanted to get a safe way out of this stalemate of the labelling and packaging. 

We have been arguing here that the product becomes part of the labelling. This is because it is the label and the packaging that represents the product and that is why we are providing for this here. If we now brought in the product, how shall we get out of it? 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I would like to rephrase and say, “Notwithstanding a penalty prescribed in sub section (5), the court shall order seizure and destruction of any prohibited tobacco product with its packaging material at the cost of the offender.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can we look at this again properly so that we are clear. When I was in the school of drafting, they used to teach us that in drafting, it is good to achieve that level of certainty where somebody reading in good faith can understand but it is better to achieve that level of certainty where somebody reading in bad faith cannot misunderstand.

Reading this, we are making this law for people who will take it in bad faith. They will try to find gaps and create situations where they can benefit from a technical interpretation that could lead to an absurdity.

Can we look at this again clearly and then come back on this on Tuesday then whatever we are going to say we can say then so that we are clear about what we are doing here. If we are now in agreement that we cannot resolve this issue properly, it is better that we now defer and stand over this clause. We shall come back to it again next time Parliament sits. That of course will be after Eid, according to the honourable member for Makindye West. The only issue we are left with is in sub clause (6) of Clause 14 and when we come, we just need to have clarification on that and then we proceed.  

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.07
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.07
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Tobacco Control Bill, 2014” and has passed clauses 11, 12 and 13 with amendments and stood over Clause 14(6).

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.08
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, tomorrow is Eid Day. We have already congratulated our friends from that faith, that they have good celebrations tomorrow. 

I also inform you that there will be an event in Kitgum to which we are all invited to participate and there will be arrangement for transport, leaving very early on Saturday to Kitgum to open a hospital that was constructed by a lady who came from Australia but has since died. The hospital has been completed, so they need to handover it to the community. It is going to be a big event in Kitgum and you are all invited to attend. 

This House therefore stands adjourned to Tuesday, 21 July 2015 at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.09 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 21 July 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)
