Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.




Thursday, 10 July 2019

Parliament met at 2.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you can see on the Order Paper today, we have Bills and I am hoping that we are all ready to proceed with these Bills and finish with them. 

The other time, I communicated that we have a problem with the way we are managing urgent questions. They are piling up because we asked them when the ministers were not there. The questions are good for our visibility as Members of Parliament to raise matters but they are not responded to. When they are not responded to immediately, it feeds into business to follow on our Order Paper.

The last time we checked, we had seven pages of business to follow and I do not how that will be handled. I have had discussions with the Prime Minister to see how to deal with these in a more systematic way and try to clear them so that we can start on a clean slate. The discussion we have had with the Prime Minister is to remove all those urgent questions that have not been dealt with by the ministers and some of the statements that are requested from the ministers that have not been made; we have agreed with the Prime Minister that I pass them on to him.

Tomorrow during the Prime Minister’s Question Time, we will start with those questions and deal with all of them. If he finishes and there is still time then we will go to the face-to-face questions with the Prime Minister. That would help the Members who have raised these questions and constituencies who are waiting for these responses from the Government on some issues that are affecting them. However, for a long time since the questions were raised, no responses have been received. That is the way we have agreed for now, to see how to handle these matters.

Honourable members, we should not be raising these matters just for visibility. We should try and stick to the rules. If we do not follow the rules, we are clogging the business of the House and we will not be able to process the core business that is pending before us; the Bills, motions and petitions that have already been brought before this House. Let us restrict urgent matters to urgent matters and find other avenues of raising these other questions. We talked about questions for oral answer and that is the avenue, which we should be using to deal with all these other policy related questions that should be dealt with in a comprehensive and responsive manner from a minister in the House.

I think it is also double-aged now. Ministers are not responding and Members have issues to raise. We are trying to see how to get a balance that can help Members to be able to handle their issues but also get timely responses to them. It is one thing to raise a matter and it is completely another to get a response to it. If you raise a matter and it is not responded to, it is the same as not raising it at all. Let us try and use the rules in an effective way to make the management of the business of the House easier for the presiding officers. 

When you come with a matter that is not urgent, sometimes as presiding officers, we are merely sympathetic but we are actually not following the rules. We are sympathetic because you have come with the issue and it is not urgent but you are saying, I have to raise this and it is important but we are not following the rules. Please, let us not put pressure on the presiding officers so that we can execute the rules as we agreed upon them and that would help us.

Yesterday, I received a notice from hon. Micheal Mawanda. “Notice to the Speaker to present a motion seeking leave to present the Private Member’s Bill on Bank of Uganda Act (Amendment) Bill 2019.” I have received it and I do not know at what stage he is at. Can you advise me how far you have gone on this matter so that I see whether you can be accommodated soon? 

Issues of Bank of Uganda and other related matters are quite involving and we need sufficient preparations from you. Hon. Michael Mawanda, what timeline are you looking at?

2.09
MR MICHEAL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, I am ready with my Bill. Anytime you place me on the Order Paper, I should be able to come and seek leave.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I need to look at it. You cannot be ready with it and keep it to yourself.

MR MAWANDA: Mr Speaker, I will submit a copy to you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I need to look at it so that we can see if it captures the spirit of what you want to achieve and whether it is tenable within the rules and Constitution and see how to schedule you. Take as much time as you may need so that when you come on the Floor, you have no issues. 

You know the limitations that private members have; there are constitutional limitations in Article 93 and we need to make sure that they are okay. Get sufficient time and get ready so that we have a discussion on that and then we see how to move with it. Thank you, honourable members. Let us proceed. Two members requested for interventions on urgent matters.

2.11
MS EVERLYN CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On 3 July 2019, we lost two lives in Bukwo District. Sam Cheropi a 23-year old young man was shot dead by a Uganda Wildlife Authority ranger. The ranger’s action charged up an angry mob that had gone to witness three buffaloes that were destroying a maize plantation. 

The charged mob in return, hurt the officer of Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) who passed on, on his way to the hospital. The cause of the souring relationship between UWA and the community is as a result of very many issues. One of them is the death of very many innocent people due to the use of live ammunitions; for example, Joshua Lenard, Masai Chamatarai, Simon Bera, Gabriel Cheptoyei and Joseph Kagara. There are those who have been injured and are now living with disabilities due to the injuries incurred from UWA staff.

We also have continuous impounding of their animals and payment of heavy fines, beating up women in an attempt to block them from accessing the national parks in search for firewood, herbs and vegetables. Last month alone, wild animals feasted on over 20 goats and sheep. The above made the community very angry. 

The prayers from the people of Bukwo area:

1. 	The Government should establish a buffer zone for grazing.
2. 	The responsible ministry together with UWA plans to hold a mediation meeting between the local community and UWA rangers because they are not on talking terms yet they must co-exist.
3. 	Compensation for the aggrieved families should be done immediately. 

I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, people have been shot dead by rangers and in retaliation, people have killed rangers. It is urgent.

2.13
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Mr Speaker, it is indeed regrettable that this incident is happening. This is an urgent matter and certainly, we quite agree with the prayer of the honourable member. Action will be taken immediately to make sure that the matter is resolved and an amicable relationship is established between the Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) and the population.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.13
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of public concern about the Uganda Airlines. On 24 April 2019, Mr Ephraim Bagenda, Chief Executive Officer of Uganda Airlines, noted that commercial operations would be launched on 1 July 2019. He continued to –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I wish you could start with the urgent matter. 

MR MUGUME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wanted to give –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. I like urgent – when you qualify under this, I want the urgent matter. 

MR MUGUME: I wanted to give the background briefly – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That can come under the urgent matter.

MR MUGUME: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for your guidance. The urgent matter is, over the weekend and today morning, as I listened to different radio talk shows, I noted that Ugandans are concerned and they are asking when Government will update them on how far they have gone with the commitments made by the Minister of Works and Transport and the Chief Executive Officer of Uganda Airlines. We were told that by 01 July 2019, we were going to see the bombardiers flying.

Secondly, I am also informed that the Canadian aircraft company making the bombardiers was sold to the Japanese company, Mitsubishi. Does the sale affect the business Uganda had with the Canadian company? More clarification is needed from the minister on this matter. I beg to move, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, you told us that the airlines would be up in the air on 01 July 2019 –

2.16
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Mr Speaker, the Minister of Works and Transport, in due course, will be able to give the update that is required by Parliament -(Interjections)- the update can even be given tomorrow, if time allows. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, this is exactly what I have just been talking about. Now, it goes on business to follow and it affects my own schedule of business of the House. Where are the Ministers of Works and Transport, any one of them to deal with this issue now? 

2.16
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, we are going to call the Minister of Works and Transport right now. I cannot give accountability of her whereabouts but let me contact the office. My apologies, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We need that response today. It is not going onto the Order Paper as business to follow. Can we now go to the next item?

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULES 15 (10) (C) AND 157 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think there were some processes that started and the Committee on Physical Infrastructure – is the Opposition Chief Whip here? He was supposed to withdraw one Member from the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. 

Then, there was also the issue of the Committee on East African Community Affairs where the Members from the Opposition were not represented. There was also a pending matter on the Committee on Climate Change. I think those were the pending issues from what happened yesterday, if my records are correct.

So, can we start with the - how do we start? We will start with the Chief Opposition Whip.

2.18
THE DEPUTY CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Tonny Muhindo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We had three committees that were not fully constituted from our side. One Member, hon. Patrick Ocan, is designated to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is he withdrawn from the Committee on Physical Infrastructure?

MR MUHINDO: No. He was not designated and we promised to designate him today.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we start with the Committee on Physical Infrastructure where you needed to withdraw one Member?

2.19
THE DEPUTY CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Tonny Muhindo): Most obliged, Mr Speaker. On the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, I designate: 

    1. Hon. William Nzoghu Musabe, 
    2. Hon. Jonathan Odur
    3. Hon. Emmanuel Ssempala Kigozi 
    4. Hon. Francis Mwijukye. 

I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So that now makes the number of 30 - thank you very much. I put the question that those Members designated be part of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS

MR MUHINDO: For the committee on East African Community Affairs, I designate the following;

    1. Hon. Angelline Osegge
    2. Hon. Nabilah Naggayi 
    3. Hon. Elijah Okupa

I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to those Members becoming members of the Committee on East African Community Affairs.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MUHINDO: Mr Speaker, I beg to designate hon. Patrick Ocan on the Committee on Finance Planning and Economic Development.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does that come within the numbers?

MR MUHINDO: Yes, it is within the numbers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Patrick Ocan of Apac Municipality is designated to that committee. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

2.21
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, yesterday when I designated Members from my side, I missed out two Members whose names were not mentioned and I would like to designate them right now. 

Hon. Angel Mark Dulu will serve on the Committee on Health and hon. Moses Angundru will serve on the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry. 

Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo had been designated to a committee that he was not supposed to be designated to. I beg to correct that hon. Thoedore Ssekikubo serves on the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, not the Committee on East African Community Affairs. I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you withdrawing hon. Ssekikubo from the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs?

MS NANKABIRWA: I am withdrawing him from the Committee on East African Community Affairs to serve on the Committee on Defence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to those changes and additional names for those particular committees.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MUHINDO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, we had designated hon. Nabilah Sempala to the Committee on Presidential Affairs by error. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you not withdraw her name?

MR MUHINDO: No, I designated her to the Committee on East African Community Affairs. I beg to withdraw her designation to the Committee on East African Community Affairs so that she remains on the Committee on Presidential Affairs.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Chief Opposition Whip wants to correct the record, which he had changed today; that hon. Nabilah stays on the Committee on Presidential Affairs and not the Committee on East African Community Affairs. That designation was already done; I do not have to put the question to that. Thank you.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I just wanted to give information to the members of Parliament regarding the new standing Committee on Climate Change. I received applications to the tune of 18 names and we shall be waiting for the Opposition to also propose names so that we designate Members to serve on this standing committee. Yesterday, the Speaker advised that we hold on so that our colleagues from the Opposition and the Independents also forward Members to this committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: With these new committees, I hope that there will be no Members without committees because it had been a running problem. I hope this solves that problem so that all Members belong to at least one committee of this House. Thank you. Next item.

LAYING OF PAPERS IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 31 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

REPORT OF THE 14TH PARLIAMENTARY INTELLIGENCE - SECURITY FORUM, 20 JUNE 2019, PARIS-FRANCE

2.25
MR MOSES NAGWOMU (NRM, Bunyole East County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 20 June, I was nominated by the Speaker  to go and represent this House in Paris, France in the 14th Parliamentary Intelligence Security Forum. The theme was, countering terrorism touching the financing aspect. 

I hereby present a report to this honourable House concerning the issues discussed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable. You are not presenting the report, you are laying it but under rule 33, which record should be corrected because you are not doing it under rule 31 but under rule 33, you are allowed to make a short summary of what is captured in that report.

MR NAGWOMU: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. The issues discussed touch on aspects, which lead to terrorism. The activities therein include money laundering, tobacco trade, human trafficking, banking institutions, in particular commercial banks, individuals with big accounts and crypto currency. 

Therefore, the discussions included putting in place effective legislative measures, which can address those aspects that finance terrorism.

The forum emphasised that there are many missing links in legislation. In the Ugandan context, I put it to the conference that Uganda has managed to come up with the anti-tobacco law as well as established a Financial Intelligence Unit. I also told them that we are in Somalia to deal with ‘anti-terrorism’. They are calling it counter terrorism because we are already facing issues of financing terrorism. 

Therefore, we have to come up with legislative measures, which can address those aspects urgently because terrorism is becoming amorphous to handle.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the report for the House to consider.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that report. Honourable members, these issues are important; issues of illicit financial flows and because they are not traceable, the likelihood of them financing activities related to terrorism and other illegal activities are very prominent. That is why these regulations are required. 

The world has a convention on that, Uganda has made some laws and these discussions will inform us. At an appropriate time, we will find time to have this debate on what this particular conference has recommended and we will see whether our standing regarding the laws are sufficient or whether we need to improve on what we already have. We will find time and have this debate. Thank you. Next item.

REPORT OF A DELEGATION OF THE LEADERSHIP OF THE COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ON A GENETIC ENGINEERING REGULATORY LEARNING VISIT TO KENYA (17 - 21 JUNE 2019)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson? Is there any member of the Committee on Science and Technology? Next.

MR SSSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, the standard you have set for the Frontbench to come and give answers should stand when it comes to us the backbenchers. I propose that this item stays; it should not be pushed forward so that any member or the leadership of the committee can inform the House and the matter is put to rest.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Correct. This will not go on business to follow; it will not come back on the Order Paper. If it is not laid today, it will stay with the Members. It will stay in the committee and they will find another way of bringing it in a report; maybe next year or something. It should be done today. Next.

RESPONSE BY MINISTERS TO ISSUES RAISED ON THE UNEXPLAINED REDUCTION OF THE QUOTA ALLOCATION OF GOVERNMENT SCHLOARSHIPS FOR STUDENTS IN PUBLIC UNIVERSITIES FOR THE ACADEMIC YEAR 2019/2020 BY HON. JESCA ABABIKU

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is one of the issues that I had referred to the Prime Minister but we were told that the statement was ready so we brought it forward. Now I am getting information that the minister who is supposed to be presenting this response is not available.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, hon. Rosemary Seninde was here yesterday, ready with her response. I do not know where she is right now. I am sorry but –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We received information that she will not be able to come to Parliament as she is held up in some meeting. That is why I said that I have information that she is not coming and I had substantially referred this matter to the Prime Minister to deal with tomorrow. Next.

RESPONSE BY MINISTERS TO ISSUES RAISED ON THE PARTIAL PAYMENT OF SALARIES TO SOME EMPLOYEES OF KASSANDA DISTRICT IN FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019 RAISED BY HON. PATRICK NSAMBA

2.32
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Mr Speaker, you will recall-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, technically the member should have been here to receive this response but we will accommodate it now so that it does not stay on the Order Paper.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Mr Speaker, you will recall that Kassanda District was curved out of Mubende District recently. We crosschecked with the new district and indeed confirmed that the issues raised by hon. Patrick Nsamba were true. 

Those issues have been raised with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Mr Speaker, actions taken are as follows:
    a. The supplementary budget to cater for the wage shortfall has been issued amounting to Shs 156  billion; 
    b. Staff particulars have been updated by the Ministry of Public Service in order to ensure consistence of the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System (IPPS) under payroll; 
    c.  Tax identification numbers have also been corrected  inclusive of supplier numbers and bank details to ensure that henceforth, staff names will not be dropped off the payroll; and 
    d.   Twelve new staff members are being processed so that they can access the payroll.

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development remain committed to resolving such issues as we support the decentralisation policy.

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much –(Mr Ssekikubo rose_) only the Member who raised the matter is entitled to a supplementary question. You are not the Member who raised this matter. So, please let us obey the rules. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LAW REVISION (PENALTIES IN CRIMINAL MATTERS) MISCELLANEOUS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students and teachers of Joy Nursery School, Mukono District. They are represented by hon. Johnson Muyanja and hon. Peace Kusasira. They are here to observe the proceeding. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Honourable members, this motion was already moved for the Second Reading and debate started and the committee reported but the issue that remained outstanding was that the Bill, in its current form, was proposing to abolish the death penalty yet the House was not very happy with that proposal. What is the status quo?

2.36
MR OBOTH MARKSONS JACOB (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter we stood over was to allow hon. Sseggona, the mover of the motion to come and speak a little further about his Bill. I think he is now more ready. We are expecting him in the House so that he can give Members the gist of the Bill and the report on the position of the committee and the Bill. Otherwise, it was not clear when we were debating it. 

Most Members thought that the committee had agreed that the death penalty should be abolished. However, as you may find out and if Members could refresh their minds on this matter, there are particular offenses where we had made some recommendations. Following certain Supreme Court decisions on the matter, we were giving effect to those decisions so that we harmonise.

Otherwise, the death penalty still remains a punishment for most of the capital offenses. However, I cannot see hon. Sseggona -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, are you comfortable that this Bill can be processed and have you taken care of the provisions for example, in clause 1(a)(4) where the death sentence is being abolished in the Bill? Have you taken care to delete that proposal?

MR OBOTH: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we proceed with it?

MR OBOTH: I do not know how we can proceed without the mover of the Bill but the Bill is now entirely here. However, the Leader of the Opposition informed me that hon. Sseggona is sick. I do not know whether he left him with –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is only fair that the mover of the Bill, hon. Sseggona should be present to defend some of the positions in his Bill. Since he is not here, we have a challenge on how to proceed. However, we need to know when we can proceed with this Bill because it is one of those things that have been pending yet it has been ready all this time. (Ms Bamukwatsa rose_) Would you like to speak on the record, honourable member?

MS BAMUKWATSA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the House that hon. Sseggona is not feeling well. Yesterday, he was here but he had a cannula on his hand and he is still on medical treatment. Once he gets fine, he will come and continue with this Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it not possible for him to come tomorrow?

MS BAMUKWATSA: It is not possible. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us stand over this matter. Probably, we will be able to process it next week when the mover of the Bill feels a little better.  

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL GRADUATE SCHEME BILL, 2018

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is hon. Majegere? The mover of the Bill is not here. Has he delegated anyone to move the motion for Second Reading? It seems he hasn’t. Let us go on to next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE JUDICIARY BILL, 2018

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the minister move the motion for Second Reading of this Bill?

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg for protection from hon. Ssekikubo. Mr Speaker, I approached the Speaker - the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga - and requested her to grant me time to go through this Bill in my caucus for us to harmonise in order to save Parliament’s time when we come here.

When I talked to her yesterday, she granted me the time. Mr Speaker, I therefore, request that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you move the motion for the Second Reading of this Bill and then we take a decision after that?

2.42
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018” be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018” be read for the second time. Is the motion seconded? Okay, it seconded by Member for West Budama South, Member for Kiboga, Member for Koboko District, Member for Abim District, Member for Pakwach District, Member for Bukoto South; would you like to speak to your motion.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, as we are aware, we have not been having a law to guide the administration of judiciary. Need arose and Government decided that we establish laws, which will regulate and administer the judicial service. Judiciary is very important, being one of the arms of Government.

The Bill was read for the first time and I would like to request that Members accept that this is a very important legislation, which will help us regulate; including emoluments of our judiciary, the judges who have been raising matters regarding their wellbeing after retirement. 

Therefore, I would like to request that we accept, move ahead and debate the Bill when time comes after the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a motion for second reading of the Bill and the motion is for discussion of the principles of the Bill. It has been substantially moved, seconded and justified.

The motion therefore, that I put for your debate is that the Administration of Judiciary Bill, 2018 be read the second time. That is the motion for your debate and to kick off our debate, would be the report from the committee of the whole House.

However, we have had a request from the Government Chief Whip and we can see that the key line ministers are not here, we would be able to engage properly with the response from the committee.

Therefore, discussion on what could have been raised by the committee on the principles of the Bill. We might have a difficulty proceeding with the Bill.

We pause a report of the committee and wait for the House to be properly constituted with the ministers responsible for the sector to be available to listen in to that report, so we will be able to proceed.

The matter is deferred to tomorrow. Please, alert the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; and the learned Attorney-General to be here tomorrow as we proceed with this matter.

If your request is granted and that you will need to pass these matters through - I think you have had these meetings and consultations before; we should be able to finish with these issues.

Would you like to make another request that you want to get out of Parliament again or should we proceed tomorrow if the ministers are ready?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, the Bill is being presented by the Attorney-General assisted by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. I feel it very difficult for me to confirm that they will be available tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are the Government Chief Whip and that status has not changed. So, please, bring them tomorrow and they talk to the House. Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ADMINISTRATION OF PARLIAMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

2.46
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the committee chairperson, we were reconstituted yesterday and we complied with the directive of this House. I would like to thank the members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for all the effort.

We went through the report and we have just left the Committee Room 139 and the report is being endorsed. Therefore, we seek for another day, probably next week, when we will be able to formally report on this matter. We have made very significant progress on the Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I was expecting a statement from the mover of the Bill at this stage because the Bill is up for a motion for a second reading. Your statement would have come after that motion.

MR OBOTH: I think I was too generous.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you ready with the motion for second reading of this Bill?

2.47
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Administration of Parliament Bill, 2019” be read for the second time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by hon. Mudimi, Workers MP, honourable Member for West Budama North and honourable Member for Igara East. would you like to justify your motion?

MR BARYAYANGA: Mr Speaker, for a long time, the Administration of Parliament has been lacking mainly the way the independents have been treated. They do not know where they fall at times.

We would also like to see how best we can chair committees not out of your kindness. For example, when you ask the ruling party to give us chairmanship of a committee; getting chairmanship in the sense that you deserve it in your own right as an independent Member of Parliament.

To also have an independent Member of Parliament be part of the Commission in the House. We would like to also see ourselves get there as independent Members of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Honourable members, the motion has been moved, seconded and justified. Therefore, the question that I propose for your debate is that the Bill entitled, “The Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read for the second time. To kick off our discussion, we would rely on the report from the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

The Chairman was generous enough to give us the status quo. I think we will have to give it some time and then, we see how to proceed with this Bill when the chairman will be able. Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LAW REVISION BILL, 2019

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery, this afternoon, we have a delegation from Bukomero Sub county, Kiboga District. They are represented by hon. Kefa Kiwanuka and hon. Ruth Nankabirwa. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very, welcome. (Applause)

2.51
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, this Bill was read for the first time on the 24th May-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Law Revision Bill, 2019” be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Ngora County, Kamwenge District, PWD Eastern. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, the object of this Bill is to provide for the revision of the laws in Uganda by the Uganda Law Reform Commission and to empower the Attorney-General to cut off dates for the enactments to be contained in the law revision and to appoint the date for the coming into force of the revised edition.

It is also aimed at prescribing the validity of the revised laws and to make consequential amendments in the Acts of Parliament and to provide for other related matters. The evil intended to be addressed by this law is that hitherto, we have not had a law in place, enabling the Uganda Law Reform Commission to revise the laws as and when the laws require revision. 

For example, in many cases, courts of law pronounce themselves on some provisions of the law and guide on what the legislature should do to improve on the law. However, hitherto, we did not have a law in place to empower the Uganda Law Reform Commission to take up such recommendations and revise the law. This is what the new law is seeking to provide for.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the motion has been moved, seconded and justified. So, the question that I now propose for your debate is that the Bill entitled, “The Law Revision Bill, 2019” be read the second time. We will always start with the report of the committee to guide the debate. 

2.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the learned Attorney-General has alluded to this Bill, this was read for the first time on 24th May. Then shortly, the committees were disbanded. 

It is today that we are receiving that as a committee for the first time and we scheduled to meet the Attorney-General on the 17th July to begin handling and processing this Bill. So, we undertake to fast-track it. We know the challenges that the Uganda Law Reform Commission, which is one of the agencies, which reports to our committee, is facing. It is a Bill that will not take long in our committee. Therefore, we still pray for time in order to allow us to process this Bill accordingly and report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you have heard the update from the committee. The challenge of transition has affected the handling of this particular Bill but as soon as they are ready, we will proceed with the report of the committee and also finalise with the handling of this Bill. Thank you.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE PHYSICAL PLANNING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

2.56
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Physical Planning (Amendment) Bill, 2018” be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? If this motion is not seconded or lacks secondment, it will collapse. 

MR RUKUTANA: I am seconding it, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded by the learned Deputy Attorney-General, Member for Lwemiyaga, Member for Mitooma, Member for Kiboga and Member for Pakwach.

Are you able to justify this motion, honourable minister? 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, thank you for the opportunity. Honourable colleagues, we have the Physical Planning Act, which was enacted in 2010. We realised that there is need to amend it and this is why we brought this Bill to streamline the functions and powers of the Board; to establish a secretariat of the Board and also to provide for the appointment of the Executive Director and staff of the Board; to streamline the composition of physical planning committees and to provide for the offences and deterrent penalties for the contravention of the Act.

This was missing and it is very important. So, I would like to request that this august House proceeds to process this Bill. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. A motion for second reading of this Bill, “The Physical Planning (Amendment) Bill, 2018”, has been presented, seconded and justified.

The question that I propose for your debate is that the Physical Planning (Amendment) Bill, 2018 be read for the second time. Debate starts now and to start it off, we will take the report from the committee. 

Chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure? Is there any Member from this committee? We need you to help us see where we are so that we can see what timelines we can give the committee to be able to process it. We need to know.

2.59
MR MICHEAL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We had started processing this Bill before the closure of the financial year –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, of Parliament.

MR MAWANDA: Closure of Parliament. When Parliament reopened, committees were constituted yesterday. We are planning to meet on Tuesday to expedite the processing of the Bill. So, we hope that in the shortest possible time, we should be able to bring our report on the Floor to enable Members to process the Bill. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we have a horde of Bills that are likely to come from the Prime Minister for this session of Parliament. We need to clear these ones because when the new ones come, it is going to be a big job. 

We need to clear what we have and the list has already come. Before those Bills start pouring in, we need to finish what we have so that we have room. So, let us stand over this. One of the members has already given a brief to Parliament that you are going to meet on this matter and handle, so we will give you some time to finalise with this Bill and then come back.

Honourable members, given the timeframe that we have, handle these Bills as quickly as possible and limit the consultation to the people of this country and sectors that are likely to be affected by these Bills, so that we can finalise with them while we wait for the new Bills that will come. That matter is also deferred.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE INSTITUTE OF PARLIAMENTARY STUDIES BILL, 2019

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not seen the honourable member for Dokolo District. Has she delegated another Member to proceed with this Bill? Has any Member been delegated to handle the Institute of Parliamentary Studies Bill, 2019? If no, please, next item.

BILLS 
SECOND READING 

THE MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE BILL, 2009

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Learned Attorney-General, where are we?

3.02
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I feel shy to present this Bill for the second reading – (Laughter) – because consultations are still going on. I plead for at least two months within which we hope to finish consultations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, help us. Who is doing the consultations? The Government or Parliament?

MR RUKUTANA: To the best of my knowledge, all the stakeholders are consulting: the Government, the Law Reform Commission and I know that members of the committee of Parliament are also consulting. This is a law, which we should not rush. It needs time and concerted efforts to reach consensus. Therefore, a period of two months is needed for us to conclude the consultations.

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Marriage and Divorce Bill, 2009 has been in this Parliament for more than 10 years. You can hear from the learned Attorney-General that he feels shy. Over what? Why is he shy over this?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is because it has taken so long and yet he is the Attorney-General.

MS JOY ATIM: Mr Speaker, if Government does not want it, can it be disposed of? We want it to come to the Floor of Parliament so that we can debate it. Why is it that when it comes to issues of women - they are regarding marriage and divorce to be women issues. It is not for the women only but for both gender. Please, we ask the learned the Attorney-General and Government to take this matter seriously. Where is it? At what stage is it? We want to know at what stage it is so that it is debated. Thank you. 

Is he in order to say that he is shy to present this on the Floor of Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you are also shy in raising the point of order. I think the leaned Attorney-General is simply saying, to have a Bill of 2009 and him coming to present it in 2019 makes him feel shy. As a human being, I think that is a good sentiment to express because if he had said he felt proud, that would have been another thing altogether. Thank you. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES) ON THE AUDITED PUBLIC ACCOUNTS OF SELECTED STATUTORY CORPORATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEARS 2013/2014 TO 2015/2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chair? Any member of the committee? Who is the Chair of this committee now? Vice Chair? Former Chair? (Laughter) The House is adjourned until tomorrow, 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 3.07 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 11 July 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
