

Thursday, 14 July 2022

Parliament met at 2.18 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, you are welcome to today’s sitting. 

On 18 June 2020, in the 10th Parliament, this House passed a resolution approving a loan of €10 million to support improvement of health facilities in Karamoja. It is two years ago. 

It has come to my attention that up to now, nothing has taken place. The loan is on our loan book – when you hear our debt-to-GDP ratio, it is one of those considered. This loan was interest-free. I remember I was on the Committee on National Economy when we were processing it. 

One of the reasons why, at that time, the committee expeditiously handled it was because we were going to do a mineral survey of Karamoja and the MPs from Karamoja said: “You are only interested in our minerals; you are not interested in our livelihood.” The Committee on National Economy then put it as a condition that we would not process that loan until – the loan from the Spanish government, where a Spanish company, Xcalibur, was being given a contract to do a mineral survey of Karamoja. 

So, we said, “Bring the one for health – they should move together. As you survey, also, give people health facilities.” And, indeed, we passed it. 

Now, the one for mineral survey is ending – they are winding and they might even have submitted the data. For this other one, they have not yet even signed it, according to the information I got – and this is an interest-free loan. I was really pushed to dig out for this information because of the current situation in Karamoja, where people are dying of hunger; the situation is really dire. I asked them whether they even have health facilities to go to. So, I had to make inquiries and this is the information I got.

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – this time I will not blame the Ministry of Health because if it had been signed, Health would have just implemented. This is on Finance. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is required to come here on Tuesday and explain to us why this loan has not been utilised.

Secondly, I am giving the Committee on National Economy two weeks to do a study on all Government loans, which the House has passed, and give a status report here. (Applause) You will not be surprised to find that for a loan that was passed six years ago, we have not absorbed even five per cent. This is so that we can work together with the Executive to tackle issues of absorption. 

You know, I am a businessman. If you borrow to just store on your account that is the beginning of problems. So, the problem we usually face with loans is the utilisation and absorption - where we allocate the money. So, Committee on National Economy, you have two weeks to report to this House on what you have done on this matter. 

Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, on Tuesday, please, bring a statement on this Floor and explain why, two years later, we have not been able to give services to the people of Karamoja the way you promised.

Colleagues, I have also received many MPs coming to my office over ministers and Government officials launching projects in Members’ constituencies without involving them (Applause). I have received many complaints – and this money is approved by the same Members here. 

I request the ministers – and this is a humble request: you are colleagues; you are MPs. One day you will be a Backbencher and they will do it to you. That is when you will feel the pain. (Applause) So, I request you, colleagues, to always involve Members of Parliament because they are supposed to do oversight over those projects. 

Now, if a project is launched in my area and you launch “air”, how then will I supervise it? These are not issues that require any political divide; these are bipartisan issues. So, let us try to involve our colleagues in these projects because it will go a long way in strengthening the relationship between the Legislature and the Executive. 

Sometimes, colleagues, you do not know why MPs are about to swallow you here; it is because of such things. When a colleague talks in the canteen and colleagues say, “That one undermines MPs”, they also wait for you when you are on the Floor or in the committee. (Laughter) So, let us improve this relationship. I am just giving you free advice and information. 

Honourable colleagues, I will vary today’s Order Paper for item No. 3, which is on first reading of the Computer Misuse (Amendment) Bill, 2022 – because I have checked and this Bill is not yet gazetted and published. So, Clerk, ensure that is done so that we have this Bill presented for first reading on Tuesday. 

Now, you know Thursday is usually a very busy day. So, I request you, colleagues – (Members rose_)- I will allow only two members, one from each side. I will allow Hon. Ssewungu and Hon. Susan Abeja from Otuke. 

2.37
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for your communication. 

The issue of ministers going to Members of Parliament constituencies without informing them is going beyond what is required. The facts are that there are some ministers - of course those who are ex-officios - who want to stand against Members of Parliament. 

Recently, a minister went to a comrade’s constituency and said, “Your MP has refused to build roads. I am building you roads, yet he is getting over Shs 40 million”, yet he too is a Member of Parliament. All the privileges of a Member of Parliament, whether one is an ex-officio or a directly elected Member, are the same. 

I know that it is mandatory for a minister, before he goes to my constituency, to communicate to me, the honourable Member of Parliament. Why don’t you inform Members of Parliament that you are going to their districts for particular projects? I will even give you more information. Can I – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues rising on procedural issues? – 

MR SSEWUNGU: Can I drive the point home, Mr Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is a procedural issue. I do not entertain rising on procedural issues. 

MR SSEWUNGU: I am going to give you all the information you need from this communication. Mr Speaker, this business of tainting the image of Members of Parliament, and above all the backbenchers, is unprecedented. Whether you like it or not, when a minister is coming to Kalungu West Constituency, inform Hon. Ssewungu. 

This Parish Development Model has been a total mess. We are always ready to see that the Parish Development Model goes on and where there are challenges, we state them to you. However, someone goes to the district to attack Members of Parliament. Okay, they are lucky they have not come to my constituency, but they can get the best guidance from me in case they attack me. 

Nonetheless, there are those who cannot. Why do you go to the constituencies without informing the Members of Parliament yet the Speaker gave that ruling and it is known? I point to you, the frontbench; we are your comrades. We support you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Ssewungu – [A Member rose_] Please, honourable commissioner, take your seat. Colleagues, I had already ruled that on procedure, I do not entertain information. 

Now, concerning this matter, I have received 11 complaints; so, I am going to pass it on to the Prime Minister. This is a matter of courtesy. Even if we discuss it, all our discussions will be complaints. I hope that ministers have taken note because ministers are Members of Parliament. Hence, it is colleagues against colleagues. I work very closely with these ministers; so, I believe that those that have been doing it are going to change. It is courtesy. 

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. For the 36 years we have been in Government, we know that Karamoja is a very vulnerable region. We all know that every time it rains, Teso floods. We all know that after every four years, River Nyamwamba will break its banks. We all know that whenever we have had rains, Bududa will slide. What is our disaster risk management plan for this country?  

Wouldn't it be procedurally right that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development does not come here to tell us about relief and aid? We are not relief managers. We need a disaster risk management plan. Wouldn't it be procedurally right for us to have that plan here?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, I remember a few months ago, the Prime Minister, on this Floor, said she had been directed by the President to develop standard operating procedures for disaster management in the country. Maybe when she comes, she can update us on how far they have reached, but she said that it was in the pipeline. 

2.42
MS SUSAN ABEJA (Independent, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I really appreciate your communication. However, the issue of Karamoja is giving us, the surrounding districts, a hard time. 

Just like the communication made yesterday by the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness, she emphasised that she has been taking food to Karamoja. Our people in the districts surrounding Karamoja are suffering from the same problem. A case in point is yesterday in my district, my Member of Parliament clashed with the minister over the issue of famine. The locals are wondering why food should be taken to Karamoja each and every time. Is Karamoja the only district supposed to survive or other people are also supposed to survive? 

Mr Speaker, I am requesting that when planning for other people, we should also plan for other districts. For example, right now, there is no rain for cultivation in all districts. If I just give information –(Interjection)- you cannot give order on a point of procedure. I am also a Member of Parliament. (Applause)

Just to inform you, in the last financial year, we got information that the Ministry of Water and Environment had got a grant to construct solar pump water for irrigation. However, we have never seen this water pumps being constructed in our district. 

Therefore, I would also like the Ministry of Water to come here and tell us if they are constructing these water pumps in other districts and not giving us water for production. That is my plea. Please, let us plan for other people and not only Karamoja. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, the issue of food in Karamoja is a substantive item on the Order Paper. 

Secondly, I would like to make clarification. You can raise a point of order on a procedural matter because procedure has to do with the proceedings of the House; how the House is moving. For instance, the direction could be wrong and you want us to come back on track since we are going astray. Order, on the other hand, means you are disorderly or a Member suspects you to be disorderly and is, therefore, appealing to the Speaker. I just wanted that clarified. 

Also, please do not respond to a colleague who is not on record. This is because they are going to divert you. That is one way of taking you off balance. They try to call you and you lose track; so, remain focused until the presiding officer allows them to present their issue. Avoid responding to colleagues who are not on record. 

Now, commissioner, what is the problem?

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. Every time and every day in this Parliament, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes up with loans. I remember in the 10th Parliament, we nicknamed my brother, Hon. Bahati, a loans officer because every day he came with a loan - some, of course, are very vital for the running of Government. 

However, isn't it time that we brought an end to this continuous borrowing? This is because there are loans in this country that we have borrowed - for example, the Karamoja loan that you are talking about, which is interest free – but nothing has ever happened. Nonetheless, the borrowing still continues. 

When you look at our threshold, we are at the margin; we have almost reached the maximum limit. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we take a decision in this Parliament that we do not just borrow, unless it is a must and totally unavoidable?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I wish you had submitted that when we were processing the budget because in the budget you brought here, and which we passed, you had a big component of it being funded through borrowing in the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility, which is going to take us through the five years that you approved here. There was a component of borrowing and what we did was to show that we should not go beyond A, B, C and D. 

However, it is up to you, colleagues, when processing the loans because I do not think honourable commissioner, there is any loan that we have passed when it was not necessary. Otherwise, then it would mean the House just passes loans. So, that, really honourable commissioner, was not right. 

Colleagues, further to my communication, yesterday, Hon. Nathan Byanyima raised an issue regarding the report of the ad hoc Committee on mergers and how the minister had requested for two months to study the report and come back to report here. I promised that I would hold a meeting with the Executive, the Leader of the Opposition, the Chairperson of the ad hoc committee and the Minister of Public Service and we report back to this House. 

We held that meeting today afternoon and we made wide consultations. We have agreed that the minister comes on Tuesday and updates this House, because he said he had studied the matter and was consulting - he updates this House on what he found in the report and maybe what they have done. 

However, the update the minister will give on Tuesday will guide us on whether we should hold the debate or engage further with the Executive. I felt that should go on record because I had promised that I would report back. 

As you all know, our colleague, Hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo, lost his mother, Mrs Mary Akoth Orach. On Friday, 15 July 2022 at 1400 Hours, that is 2.00 p.m., we shall have a requiem mass at Rubaga Cathedral. Like we usually do, colleagues, let us go in big numbers and stand with our colleague. 

The body will, thereafter, be taken for prayers at St Theresa Catholic Church in Tororo District. Burial will take place on Saturday, 16 July 2022 at the ancestral home in Mwenge Zone, Katandi Parish, Kirewa Subcounty, West Budama North East County, Tororo. 

So, Hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo has requested that I convey this to you as we continue standing with him. And he appreciates all of you, for standing with him so far. 

Matters of national importance, Hon. Christine Kaaya? Colleagues, if we are to go with that - because I have very many colleagues - some of you have requested for time and I will give you chance to whisper to me, and then I’ll realign because look, it is 3.00 p.m. and there are points of procedure everywhere. I request you, colleagues; let us listen to Hon. Christine Kaaya.

2.51
MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here on a matter of national importance and urgency, relating to the encroachment of small vermin, including the black and white colobus monkeys. And the monkeys we know, the squirrels that have encroached the gardens, eating everything, right from the root crops, the bananas and they are even encroaching on the gardens near swamps. 

Mr Speaker, their original refuge these days is too stressful and they have come to the food growing areas, hence destroying everything. Every district has a vermin control officer, but some of the district officers are missing and we need to recruit them. 

When we contacted these offices to help us, the veterinary officers informed us that they always report this to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; which is the only mandated entity to import strychnine poison that can poison these vermin. 

Mr Speaker, this is a period when we should safeguard the food we have. Otherwise, we do not want to create another situation like that in Karamoja. This has affected areas in Bukomero Town Council, Kiboga District and very many people have given up on growing food. 

My prayers are:

That the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries expedites the need to quicken the importation of this poison as they have always done, in order to reduce the vermin destruction of the food. The only remedy that our people apply is to reclaim all swamps such that they do away with the refuge of the vermin, which is also very dangerous to our environment. 

The other prayer is to request for sensitisation of the masses, on the planned actions and the response from the ministry on the need to poison them because currently, our priority is food. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister?

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE)(Mr Fred Bwino): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have taken note of the concern from Kiboga and I am going to work with the technical staff at the ministry and at the district, to tackle the problem. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, your response seems non-committal. Anyway, I am going to follow up on this matter with the honourable member. I am going to interest myself in it. 

Now, colleagues, Hon. Ssemujju was raising an important issue on procedure, but his issue was in line with my directive to the Committee on National Economy. I said the committee does not bring reports, yet it is supposed to be giving us reports - look at Rule 178. So, read Rule 178 and Chairman of the Committee on National Economy, you come into line. Okay? 

Hon. Basalirwa has also reminded me here that most of you, after my communication, go for points of procedure. No, there is a reaction and it is provided for. However, all of you stand up on points of procedure. However, it is discretionary to the presiding officer; it is not that it should be a given. I might fail to communicate or I say “hello.” Will you say, “I want to react to that”? So, colleagues, that is discretionary. Let us move. Hon. Midius Natukunda?

2.56
MS MIDIUS NATUKUNDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the poor state of roads in Rukungiri District, especially the road from Bwambara Town to Queen Elizabeth National Park and Lake Edward. This road, at Rushaya C plus D, developed a huge crack on one side of the road, which has developed into a huge hole. 

Mr Speaker, this is a tourism road to Queen Elizabeth that generates income for the country and to the only landing site we have in the district called Rwenshama Landing Site. 

It has been six years of trying to negotiate with UNRA to come and fix the road because it is very dangerous to the users and to the community. Just last week, on Monday, a team from UNRA came and we thought they had come up with a lasting solution. However, what they did was to extend the road on the other side, which did not solve the problem. 

My prayer is that the team should come and fix this road because when the August rains come, it will be impassable; it will block the road. I, therefore, request the team from the Ministry of Works and Transport or UNRA to address this problem as soon as possible. I thank you.

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Fred Byamukama): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We apologise, as Government, for what is taking place. We are aware of the matter.

What we had done was just emergency work. We got a report, but the financial year was ending. We are trying to make all ends meet. By next week, UNRA will fix the problem permanently. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. That is specific. Honourable colleague, please link up with the Minister of Works and Transport.

2.59
MR RICKY ANYWAR (NRM, Agago West County, Agago): Mr Speaker, thank you. I rise on issues of national importance. On Friday, 30 July 2021, at 1800 Hours, Agago District experienced an unusual downpour accompanied by storms. The storm left death and destruction in its wake. Several properties were destroyed, including buildings, both for private and Government institutions.

The most affected was Wimonopechek Primary School, a Government-aided primary school with a population of over 1,200 pupils. The entire classroom block roof was blown off by the wind, leaving primary one to primary four pupils to study under trees. It is one year since the roof was blown off and the children are still studying under trees.

Mr Speaker, if we still believe in the saying that children are our future, then we need to do something politically right to save the future of these children.

My prayer is that the Office of the Prime Minister should do something politically right to roof the building and also rehabilitate it. I beg to submit. 

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we regret what happened in Hon. Anywar’s constituency. The Minister for Disaster Preparedness will follow up on this matter tomorrow with Hon. Anywar and we will find a solution. (Applause)

3.02
MS JOSYLINE KAMATENETI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My issue is about student education management system registration in my district. Recently, the Ministry of Education and Sports embarked on registration of all learners at all levels in my district. This activity was supposed to be done by the head teachers, the school administration and the LCIs. 

However, along the way, some people claiming to be sent by NIRA came and they are registering at schools, but charging parents between Shs 2,000 and Shs 5,000.

Mr Speaker, you saw in the papers, when they reported that Ntungamo District is among the first five districts with the highest number of children, and with women who are very fertile. (Laughter)

You find every household has an average of about 10 children. By the time you register a family with 10 children at school, it is around Shs 50,000 for every family. 

Some parents have refused to take their children to school because of this registration since it is compulsory. We do not know what is taking place. I have tried to consult the CAO’s office, LCV, NIRA and they all claim it is supposed to be free. 

My prayer is that the Ministry of Education and Sports comes out and explains this activity and the terms and conditions involved. 

Secondly, if it is free, let them refund the money of the parents who have already paid. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope you got the matter very well, honourable Minister of Education and Sports. Would you like to be briefed?

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Joyce Kaducu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Member for raising such an important issue concerning the registration process of our children. 

It is true the Ministry of Education and Sports together with NIRA are registering our children. However, this is not tagged to any monetary payment. It is free of charge. I will follow up on that matter with my colleague, the Member of Parliament. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students from the Guild Council of Bishop Stewart University, Mbarara. They include:

Mr Peter Asiimwe – Guild Speaker. Please stand up for recognition. (Applause)

Mr August Nowamani – Deputy Guild Speaker.

Mr Norman Agumenaitwe – Guild Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs. 

They are represented by Hon. Mwine Mpaka and Hon. Rita Atukwasa. They have come to observe proceedings of this House. Please join me in welcoming them (Applause).

3.06
MS JULIET KYINYAMATAMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

On Sunday, 10 July 2022 at 4.00 a.m., Caroline Aturinda, Annette Kabaya, and Norbert Tizikara were driving in a Mercedes Benz registration No. UBJ 053N and were hit by a train at a crossing point in Nakawa Division. 

On Friday, 17 September 2021, soldiers were similarly hit by a moving train and two of them lost their legs. On Monday, 31 May 2021, a train caused and paralysed traffic movement in Jinja City – still, that was another accident.

Train accidents have been happening in the country and there is no one who has come out, especially the ministry, to explain. 

My major concern and prayer is that there should be warning lights at all cross-roads. There should be flags at all cross-roads. There should be automated alarm systems that will be creating awareness about the crossing trains and, in the long term, we need flyovers at those points. 

It is not wise to say, in this modern era, that trains do not knock, but cars are the ones that knock, yet we can avoid these accidents, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable, if your prayers are done.

MS KINYAMATAMA: Yeah, my prayers are done. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member from Mukono had approached my office over the same issue. Honourable, do you have any complementary information?

MS NABUKEERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give my colleague is that one of the victims who were in the Mercedes Benz was a student doing clerkship in my law firm. So, we are saddened by her death. 

I urge the Ministry of Works and Transport to put in place those railway bar signals such that motorists stop for the train to pass. Nowadays, those rails are no longer working. For the time I have grown up here in Kampala, I have always seen those bars, but of late, they are not in operation. 

I urge the Ministry of Works and Transport, together with Uganda Railways Corporation, to look into this such that we save the lives of our people. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, this is a very absurd situation. Procedure?

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Whatever is said on the Floor of Parliament goes on record. A while ago, I heard a Member calling us “Rt Hon. Members”. I do not want to go home in jubilation that I am now also a “Right Honourable”. Actually, there are many secretaries-general of political parties calling themselves “Right Honourables”. However, these positions and titles are given for a particular purpose. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally okay, Mr Speaker, that that reference be expunged from us – Members who are Backbenchers? I would not feel happy going back home and telling my wife that today I was called “Right Honourable” yet it’s meant to be in reference to only the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister – aren’t they creating these offices and titles, which are not precedented? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. (Members rose_) Colleagues, please. Hon. Ssewungu, a colleague is looking at others as potential “Right Honourables”. (Laughter) However, for clarity, Clerk, kindly, correct that. We are all potential “Right Honourables”. Minister?

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Fred Byamukama): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We do condole with the families of the dear ones lost in the accident. Very soon, as the Ministry of Works and Transport, we shall tell the public how the accident happened. 

In the meantime, depending on the President’s directive, we are rehabilitating the major railway lines in the country. In future, we shall consider those safety precautions while rehabilitating to ensure that no accident takes place -(Interjections)-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, please. Honourable minister – if you can, listen to me – we have lost people. What the Members are asking is that, as an emergency measure and response, put the barriers in place. I do not think if I found those barriers closed - I think why they do it is because at night, there is no one – please, take advantage of technology. Even from 100 kilometres, you can close a barrier. When they are setting off, they close and then after they leave, they open. 

Honourable minister, kindly come back on this Floor and recommit and on Tuesday, give us feedback on what you will have done. I have seen that it looks normal to you. 

MR BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker, we shall take that advice. In the meantime, we have already directed the URC to replace all the road signage along those crossings and to deploy those who can stop the vehicles – whether during day or night – as we find money to fix those problems. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. That is better.

3.13
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Uganda is a religious country. We have a Constitution and following the enactment of the 1995 Constitution, Government of Uganda put in place institutions that are supposed to ensure that we all maintain ethical values and also that Ugandans are brought up with good morals.

Mr Speaker and Members, in the last week, most of you have seen on social media, concerts in schools where musicians were dancing in very obscene, seductive ways and students joined in. 

This, to me as a mother, is completely unacceptable because there are ways in which musicians should dress when going to schools. Some of these musicians were almost naked.

We also saw, Mr Speaker, that during the last graduation at Makerere University, students dressed almost naked in their graduation gowns. Most of you saw this. Mr Speaker, we need to bring up our children with good morals. We need to bring up our children while they respect themselves and their bodies.

I request the Ministry of Education and Sports to clarify whether there are no guidelines or dress codes in schools – whether students are not supposed to dress decently in schools. I know Uganda Christian University, Mukono, is one institution where you can’t dress in a certain way. Why can’t we have the same in other schools?

Mr Speaker, I also want to find out whether there are no guidelines governing these concerts in schools. If they are there, I request the Ministry of Education and Sports and that of Ethics to ensure that these schools are properly guided. If they cannot adhere to the good moral values that we expect, can these concerts in these schools be banned? And these musicians must dress decently when going to these schools, but not to go and seduce our children. Thank you and I am glad the Minister of Education is here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Minister, recently, we also saw a video trending on social media of school children engaging in immoral acts on a school bus. We all used to dance at school, but the dancing of these days, I don't know what has happened.

I don't know whether I am in a wrong generation because it seems these days in order to dance, number one, your dress must be extremely short. Then you must dance when the head is facing down and the back facing up. It is very unfortunate what is going on in the schools.

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, I need to be protected.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, we are in the House, not in a market place.

DR MORIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank Hon. Sarah Opendi for raising such an important issue on the Floor of Parliament. Indeed, it is true and she is right that all of us need to uphold our integrity and culture as a God-fearing country.

What she has said happened; an indecent dancer or singer went into one of our schools. As a ministry, we immediately took action. 

First of all, we condemn such acts in schools, especially in the said school. The ministry issued a circular. Dancing is allowed, but in a decent manner that all of us know. As you have said, Mr Speaker, during our time, we danced decently and for that matter -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I have not allowed the Member. Please go on.

DR MORIKU: Thank you for protecting me. As I said, we condemn such acts and we have issued a circular to all schools regarding such acts. The second issue that you have raised and that has raised a lot of concern –(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, it is me to allow the Member not you. 

DR MORIKU: Thank you for protecting me. Indeed, the investigating bodies have handled that issue and action has been taken -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, procedure.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising in relation to rule 49. My understanding is that all these matters of national importance are being raised there. This rule restricts what can be raised as a matter of public importance. In fact, the word is public. Most of the issues being raised are constituency related; maybe we need to amend the rules.

Mr Speaker, the rule requires Government to deal with these matters because they are of public importance and are urgent. The issue of dressing - and the colleague who stood up started with giving a background of religion. 

According to my faith, she is also indecently dressed. (Laughter) I have been to Karamoja to do parliamentary work and I have found people who are not dressed in the way people in Buganda dress.

In my constituency, I have seen people from Bugisu wrestling down adults, undressing them and circumcising them in public; and maybe, in their area, that is decent. 

Therefore, the procedural issue I am raising in relation to rule 49 is whether matters that are not of public importance that require an immediate answer from Government and that are also controversial and have no standards in the country should be raised under this rule. 

At the end of the day, if you have no standard as a country that the cloth must be this long and this size, how can that be urgent and which answer does our colleague require from Government? I am just a requesting you, Mr Speaker, to help us understand what can be raised under –(Interruption)

MR KIMOSHO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is what we call acceptable minimum standards. We have all gone through schools. Is the honourable Member in order to trivialise or even attempt to vulgarise by making many descriptions of how different cultures behave yet even some of the cultures he is highlighting are being –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you cannot have order on order.

MR KIMOSHO: Even in some of the cultures he is highlighting, Government is trying to eradicate those behaviours in those communities. Is the honourable Member in order to try to trivialise the issue of standards in schools and to say that what was done is right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, all of us have children and what goes on in schools concerns us. It might not be all of us, but we can generally say that what concerns children in schools concerns us and that is why in schools, there is what you call a uniform. 

Freedom without responsibility is also another problem. If you give school going children freedom without any responsibility and yet we know that by their age and the influences in life, they need to be guided - We cannot just leave them that way otherwise we are going to be like in places where your son wakes up and he says, “Daddy, I am a woman.” 

I saw Elon Musk’s daughter saying that; and even the daughter of the mayor of Toronto said, “Mummy, from now I am a man”, but you are a woman. She said no, I am a man and even went to court and court granted it. You know, that is where we shall reach. 

So, this should not be a matter of contention between us; it should be a matter of discussion and ensuring that we put some standards. Next time, I will allow Hon. Joram Tibasiimwa, the former headmaster of Mbarara High School to maybe submit on such matters because they guide us. It is just guiding our children. 

Now, what was very painful was what the children were doing. I do not think if that were your daughter - if you saw that video - or your son, you would really approve of them to be doing that when they are in their adolescence stage. That is when you come in as a parent and guide. So, colleagues, we should not make it a contentious matter. 

Honourable minister, you have procedures you follow in controlling such behaviour in schools, so kindly conclude. If there are circulars, please share them with us.

DR MORIKU: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. As I said, we condemn such acts. We have rules and regulations in schools. We will continue to strengthen the rules and regulations. 

Lastly, concerning the bus saga, appropriate action was taken and we will continue engaging the head teachers using all forums, as far as upholding the integrity standards and good morals of our children is concerned. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ndyomugyenyi Roland? Point of procedure, from Hon. Asuman Basalirwa. [A Member rose_] Colleagues, just a minute. There was a point of procedure and a point of order and I told you that these are issues where we should not have contention. We can have our interpretation, but the most important principle on this is that our children need to be protected. 

Secondly, on matters being public or matters of urgency. If I see someone’s daughter in Senior Two in such acts, to me, it is an emergency matter as a presiding officer. The discretion is on me, as the presiding officer, and I saw it as a matter which was very urgent and needed attention.

MR BASALIRWA: Mr Speaker, precisely, I understood Hon. Ssemujju to seek your indulgence on what constitutes a matter of national importance. I know that this 11th Parliament, under the leadership of the late Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah - may his soul rest in peace - had the opportunity to contend with this issue - rule 49; what constitutes a matter of urgent national importance to necessitate the intervention of this House.

Mr Speaker, you have rightly guided. The discretion is yours, under rule 49(3) on admissibility; the discretion is yours. Now, on rule 44(1)(b); where a matter contains an argument, expression of opinion, inference, imputation, irony, or hypothesis, does it constitute a matter of national importance? But the guidance, Mr Speaker, is yours and I think that is where Hon. Ssemujju is coming from. That is where I think his point of procedure comes in. What should I bring as a matter of national importance and what guidance do you give, in as far as this matter is concerned? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. You know, honourable colleagues, in a day, I receive over 30 issues that are coming as matters of national importance. I guide in very many aspects. Some through Prime Minister’s Time; questions for oral answer; petitions; some, you know, motions. So, by the time I am allowing a Member, you know I have gone through a lot of considerations. (Applause) 

I think that flexibility is somehow needed if we are to move well; but also, we do not stop at that. For some of the Members, I attach them to senior colleagues for mentorship. I guide some - go read A, B, C, D. You remember that more than 70 per cent of Parliament is new. So, the moment we keep dismissing colleagues right away, you frustrate people –(Applause)- they do not feel they belong here. 

So, we shall grow together, but that does not mean that we lower the standards of Parliament. We try to strike a balance, colleagues. I thank you. 

3.32
MR ROLAND NDYOMUGYENYI (Independent, Rukiga County, Rukiga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, regarding St Balikuddembe Market, formerly Owino Market. 

Recently, I saw a letter purportedly from the President, cancelling the land title of the traders of St Balikuddembe. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the purported letter on Table –(Interjection)– I have laid.

Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just read the reference and date.

MR NDYOMUGYENYI: It is a letter to the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, dated 4 July 2022, regarding Owino Market. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Signed by? 

MR NDYOMUGYENYI: Signed by the President, Yoweri K. Museveni and copied to so many ministers and the Vice President.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is enough. 

MR NDYOMUGYENYI: Mr Speaker, the title for the St Balikuddembe Market land was given to them in 2014; thereafter there was a directive by the President that the traders should be given this land. There was also a report by the Attorney-General, indicating the procedures that had been followed for the traders to get this title.

Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) verified and updated the vendors register, as directed by the President, and the list of the vendors, Mr Speaker, is here, titled “SSLOA: St Balikuddembe Market Stalls, Space and Lock Up Shops Owners’ Association Limited – a list of verified register for all vendors. I beg to lay it on table. 

After this lengthy process, St Balikuddembe Market land was leased to St Balikuddembe Market Stalls, Space and Lock Up Shops Owners’ Association Limited, whose shareholding is unlimited and that all vendors become shareholders as and when they want.

The vendors and traders applied for a lease. They paid a premium of Shs 4 billion and then later, KCCA, after all this, refused to give them the land. The traders went to court; they won the case. I have a compendium of all the documents, including the rulings - and after that, under pressure, they were able to transfer the title to the traders. 

However, KCCA frustrated the development of the market. When the traders had done their design after getting a developer, KCCA, in 2019, deferred the decision to approve their plan. Their design is here. I beg to lay, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that a copy of what was submitted for approval? 

MR NDYOMUGYENYI: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it stamped?

MR NDYOMUGYENYI: Yes. I beg to lay it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR NDYOMUGYENYI: In 2009, when the President gave them a go ahead in a letter dated 19 January 2009, he approved their plan. Mr Speaker, that letter is also here. 

Therefore, with all the court processes the traders went through to register their title, the sudden cancellation of their title is very unfair and detrimental. I believe the President has not been advised well on this matter. I think he did not get all the information. 

In one of the paragraphs of the letter, it is stated that the 10-year probation is over, yet it is KCCA that frustrated the development of this market by failing to approve the plans. 

Mr Speaker, my first prayer is that this Parliament interests itself in this matter. Otherwise, it is not only about the traders, but also a security matter that can cause conflict. Therefore, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development must come to this House and report on this issue. 

Secondly, the Attorney-General should give us a position on the legal impact of this decision so that Government does not lose money through litigation. 

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, someone has been named in the President’s letter as having been the one who gave the information. He is called Mr Balondemu. This gentleman should be investigated in order to find out his interest in causing conflict among Kampala traders. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleague.

MR NDYOMUGYENYI: I beg to lay on table all the other documents including the court orders, the President’s letter dated 2009 and the Attorney-General’s report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, the Member came to me today and I had advised that they present a petition, which I would send to the minister. However, the President’s letter says “cancel”. Therefore, when it says, “cancel” – by the time you go through the processes of a petition and then appearing on the Order Paper, it might be overtaken by events. This is why I allowed him to raise this matter. 

Honourable minister, do you have any useful information to give us on this issue?

3.40
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Judith Nabakooba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to acknowledge that I received the letter written by H.E. the President of the Republic of Uganda and it is correct. 

The land in question is manned by Kampala District Land Board, and they know who will be using that land; and they are the ones who offered the lease of 10 years to Stalls, Space and Lock-Up Shop Owners Association Ltd (SSLOA). The lease had conditions, only that I was not prepared to come with the lease documents. But the lease had conditions. According to Kampala District Land Board, the conditions of the lease were not met. 

We all know very well that KCCA took over management of that market a long time ago, and they have been complaining about my ministry not complying to cancel the title since they took possession. Even a big poster was put there, indicating that they had taken possession of the market. His Excellency directed me to oversee the cancellation of that title. 

Mr Speaker, that is what I am implementing right now. We got all the documents related to that piece of land. In case of further information, please contact me or my Commissioner for Land Registration. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister, for the information. 

Honourable minister, the situation is that KCCA had vehemently refused and rejected any attempt by the traders to take the market. When they did that, the traders found their way to the President who directed that they be given the title. After being given the title with conditions of development within 10 years –That is what you have said, honourable minister. In the 10 years, they were supposed to go back to the same KCCA for approval of a plan. So, what KCCA did was to say, “now, it is our chance” and so they frustrated the approval of the plan. 

After 10 years of frustrating the approval of the plan, the same KCCA says, “You have not fulfilled the terms of the lease”. That is what I took note of when the Member brought up the matter.

Honourable minister, thank you, for the information, but as the presiding officer, what I am going to do is - the Member has said maybe the President was denied or never given information as to why the development never took place or he was never informed of the attempts to frustrate the development efforts, which included refusal to approve the plan by KCCA. 

Therefore, I am going to bring this to the attention of His Excellency the President so that he can access this information. I am going to inform him that a Member has raised a, b, c, and, d. I will attach all the documents and send them to him. If they can help him to make a decision, the better. Ours will be to give him information, which the Member says the President was denied. It is very simple. Honourable minister that does not stop you, as the Executive, from doing your work. 

We cannot come in as Parliament to stop the Executive from doing its work, but we can enable the Member to give the President the necessary information, which he said he never got. So, tomorrow I will do that. Honourable minister, I will give you a copy, which I believe will help you and KCCA to come to an amicable conclusion of this matter. 

Honourable colleagues, I have received information from Hon. John Teira that we have lost the former Member of Parliament for Bugabula North Constituency who died today. The Member is called Hon. John Sebastian Majimbi. He served in the Sixth Parliament. As a tradition, let us stand up and pay respect to our former colleague.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Health, do you have a procedural matter? 

DR ACENG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the honourable members, but I would like to bring to all our attention that when we come to this august House, we want to be assured of comfort and safety.

We are living in very difficult times when we have the COVID-19 pandemic and we are all trying to keep safe. In Uganda today, our vaccination coverage is nowhere near 70 per cent. However, when I look around, I see honourable members without masks. Some have masks around their chins and others do not even know where their masks are, yet others are religiously putting on their masks, like you, Rt. Hon. Speaker. I have not even seen you remove yours.

Is it procedurally right that some of us try our best to protect others while others do not care about the health of others? Mr Speaker, I think it is pertinent because we are in a closed environment, with no free circulating air that we all keep our masks on to protect one another. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, the standard operating procedures we use here are set by the Ministry of Health; it is the one with the mandate. The minister has been clear on the issue of masks. Therefore, I request all of you, colleagues, to put on your masks. If you do not have a mask, I request that you try to find one so that we can go on with the proceedings in the House.

(Members rose_) Hon. Asuman, please, I can see the time - save me this time. Okay? So, let us go to the next item.

ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE HOUSE ON THE NAGURU–NAKAWA LAND ALLOCATIONS ARISING FROM THE REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON NAKAWA-NAGURU LAND ALLOCATIONS

3.49
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Judith Nabakooba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you for the support you render the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. I would like to thank you for the guidance you normally give us and I also thank Madam Speaker, in absentia, for the continued support to the ministry. I also thank the Members of Parliament who have been in position to interact with us and, also guide us, especially the committees we work with.

Yesterday, I saw this matter on the Order Paper and I would like to inform the House that, as the ministry, we have not been in position to study the recommendations of the committee. 

Mr Speaker, you remember that this report was discussed towards the end of the session, and, therefore, Parliament did not formally submit the recommendations of the committee to the ministry. It is only yesterday that I, informally, asked my staff to get a copy from the committee – (Interruption)

MR BASALIRWA: Mr Speaker, I was in this House when that report was presented. The Frontbench was present; the learned Attorney-General and some ministers were here. When this report was unanimously adopted by this House, with amendments, the Frontbench undertook to study this report and report back to this House. In fact, they even said that in two months, they would be coming to this House to report on the actions taken. 

Mr Speaker, is the minister for lands in order to come before the House today and claim that, as a ministry, they were not aware?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, whenever resolutions of this House are made, they are communicated. The Clerk extracts the report and resolutions. You will recall even yesterday – because we usually make amendments and they are scattered. So, the Clerk extracts the report and resolutions and sends them to the relevant authority for action. Now, what I need to do is to verify with the Clerk. Attending proceedings here is not enough. You must note that.

That is why you see that whenever we make communication here, we go on and write. I will need to verify with the Office of the Clerk whether, indeed, we communicated the resolutions of this House to the minister. This is because sometimes we communicate and they say we did not. I need to verify that. If we did not, then, I will give my guidance.

Colleagues, we are leaders in this House. We want to follow up issues. This is something – you reach in court and someone says: “Procedurally, you did not submit.” Here, we are lucky that we can make our decision. That is why I have said that I would like to, first, verify with the management of this House whether, indeed, we submitted these resolutions. [Member: “Small procedural issue.”] No, there is no small procedural issue. Procedure is procedure. Let me just allow a few colleagues to comment on this matter, in the meantime, as they verify for us. 

3.54
MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In your communication, you said you are going to find out if the Clerk communicated to the relevant ministry. I am very much aware that before anything is put on the Order Paper, the Clerk plays a very big role. There is no way the Clerk would put it on the Order Paper if he had not communicated.

Secondly, the minister - if I got her English well - said that they got the report, but they have not got time to read it. That means they have already received it. 

Mr Speaker, we need to be serious. You had the letter, which was submitted to you yesterday. She is going ahead to implement other instructions. That means they are not following the decision of Parliament. Let the minister explain this – either they are going to follow the decision of Parliament or not. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the minister has to explain. On that one, there is no question. 

3.56
MR DAN KIMOSHO (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you very much – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Bakkabulindi, to make it easy for you, that is why I said: “let me crosscheck with the Clerk.” It takes around 10 to 15 minutes. I will have got the information. Yes, Hon. Kimosho -

3.56
MR ATWIJUKIRE KIMOSHO (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I really want to request the minister to be very specific. I have seen a letter making rounds, giving instructions contrary to the report as tabled by the ad hoc committee.

Mr Speaker, why I am seeking for this clarification is that we shall go on record, as this Parliament, that we wasted taxpayers’ money on things that we knew we would not achieve or even implement. That is one.

Two, I would like to put ourselves on alert that if such things continue - we are only making an emphasis in bold that this Parliament is a barking dog that does not bite.
So, Mr Speaker, I request – and this goes to each and every committee of this Parliament - that is why we are talking about approving loans that are not performing. This is why we are talking about passing resolutions which do not come into force. 

Mr Speaker, I can tell you that if we proceed on this trajectory, every Ugandan will be telling you that those are “just for just.” I am not putting it to my sister alone; I think this is a matter that we should deliberately resolve or we tell Ugandans that we are good for not doing anything. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Kimosho. Yesterday I had allowed Hon. Aisha Kabanda who had risen up on a procedural matter and I said when the matter comes up substantively, I would allow her to raise a point of procedure. It is in relation to what Hon. Kimosho has raised. Yes, Hon. Aisha Kabanda.

MS AISHA KABANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Kimosho just referred to a flying letter. For avoidance of referring to a flying letter, I pray, Mr Speaker that you allow me to lay on table the letter written by Hon. Judith Nabakooba, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. It is titled: “Land for M/s Internal Medicine of Virginia Limited, Plot 25-50, Naguru Road, Kampala.” It is addressed to the Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters, Kampala. The date is 12 July 2022. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay this on the Table - okay, I will read the contents – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please honourable member, it is only the presiding officer that can allow you to read that. I do not know who you are listening to. You are listening to many voices here, but go on and read it.

MS AISHA KABANDA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) As mentioned earlier, the subject is “land for M/s Internal Medicine of Virginia Limited, Plot 25-50 Naguru Road, Kampala.” 

It reads: “I received a telephone communication on the 7th July 2022 from His Excellency, the President directing that you provide security to M/s Internal Medicine of Virginia Limited to enable them take possession and develop the land leased to the company by Uganda Land Commission with immediate effect. The land is comprised in Plot 25-50 Naguru Road, Kampala Capital City.

By copy of this letter, all relevant Government agencies are requested to provide the investor with the necessary support and cooperation. Signed by Judith Nabakooba, Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.” 

It is copied to the:

Rt Hon. Prime Minister; 
Minister for Kampala and Metropolitan Affairs;
Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development;
Chairperson, Uganda Land Commission;
Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development;
Secretary, Office of the President;
Principal Private Secretary to the President;
Executive Director, Kampala Capital City Authority;
Secretary, Uganda Land Commission; and
M/s Internal Medicine of Virginia Limited. 

I beg to lay, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, does the letter have a received stamp?

MS AISHA KABANDA: The letter has a “Received” stamp.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From where? 

MS AISHA KABANDA: From the Office of the Minister of State for Housing. The stamp is dated 12 July 2022. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MS AISHA KABANDA: I beg to lay, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She is still on procedure.

MS AISHA KABANDA: Mr Speaker, what prompted me to bring out this matter on procedure is the fact that this House had directed that the agreement that was giving M/s Internal Medicine of Virginia Limited, whatever it is, should be rescinded on grounds that the committee had discovered that actually, M/s Virginia does not exist. 

We looked for Virginia in vain and the Land Commission also conceded while they appeared before the committee that they actually never interfaced with Virginia at all before they gave them the land. They allocated them the 15 acres only on the directive of the President –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you are repeating the content of the report. I just want you to go to your procedural matter.

MS AISHA KABANDA: Mr President -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not yet at that level. (Laughter) Honourable member, you are protected. 

MS AISHA KABANDA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, the procedural matter therefore – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are protected. 

MS AISHA KABANDA: Thank you. You should have said that you take it in God’s name, but I know many people fear to take over the presidency. 

Mr Speaker, are we therefore, proceeding well to be seated with the Executive members here in Parliament who decide to defy the directives and resolutions of Parliament with impunity? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Before I give guidance on this, honourable Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, is this your letter? And why are letters from your offices circulating? 

MS NABAKOOBA: Mr Speaker, I confirm that it is my letter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MS NABAKOOBA: How it got onto the social media, Mr Speaker, I think is a subject of investigation, but I confirm that it is my letter. 

Mr Speaker, with all due respect, as I was stating earlier on, I told you that I respect this House with all my heart and I would like to confirm to you again, Mr Speaker, that –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Each one has their opinion. 

MS NABAKOOBA: That the recommendations of the committee are going to be studied.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we are still on the letter because the letter is implementing - the Member is saying that your actions are defying the resolutions of this House. That is what I would expect you to clarify.

MS NABAKOOBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On defiance, I would like to say, quoting Article 117 of the Constitution, that I am directly responsible to the guidance of His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda –(Interjections)– but also accountable to Parliament.

Mr Speaker, I was only - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue here is that we don’t always want to listen to each other. You should allow a Member to speak, then you make a rebuttal. I will give you chance. But now, before someone finishes speaking, you want someone to be stopped? You do not want someone to be heard. Now, if a Member cannot be heard on the Floor, where will they be heard from? Please, honourable minister, conclude on what you were saying, and then we shall allow colleagues to give their opinion.

MS NABAKOOBA: Mr Speaker, I would like to say that when I got the Executive instructions, my work was to relay the same to the officers responsible to enable the investor access the land that had been allocated. That is all I can say for now. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me just say – (Interjections) - I wish they would stop disturbing the Speaker so that he can rule very well. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please go on. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Just a few minutes ago, the honourable colleague here from Rukiga laid a letter where the President was directing the title for Owino Market to be cancelled. The minister has not implemented that up to now. 

Now, there is a letter from the President – this time it is a telephone call, which we cannot confirm whether it was there or not – which she is quoting in the letter, saying “give this plot to this company.” The minister has acted very fast. In contravention of the conversation on the directive, contradicting the first on Balikuddembe where it was written. On this one here, she has gone ahead to implement.

However, on the recommendations and resolutions regarding this specific company – if I remember very well – the report says Uganda Land Commission leadership arranged to have a discussion with the company on Zoom, but they never showed up. 

They said Hon. Betty Kamya gave them a name of a contact of Mr Faruk, who is a Ugandan. They called that number, but no one would pick it up. They put an advert in the newspapers inviting them to appear and defend themselves; they never showed up. They looked into the file and there was no other document except the application. Therefore, this was a briefcase company, according to the report. 

Now, if the minister received a call from the President, what was so hard for her to explain to the President that this company, according to the report - because she interacted with the Committee and when she was also asked whether she had met those people – according to the report, she said that she had never met them? (Applause)

Now, the minister has come out providing security to this shadowy company. It defeats one's understanding because even if there was a directive from the President, the minister is there to guide. To say, please, there is A, B, C, D. Now, if the company is non-existent, whom are we giving this land to? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is your procedural matter, honourable member?

MR OKUPA: Is it procedurally right for the minister, who told the committee that they have never met these people, to go ahead now to provide security to a shadowy company or a non-existent company? Is it procedurally right to move that way? (Applause) Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I am going to give my guidance on this matter. Number one, resolutions of Parliament must be respected and implemented. (Applause) As the leadership of Parliament, we shall do whatever is within our means to ensure that this is done. (Applause)

Number two, the findings about this company called Virginia, are very clear. We tried our level best. The chair and the team did all they could, but it was difficult to get a ghost. These people were ghosts, according to our findings. This is because we requested, in every way, to see this group and got nothing. We even said come for a meeting on Zoom, or at least send a lawyer or bring anyone, but no one showed up. 

Colleagues, when you are faced with such matters, it is not emotions that help or guide you as a House to make decisions. You elected your leaders in the House. Your leaders are supposed to do public relations for you. Your leaders are supposed to do engagements, on your behalf, and report back to you. They should not remain in our boardroom. 

On this specific matter, since they are quoting the President who is not here – we know the President has given us many directives in writing. On this one, they are quoting a telephone call. As the leadership of Parliament, we are going to reach out to His Excellency, the President over this matter. 

Number one, we bring to his attention the report that was adopted by this House and the resolutions thereto. 

Number two, we will clearly explain to him how we feel about the actions being taken and that they are aimed at frustrating the work of this Parliament. The results of our engagement will be communicated to you. I will do that tomorrow. Next week – we have access to His Excellency, the President and that is why we are leaders. Let us do that so that we have a meeting of minds. 

We do not benefit from situations, which show we are competing or we are trying to show who is more authoritative or not. Let us focus on the results of whatever we are doing. With that let us move on to the next item. It is already Prime Minister's Question Time - I have guided on this issue.

PRIME MINISTER'S TIME

4.15
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the Hon. Sylvia Bahireira, Woman Representative Kamwenge, asked the Prime Minister this: “Kenya and Tanzania have accused Uganda of stalling US$60 billion trade plan on Lake Victoria, which would be a big boost to the region’s economy.” She asked whether I know the status of the Bukakata Port Project, which is part of this trade plan.

Mr Speaker, Bukakata Port Project has three phases, namely;

The preparation phase;
The physical construction phase; and
The expansion phase.

Currently, Government has commenced the first phase, which includes:

 The construction of the main access roads, that is, Kinawataka-Bukakata Road;
 The completion of the feasibility study is done; 
The environmental and social impact assessment has also been completed; 
Completion of the settlement action plan; 
The port design and the master plan for Bukakata Port is in place; and 
 The compensation for 1,750 out of 1,958 project-affected persons, representing 89 per cent is done. 

Finally, the first phase is scheduled to be completed in June 2023 and thereafter, the commencement of the second phase, which will include the construction of the shipyard and floating dock will take off too.

Hon. Samuel Acuti, MP for Kole North District asked: “Three years ago, Government launched the rehabilitation of the 375 kilometre Tororo-Mbale-Lira-Kole-Gulu metre gauge railway line. The project was to be funded through a grant provided by the European Union. 

It was expected that by the year 2022, the rehabilitation would have been completed and this line would form a vital transport corridor connecting Uganda's exports to South Sudan, DRC and Kenya. However, to date, there is hardly any work going on. What is the status of the rehabilitation of this railway line and the amount of money?” He wanted to know the amount of money involved and wondered whether that money hasn’t been diverted.

Mr Speaker, this project covers 355 kilometres and it is part of a bigger programme named the Development Initiative for Northern Uganda (DINU), co-funded by Government of Uganda, which is contributing 55.4 per cent and the European Union, which is contributing 44.6 per cent. The total contract sum is € 39.34 million. The project's actual physical progress is at 19.2 per cent. 

Mr Speaker, funds were not diverted. The project is expected to be completed by August 2023.

Hon. Patrick Nsamba, the Member of Parliament for Kassanda North County, Kassanda District asked: “For the last two weeks, there has been massive vandalism of over 17 boreholes in Kassanda North, Kassanda District by unknown people, which has led to scarcity of water in the area. What steps has the Ministry of Water and Environment taken to restore and assess the clean water in the area?”

Mr Speaker, due to the poor quality of water that Kassanda Town Council boreholes were producing, Midwestern Umbrella Organisation was subcontracted by the Ministry of Water and Environment, after it was decided to stop water production from the same boreholes and embarked on drilling new boreholes. 

The contractor, MSR Technologies Limited, was contracted to drill the new boreholes and the drilling is now complete except that pumping and testing of the water is still ongoing. 

The water supply in Kassanda Town Council is still low. Currently, there is high demand for clean and safe water in the district. 

Mr Speaker, you will recall that this question was raised yesterday. Soon after Parliament sitting yesterday, I got in touch with the Minister of Water and Environment and informed them of this problem. Today, the ministry has sent engineers to Kassanda to assess the level of damage so that water supply in those vandalised boreholes is restored.

In Kassanda, there are two types of boreholes, namely; the piped one nearing completion, managed by Midwestern Umbrella Organisation and the others are run by water user committees elected from among the communities.

The other question raised by Hon. Nsamba was: “Can Government institute an investigation to get to the cause of the theft to ensure that does not happen again?”

Kassanda Police Station has opened up a general inquiry file to investigate the matter, and the public is urged to report cases of vandalism. 

The district security committee, together with officials from the Ministry of Water and Environment, are conducting community meetings to sensitise people to be vigilant and report any suspected cases of vandalism. I am therefore, directing the Inspector General of Police to send a special investigation team to reinforce the district.

Today, the district security committee comprising the RDC, DISO and many others, including the engineers, are in Makokoto Sub County conducting a sensitisation meeting.

Hon. Acen Dorcus, Woman Representative for Alebtong District asked: “Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) into domestic structures, equipment and organisation is a key driver in economic growth in any developing country's balance of payment position. To what extent has Uganda, as a developing country, utilised FDIs as a strategy for economic improvement?”

Government, over the years, has put in place mechanisms to improve the business environment to facilitate investment. For example, the Investment Code Act was revised in 2019 and provides for Uganda Investment Authority as a one-stop-centre, while tax laws are often updated to reflect international best practices. 

In addition, infrastructure development including road network, utilities and ICT have equally been prioritised especially in the industrial parks and free trade zones. These are some of the factors that have made Uganda a competitive investment destination leading to increased foreign direct investment.

Mr Speaker, foreign direct investment inflows have significantly grown from $1 million in 1991, to US$874 million in 2020.

Foreign direct investment firms have played a key role in contributing towards economic development through:

1. 	Enhancing technological transfer;
2. 	Job creation;
3. 	Capital accumulation;
4. 	Increased value and volume of exports; and
5. 	Improved balance of payments. 

In addition, foreign direct investments provide for financial, human and technological resources and these are required to promote domestic private investments. This is critical for our industrialisation agenda.

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Since we amended our rules, we shall allow some questions to be directed to you. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I was excited today when I heard Members saying, “We want the Prime Minister” and you are here and going to respond to them. It seems now that whenever you talk, things are done. (Laughter)

Colleagues, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have law students from King Caesar University. They are here on a study tour of Parliament. They are represented by Hon. Derrick Nyeko and Hon. Shamim Malende. They have also come to observe the proceedings of this House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Thank you. This is your Parliament. Anytime, you are welcome. 

I am going to allow a few questions to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, but please, be precise.

4.27
MR JOEL LEKU (NRM, Terego West County, Terego): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there is an escalating crisis at the border of Terego and Madi-Okollo districts, arising from a boundary dispute between the two districts and collection of market dues at Ocea Market in Terego District.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that the two parties had a meeting with you on 11 February 2022 in your office, together with the Minister of Local Government. The meeting resolved that the status quo should remain and that the Minister of Local Government should go to the contested area as soon as possible.

You even indicated that if the Minister of Local Government did not go, you would go there yourself. However, five months down the road, both of you have not gone on the ground. As a result, people are still fighting over the land and market. 

Both Terego and Madi-Okollo districts wrote to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, requesting them to carry out re-affirmation of the borders. Over time, the reports of 2014, 2020 and the recent one of 2022 all indicated that the contested area is in Terego District.  

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there is an issue of service delivery and the Parish Development Model for the people in the contested area: which district should budget for them for health, education and the collection of taxes? 

Strangely enough, there was deployment of UPDF soldiers alongside the police on the 4th of July at Ocea Trading Centre, and on 6 July 2020, six people were arrested and moved to - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, make it very easy and say your prayers.

MR LEKU: Let me go to the prayers. Mr Speaker, in these circumstances, there is a real danger of people beating themselves because of the inaction of the Prime Minister and the Minister of Local Government. 

My prayers are as follows: 

Government should release the reports as submitted by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development in 2014, 2020 and 2022 immediately, to resolve the border issues;
 
The people arrested from Terego and taken to Madi-Okollo should be acquitted;

The UPDF should be withdrawn from the area; 

The people of Terego should be allowed to collect the market dues at Ocea Market; and 

The minister should state where the conflicting villages at the border are going to benefit from Government services, including the Parish Development Model. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if you do not mind, they would create for you a seat around there in the meantime so that you do not move a lot. 

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, moving from the other side to here is part of my exercise. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Very good.

MS NABBANJA: The issue of Madi-Okollo and Terego districts came to my office and, indeed, we had a meeting with the Ministry of Local Government – and my brother is here. The issue of boundaries in that area is a long-standing problem.  I request that you allow me, Mr Speaker, to go to Terego and solve that problem. (Applause) Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.32
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the Vice-Chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government). We have interacted with almost all districts of Uganda. We have moved to all districts of Uganda, but realised that most Government seed secondary schools do not have teachers. Those who have teachers have one, two or three yet it is a very big Government project. 

Therefore, I would like to know when this programme is going to be thought about by Government – such that at least, Government does not have such kind of burden, including schools that have been affected. So, when is the recruitment starting? Thank you.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Member for the question. Even yesterday, but one, that question came up. So, I took trouble and inquired from the Ministry of Education and Sports about what is happening. As I talk, there are interviews going on at the Ministry of Education and Sports; those schools will soon get teachers.

4.34
MR BEN KORYANG (NRM, Dodoth West County, Karenga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on 12 July 2022, several herds of elephants wandered out of Kidepo National Game Park and destroyed over 4,000 acres of maize in the districts of Karenga and Kaabong. Two people were killed in the process of trying to scare away the elephants. 

My questions to the Prime Minister are:

Can Government make good for the losses that the people of Karenga and Kaabong have suffered as a result of the destruction of their crops by the elephants? 

In the short term, can Government take measures to ensure the remaining maize crops are not destroyed so that we avert a situation like that happening in Karamoja? 

As you respond, I would love to hear when this is going to happen so that as I go back to the district – when I am doing the mobilisation for the Parish Development Model – I should be able to give them feedback. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister? Colleagues, we are moving quickly, so we will be able to take many questions.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, it is true we got reports that the districts of Kidepo and Karenga had their crops destroyed. Like we told you last Tuesday, all those districts that are neighbouring national parks will get electric fences. This Parliament budgeted and appropriated the money to do that, under the Ministry of Tourism.

Mr Speaker, in the short term, there is food going to Kidepo today, as I talk. We have provided food that is going to act in the short term, but in the long term, we shall have to fence off that area. Thank you so much. 

THE SDEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Hon. Pacuto.

4.36
MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. Government of Uganda recently launched the Parish Development Model, which is a key driver to the socio-economic transformation of the poor in this country. First of all, I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I know she is a very good supporter of the Parish Development Model; very passionate like I am. 

However, Mr Speaker, over the years, I have reported to this House the fact that some of the people of Pakwach who live east of the Nile in Nwoya District have been faced with evictions from their historical land. On 21 May 2020, this culminated into the death of five people.

Parliament then directed a response from Government and this was housed in the Office of the Prime Minister then who instituted a committee of three ministers that were supposed to investigate and report back to this House. This violent forceful eviction has continued on the people of Pakwach who are supposed to participate in the Parish Development Model as well, but do not have land now because they are being forcefully evicted by land grabbers. 

I would like to know from our very good Prime Minister, who is very passionate and a very good mobiliser for the Parish Development Model, what her office can do to the unfortunate people of Pakwach who are very eager to participate in this Parish Development Model. 

I have written to the Minister of Lands over two weeks, but I have not got any communication from them. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable member, your prayer is already captured. Colleagues, let us be brief and precise and allow more colleagues; I would want to pick as many colleagues as possible.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable member for the question. The district of Pakwach and the people of Pakwach must benefit from this programme. I would like to institute another investigating team into the matter. As of now, I think I will get in touch with the colleague so that we get to know the ministers who were on that committee instituted by the former Prime Minister so that I know where to begin from. 

Lastly, there are so many enterprises that we put in place. People can rear chicken and chicken do not need a big area. Even if you are in a rented place, you can rear chicken. There are those in cities who are going to do small businesses; we still have Emyooga. We still have so many programmes. 

Mr Speaker, I will get in touch with the honourable member and together, we shall get a way forward.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Yes, Hon. Ssasaga.

4.40
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the scouts land at Kaazi, which was acquired in 1932 and has all the legal documents, the first title having been acquired in 1948 and renewed in 1998, running up to 2097, is under serious attack by the mafias.

If you visit Kaazi, you will realise that the whole secretariat is very intimidated. The land has been grabbed; buildings are coming up day and night. Some of the grabbers are army generals. Others are Chinese who are well protected under their Smart Projects Company. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are you aware of those developments at Kaazi?

Secondly, when are you visiting Kaazi to ensure there is sanity over this national land for scouts and more so, it being a camping site for all the scouts whose gathering is coming up next month? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, any comments?

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, Government came up with a directive in Cabinet to protect all Government land across the country and I am chairing that committee. The Minister of Lands and the Attorney-General are part of that committee and we soon are coming up with regulations. 

Government land and these other institutions must be protected. (Applause) Colleagues, we shall now invite you to our committee to give us details. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, he says, as we talk - maybe in the meantime, you can send the Minister of Lands to the ground.

MS NABBANJA: That is why I like you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, with the powers entrusted in me by the President, I direct you, Madam - (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us hear from the woman member for Masaka, Hon. Anthony Esenu and Hon. Fredrick Angura.

Prime Minister, you can see – please add us another 10 minutes; we are moving quickly. Prime Minister should add us 10 minutes; you can see everyone wants a piece of you. It is rare for people to be loved this way; it means people believe in your answers. 

4.43
MS JOAN NAMUTAAWE (Independent, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to request the Prime Minister to tell us the specific time the newly constructed seed schools will be in full operation because today, I have seen communication from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development saying that those seed schools will be in full operation in October. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you! Very good! Yes, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my sister from Masaka. In fact, it was the question that she asked yesterday that led me to get this information that Government is recruiting teachers. It is true that the schools will be fully operational by that time because we send money in quarters. 

Currently, like I have already told you, we are recruiting teachers. As I talk, teachers are doing interviews. Thank you so much. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, you have seen now that the question from the Woman MP, Masaka has liberated all of us -(Applause)– because we have gotten very important information. 

4.45
MR ANTHONY ESENU (NRM, Kapelebyong County, Kapelebyong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

Madam Prime Minister, allow me to first thank Government for responding to the cry of the people of Kapelebyong and Teso with respect to the deployment of UPDF, which has resulted in pacification of most of our districts and raids stopping immediately. Thank you very much for your response as Government and to the UPDF. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable member, ask the question. 

MR ESENU: Yes, it is related to that, Mr Speaker. In the last two weeks, there has been a resumption of raiding by the rustlers and some people have been killed. I would like to find out whether Government is planning to beef up the UPDF deployment in Kapelebyong, put in place the barracks that we requested for, but also construct roads to provide security access for the UPDF, most of whom are right now fully facilitated in terms of transportation, food and communication. Is there a plan for Government to improve their services?

Secondly, in that motion on the Floor of this House, the Speaker requested that Government should come, after every two weeks, to update Parliament and Uganda, on the progress that is being made to pacify Karamoja and all the surrounding districts. However, since then, there has been no effort, at least to the best of my knowledge, for that to be done. Could you advise when that will happen? 

And finally, there is -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable, stop there. 

MR ESENU: Most obliged.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, this question came yesterday. Let me give you the same answer. Mr Speaker, Government has put aside money to work on security roads; this money is already with the Ministry of Works. Yesterday, we met with the Members of Parliament from Karamoja Sub region and we agreed that even those roads that were left out and are crucial should be included.

Secondly, a lot of deployment has taken place in that area. And that is why you see there is some relative peace. We shall continue to deploy until Karamoja and the neighbouring districts are safe. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Prime Minister had only 15 minutes and these are in our rules. I just begged her for a few minutes and she has already given me those few minutes. However, she still has a long programme on the Order Paper, but I do not want to break the rules by keeping the Prime Minister beyond what she is able to do as provided for in our rules. Therefore, I will stop on Hon. Angura on questions. 

I know I had promised colleagues - I had listed Hon. Nakaseke, Hon. Dr Bwanika, Dr Ayume, Hon. Veronica, Hon. Atima, but colleagues, time is out; I have to work within the rules. That is what I have. That is what the rules give me. Hon. Atima, you are the final one on this.

4.49
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, during the onset of COVID-19, the borders were closed and Malaba Border was among those. However, as time progressed, the borders were opened. Unfortunately, the community border gate remained closed. 

Number two, we had a crisis that emanated from the congestion at the border again in Malaba when the fuel truck drivers protested. You went to the border and instituted a directive that empty trucks that are supposed to be exiting Uganda be diverted to the border at Rwakhakha to enable fuel trucks to cross over. However, that has since been overtaken by events. When are the empty trucks going to resume their normal crossing at the border since it has become an extra cost on transport; we are forced to go many kilometres, which is an increase in the cost of doing business? Thank you.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I have been in touch with my brother Hon. Angura and I would like to inform the House that the official gate is open and working 24 hours. These community roads, which he is talking about, will be handled from one area to another because even in Busia, we have the same issue. 

On the empty trucks that pass through the Rwakhakha border, we have talked about this with my brother. We continue to pursue this because there are those that say it is very far for them to go through Rwakhakha. We are handling this matter. The challenge was that we were fearing to have congestion of trucks on that border. But I think now that the flow of vehicles is smooth, we shall, together with my brother and UNRA, go and handle this conclusively.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, the Prime Minister according to our rules has 15 minutes for questions for oral answer, but she has given us 30 minutes and so, she has been generous; I do not want to abuse her generosity. 

4.51
THE LEADER OF OPPOSITION (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question by Hon. Sylvia is a very good one. Mr Speaker, Kenya and Tanzania have accused Uganda of stalling a $60 billion trade plan. Uganda is perfecting the habit of stalling very important projects, including the standard gauge railway.

Ever since Kenya started constructing that line to Naivasha - you are even aware, Madam Prime Minister that Kenya donated to Uganda at Naivasha and being a member of the Budget Committee, you went there to see them donating a vast expanse of land. However, up to now, not even a toilet or a pit latrine has been developed on that plot. And we are taking ages for nothing; there is no sign to show that there are efforts towards commencing this project of the standard gauge railway. 

And the one on Lake Victoria up to Bukakata port would even be in line with the Metropolitan Plan of KCCA to decongest Kampala because of the challenge of traffic jam. However, of the three phases, we are still in the preparation phase; and I do not think that we shall easily graduate to the second phase.

On the question about the Meter Gauge Railway, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, regarding this question, you mentioned a contract of €39.34 million. However, the Member says there is nothing on the site. It seems the contractor is hardly there; they are absent. That is why he is blowing the whistle that funds could have been diverted. You had better conduct some investigations into that.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I am almost concluding. Kassanda is complaining of 17 boreholes that have been vandalised and the ministry is offering to only drill one in replacement of the 17. However, where you came out accurately is when you said that today you have dispatched an inter-ministerial team to assess the level of destruction or damage and maybe you will get a better report on the way forward. 

Lastly, you gave a good exposition on the foreign direct investments, but only fell short of mentioning which one you are executing. Is it equity capital, reinvested earnings, or intra-company loans? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you - who is that? Honourable member, take your seat. 

Honourable member, you do not speak into the microphone before you are allowed by the Speaker. Also, during Prime Minister’s Time, there are no supplementary questions. 

Secondly, rising on a point of information is meant for a Member holding the Floor. Under Rule 41(9) of our Rules of Procedure, the Leader of the Opposition only comments or replies if there is anything to respond to. The Prime Minister does not need to go back and explain anything. So, your information does not fit anywhere in the current circumstances on the Floor. 

Clerk, let us first handle item No.6 before we go back to item No.5. 

GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR THE SUCCEEDING WEEK, 19 TO 21 JULY 2022

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

4.57
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, I move under Rule 28 of our Rules of Procedure that requires me, as Leader of Government Business, to make a statement in this House regarding Government Business for the succeeding week. 

Below is the business for the succeeding week: 

Motion to thank His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda for a clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the State-of-the-Nation Address to Parliament of Uganda on Tuesday, 7 June 2022; and 

The status of the COVID-19 pandemic in the country. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I request you to consider bringing a motion congratulating our leaders at the Pan African Parliament next week because I had promised that it would be today; that will be very important. 

Hon. Atkins Katushabe, today you are raising procedure casually, so, I will not allow you. You are seated very comfortably so I do not want to disturb your peace. (Laughter)

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS

5(I)	ON GOVERNMENT’S PROVISION OF FOOD TO THE STARVING COMMUNITIES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are the one to update the House, but if you have nominated any of your ministers, we are glad. 

4.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Ms Esther Anyakun): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This information paper seeks to address Parliament on the interventions by Government towards the various disasters in Ntoroko, Kasese and Karamoja.

The devastating floods that submerged parts of Ntoroko
The Rt Hon. Prime Minister accompanied by the Minister of State for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, visited Ntoroko District. Thereafter, we conducted sensitisation with the communities to relocate from the affected to safer areas, which are water receded. 

Relief and non-food items have been continuously sent to the flood-affected communities. 

Ten acres of land for resettlement of the most affected communities that were trapped in Rwangara Parish, Kanara Subcounty, was identified in Kanara Town Council. It is to be plotted and people moved to those plots. 

The trapped people in the Rwangara Parish were registered in biometrics and ready to move. They were 66 households in this parish. 

The affected communities in the camps have been sensitised against returning to flooded areas and are still patiently waiting for Government for a lasting solution to their plight. 

A new health centre III is being constructed at a safer location away from the flooding zone of Lake Albert. 

People are generally moving out of the camps. They are approximately less than 1,000 people remaining. It is difficult to establish where these people are going. Most of the people that were in the camps were migrants who had come to Kanara for economic ventures. 

The need for a long-term strategic plan for emergencies and also a multi-sectoral approach to disaster management

A disaster risk management plan was developed following the directive by His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda and was presented this week to Cabinet and approved. 

Response to the floods in parts of Kasese District due to the overflowing of River Nyamwamba, Rubiriha and Nyamugasani and the need for Government to provide emergency relief aid and devise a lasting solution to these recurrent matters

Mr Speaker, relief food was delivered by the ministry under the Office of the Prime Minister. In January 2022, 13,800kilograms of maize flour were delivered and in May 2022, we also delivered 20,000kilograms of maize flour and 10,000kilograms of beans. 

Land for Kasese flood victims has been procured.

The Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment has started distilling along River Nyamwamba, especially in the areas at very high risk of flooding. This has been funded by World Bank. 

The situation in Karamoja

Mr Speaker, 517,800 people, representing 41 per cent of the population, have been at risk of food insecurity between March-July, 2022. 

The majority of these households, that is, 80 percent, reported that food stocks would last a month or less. Only 3 per cent of the households had stocks to last for more than three months. 

There has been increased food insecurity in 2022 at 41 percent, compared to 2021 at 30 per cent, and 27 per cent in 2020.

The worst affected districts are Kotido, Kaabong and Moroto. 

The Cabinet meeting held on 10 July 2022 directed the release of Shs 135.2 billion to persons affected by food insecurity in Karamoja sub region for three months. 

Mr Speaker, 1,590 metric tons of maize flour and 795 metric tons of beans have been delivered so far to the region during the months of April and June 2022. 

An appeal by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister was made to donors and development partners to respond to the food insecurity in the Karamoja sub region that is highly affected. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I am trying to see if there is any Member of Parliament from Karamoja or Kasese standing to contribute on this matter. I will allow only three Members to submit on this matter and we go to the malaria statement.

5.05
MR ABRAHAMS LOKII (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The food security situation in the region is a big challenge. You have heard Kotido mentioned among the most affected districts. In fact, the statistics that we have –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, put on your mask.

MR ABRAHAMS LOKII: The statistics that we have, as per this morning – the number of dead people in Kotido has gone up to 380. The general situation is such that there is even no hope because the weather patterns seem to have changed. The rains have not come at a point when people are supposed to be harvesting. Government might need to even think of a more sustainable and long-term intervention that could bring an end to the challenge of food insecurity. 

It is important that our MDAs sit to plan and look at the best option because we cannot rely on the rain patterns, as already indicated. We need to think of the most strategic way that people can sustainably be productive and forget about the issue of hunger. 

5.07
MR SOWEDI KITANYWA (NRM, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by thanking Government for procuring land for the flood victims in Kasese. I think, to us the people of Kasese, this is our July gift from Government. We want to thank you. 

On the issue of desilting the rivers, most of the work is mainly on River Nyamwamba; the other rivers have been forgotten. 

The other rivers, for example, River Mubuku, River Nyamughasana and River Rubiriha, still continue to be a problem. My prayer, therefore, is that concentration should not only be on Nyamwamba; the other rivers should also be taken care of. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will allow Hon. Gilbert Olanya to submit on this matter. 

5.08
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister in charge of disaster. I would like the Office of the Prime Minister to be on notice that starvation and famine, this time around, is not going to be in Karamoja only. This time around, the rainfall patterns in northern Uganda – and countrywide – have changed. The climate has changed drastically. For us, in Acholi sub region, most of the crops that were planted have all dried. It means, in three to four months, famine is going to be countrywide. 

I pray, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that this time, let us plan on how to help our people countrywide. It is better we prepare now before we begin seeing people die. 

The issue of Karamoja needs to be looked at properly. I call upon the Minister of Health to take interest in Karamoja because normal human beings cannot be killed - about 300 to 400 people - just because of hunger. It means there are underlying factors that are killing people, apart from starvation and we need to take this matter very seriously. 

It is true that lack of food may reduce the immunity in the body and any other sickness that may come may kill the person very easily. Therefore, direct the Minister of Health to take interest in Karamoja so that our people are helped. Mr Speaker, let me take the information from -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Hon. Gilbert – 

MR OLANYA: Okay, let me wind up – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Hon. Gilbert, take your seat. You have used more than two minutes. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, Government has already taken interest in Karamoja. This statement has been very clear and it was for information purposes. 

5.11
MR ENOS ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. However, I would like to inform her that the central region, specifically my county, had an attack of armyworms, which destroyed gardens. Some farmers did not get good harvests and they are now doing badly. I request that if she is considering food relief, specifically for hunger-stricken areas, Kabula County should also be considered. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, these were issues for you to take note of. Thank you for the statement. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, thank you for keeping the promise. You promised to update us today and we have received the statement. 

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF HEALTH ON THE INTERVENTIONS TO ERADICATE MALARIA IN UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, you are reminded to put on your masks.

5.12
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruth Aceng): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Allow me to appreciate this august House for the opportunity to provide an update on the progress made towards malaria reduction and elimination efforts, to date. 

I would like to make some clarifications on the malaria situation implementation progress and elimination targets, which we need to attain by 2030. These are well-aligned with the global malaria elimination targets and eradication in the long run. 

Mr Speaker, malaria is a parasitic disease transmitted by a bite of an infected female anopheles mosquito. In Uganda, plasmodium falciparum remains the predominant malaria parasite species, at 97 per cent of all infections, followed by plasmodium malariae infection. P. falciparum, which is known to cause the most severe forms of malaria. 

I would like to inform the House that the entire population of Uganda is at risk of malaria, with 95 per cent of the population living in areas of stable malaria transmission – meaning it is there throughout the year. The remaining five per cent live in highland areas, which have lower transmission, but are prone to epidemics. These are areas like Kabale. 

Malaria risk in Uganda is influenced by a host of factors such as rainfall, temperature, population movement, poverty, access to health services, urbanisation and altitude. Population groups with a disproportionate malaria burden include pregnant women, children under five years of age, people with immune-compromising conditions like HIV, sickle cell disease and cancers among others; and non-immune travellers.

These groups experience more episodes of malaria, severe forms of the disease and may succumb to the disease if they do not receive prompt and quality diagnosis and treatment. Most recently, data has shown that children aged 5-15 years have an increased risk of malaria and are known to drive the transmission. 

On Malaria elimination, Mr Speaker, my ministry is poised to eliminate malaria from Uganda by 2030 to enable socio-economic transformation in alignment with the Vision 2040. 

Elimination is defined as the interruption of local transmission of a specified malaria parasite species in a defined geographical area as a result of deliberate activities. Continued measures to prevent re-establishment of transmission are required. Elimination by 2030 is feasible though will require sustained deployment of effective malaria control interventions through concerted effort from all players and the entire populace of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, I would have loved to go through the current malaria situation, but the paper is long and I do not know how much time I have, but allow me to summarise.

Over the last decade, Government has put in a lot of efforts and I will highlight some of the achievements:

Malaria parasite prevalence rate (the number of people who have malaria infection in the population) reduced from 42 per cent, in 2009 to 9 per cent, in 2019. Obviously, the prevalence is heterogeneous varying from less than 1 per cent, in Kampala to 34 per cent, in Karamoja. 
The incidence (these are number of new cases) decreased from 460/1000, in 2013 to 292/1000 persons per year, in 2019; a 36 per cent reduction.

Inpatient malaria deaths decreased from 30/100,000 population, in 2013 to 9/100,000 deaths, in 2019. This was short of the set target of 5 deaths per 100,000 population.

The proportion of malaria deaths to total deaths in health facilities also decreased from 18 per cent, in 2013 to 12 per cent, in 2019, a 33 per cent reduction.

The under-5 mortality rate reduced from 90 per 1,000 live births, in 2011 to 64 per 1,000 live births, in 2016; a 30 per cent reduction. 

Mr Speaker, I have provided a map showing malaria parasite prevalence and trends in Uganda. When you look at that map, for those who have the iPads, you will note that Karamoja is painted red with a very high prevalence, at 34 per cent, West Nile follows closely at 22 per cent, Busoga at 21 per cent and some areas in mid-north notably Acholi and Lango, at 12 and 13 per cent respectively. Then we have 8 per cent in Teso, the North Buganda and Bunyoro. The other areas have relatively lower prevalence. 

On financing for malaria control. The funding realised for implementation of malaria interventions between 2015 and 2019 was Shs 3.2 trillion, representing 63.8 per cent of the total financial need of Shs 5 trillion. This left a gap of 36.2 per cent, which is Shs 1.8 trillion. 

Most of these funding, and that is 84.6 per cent, was from donors while Government contributed 15.4 per cent. 

Of the key donors, we have Global Fund that contributed 40 per cent of the malaria funding, followed by USAID, with 24 per cent and DFID (UKAID), at 18.8 per cent.

Mr Speaker, I will bring out some contextual issues:

1. 	Malaria transmission in the country is heterogeneous and cannot be effectively addressed through a “one-size-fits-all” approach. Some areas require more intensive efforts;

2. 	Funding for malaria interventions in the last five years has been sub-optimal, as I mentioned at 63.8 per cent;

3. 	The malaria control gains that we have made are fragile with an ever present risk of reversal should funding end from the partners or interventions be withdrawn without a properly managed exit plan. COVID-19 pandemic has also strained the health systems;

4. 	There is reducing effectiveness of the known tools (anti- malarial medicines and indoor residual spraying chemicals) due to resistance developed by the parasite;

5. 	Climate change and floods have led to increases in the breeding abilities of the mosquito vectors; and 

6. 	Border crossing and international travels continuously make Uganda vulnerable to introduction of new species or strains of malaria. 

I will now give some information on the burden of malaria since January to March 2022. Mr Speaker, the country is currently experiencing an increased burden of malaria. This situation started in 2019 and has been sustained. Allow me to summarise this information. I will go straight to the outpatient malaria burden.

Outpatient burden 

Malaria contribution to Outpatient Burden (OPD) visits out of 11,251,900 OPD visits, about 3.2 million are cases of malaria;

Regarding the under-five, out of the 3.2 million cases of malaria, 774,000 are children under five years; and

Malaria in pregnancy - out of the 489,000 pregnant women attending their first antenatal visits, 80,000 come in with malaria. 

Inpatient malaria burden

Out of the 804,000 total admissions, 61,000 of the people admitted have malaria. 

Mortality

All malaria deaths: 628 malaria deaths were reported;
Under five: of the 628 deaths, 371 occurred in children under five years; that is 59 per cent; and
Regarding malaria in pregnancy, out of the 628 deaths, 41 - that is 7 per cent - were among pregnant women. 

Mr Speaker, there are regions with increased cases, as I mentioned earlier and I will go through some of them. Several districts in different regions around the country are experiencing an increase in the number of malaria cases and the most affected, as I showed you in the map, are Karamoja, Bukedi, Busoga, Lango and Acholi in that order. 

To respond to the increased number of cases across the country, the Ministry of Health is carrying out the following:

We have increased diagnostics and medicines allocations and distribution of insecticide treated mosquito nets through antenatal and child immunisation clinics. 

We have intensified surveillance and staff mentorship and special emphasis is being placed on the hardest hit districts through an epidemic response plan, including the following:
 
Integrating the malaria epidemic response in the existing COVID-19 coordination and management structures so that when we are looking for COVID-19, at the same time, we also focus on malaria. 

We have transferred funds to the affected districts to support coordination, operations, surveillance, and capacity building.

Deployment of new and improved anti-malarials, malaria test kits and ensuring availability of blood at these facilities. 

Provision of insecticide-treated mosquito nets for patients diagnosed with malaria. When they come in and test positive, we give them treatment and a net.

Strengthening the malaria surveillance system from weekly to daily reporting and data use for decision making.

Strengthened interpersonal communication at the health facility, community levels and in schools.

Engagement of the private sector providers (clinics, pharmacies and drug shops) on proper management of malaria and early referral. Maybe, just to let Members know here, that drugs for malaria are sold at a subsidised price supported through the Global Fund.

Mr Speaker, I will now go to the eradication and elimination strategies. For the long term, the Ministry of Health is implementing the Uganda Malaria Reduction and Elimination Strategic Plan (UMRESP) which runs from 2021 to 2025. The plan has adopted stratification of the country and deployment of different intervention mixes per strata through the most appropriate delivery approaches for maximum impact. 

Issues of human rights in malaria programming have been highlighted in the strategic plan guided by the equity plan of “Leaving No One Behind.”

The core interventions include the following:

Malaria vector control deploying a mix of long-lasting insecticide treated nets, indoor residual spraying, larviciding and environmental management.

Malaria case management – this means diagnosis and treatment at the facilities.

Chemoprevention in high-risk population groups. This means we go there and we give anti-malarials to the communities to take for prevention.

Surveillance, monitoring, evaluation and operational research.

Epidemic prevention, preparedness and response. Like right now, we are having the upsurges in those regions.

Advocacy, social mobilisation and behaviour change communication.

Programme management including stronger private sector engagement.

Let me highlight some of the current interventions, outputs and their funding gaps. 

I will start with the Long-Lasting Insecticide Treated Nets (LLITN) mass distribution. The mass distribution campaigns are conducted every three years; the most recent round was in 2020/2021 where 28 million nets were distributed across the country to achieve universal coverage of one net for every two persons in a household. 

A mosquito net costs three dollars at the factory with another two US dollars for shipment, storage and in-country distribution, bringing the total cost to five US dollars for a net in a household. 

For the upcoming campaign planned in 2023 to distribute 28.7 million nets, we need approximately US$ 135 million. Of this the Global Fund has provided US$ 85 million, Against Malaria Foundation US$ 32 million (this is in kind – nets only), the New Net Project is providing US$ 4 million, USAID US$ 4 million, making a total of US$ 125 million.

This means there is a funding gap for the upcoming campaign of US$ 10 million. 

b) 	Routine net distribution. We distribute nets to pregnant women and children under five years through antenatal and EPI (Expanded Programme on Immunisation) clinics at both government and private facilities. Annually Government distributes 1.5 million nets through this channel. This is mostly funded by the Global Fund and USAID. This means we receive the nets and we give them out.

The ministry also plans to distribute nets to school children in 11 high burden districts in Lango and Acholi this school term. The districts are: Apac, Kole, Kitgum, Gulu, Oyam, Nwoya, Lamwo, Pader, Amuru, Omoro, and Kwania. A total of 215,000 nets will be distributed at a cost of US$ 1,000,000 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, sorry for interrupting you, but your statement is confusing. You seem to have more detail than what we have in the statement. I do not know whether colleagues have the full statement. For example, where you talked of “11 districts” the statement we have has “40 high burden districts”. I have been trying to add up what you are reading and what I have – I will be glad if you can share that detailed statement. I do not know whether you are adding in the details as you go along. We have a statement signed by Anifa Bangirana Kawooya – the one that was given to me. Colleagues, do you have the same?

DR ACENG: Mr Speaker, I submitted a statement today. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have what she is reading - [Member: Yes]- If what the minister is reading is what is on the iPad, Clerk, kindly avail me with a copy of the updated statement. Please proceed, honourable minister, the Clerk will handle that. But please try to summarise.

DR ACENG: Mr Speaker, I am trying to summarise. I am about to end. I am now on (c) Indoor Residual Spraying (IRS). Currently 10 high burden districts in Bukedi and Mid-North namely; Budaka, Butaleja, Butebo, Kibuku, Namutumba, Pallisa, Lira, Serere, Bugiri and Tororo are receiving indoor residual spraying. 

These districts are sprayed annually before the rainy season. In March 2022, a total of 1,104,000 houses were sprayed achieving a coverage rate of 92.9 per cent and protecting about four million people, including 724,448 children under five years old and 110,000 pregnant women. 

There is a plan to extend IRS to nine high burden districts in West Nile namely; Adjumani, Arua, Moyo, Koboko, Yumbe, Obongi, and Madi Okollo and four additional districts in mid-North including Kaberamaido, Kalaki, Amolatar and Dokolo. Previously funded by DFID/FCDO that exited the bilateral funding, this will now be funded by Global Fund. 

The strategic plan has targeted to spray over 60 districts by 2025: a district of 300,000 people requires about Shs 1 billion per spray season. This means Shs 200 million for operational costs and Shs 800 million for chemicals, supplies and equipment. This is why we cannot spray all the districts. The costs are enormous.

d) 	Larval Source Management (LSM). Measures such as larviciding and environmental management diminish vector breeding sites and kill vectors at their larval stages to reduce transmission of malaria and other vector borne diseases. The GOU is supporting the implementation of LSM in six districts of Kabale, Rubanda, Kisoro, Lira, Alebtong, and Otuke, to a tune of Shs1 billion annually. 

We require more funds to scale up to an additional 13 districts planned. The cost to cover a district varies with terrain and water body mass.

e) 	We have chemoprevention: Therapeutic doses of malaria medicines are provided to vulnerable populations like pregnant women to prevent malaria. More recently, the Karamoja subregion which has the highest burden of malaria in Uganda occurring in a seasoned pattern has been targeted to receive chemoprevention in the peak malaria transmission season, that is, May-September. This intervention started in two districts of Moroto and Kotido; in 2022, data showed over 90 per cent reduction in incidences of malaria in children in these districts. 

All districts in Karamoja subregion except Amudat will be covered in 2023 with the intervention. This intervention is funded by Give Well, Global Fund Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. For example, in Moroto, Seasonal Malaria Chemoprevention (SMC) has reached 23,000 children under five years at an estimated cost of Shs 1.2 billion. This is through an implementation science approach.

(f) 	The other intervention is malaria case management, that is, treatment in the facilities. 

We also have what we call “integrated case management” of childhood illnesses, where Village Health Teams (VHTs) move through the villages to provide treatment for malaria to the families where they find children with fever.  This is being conducted in 63 districts across the country. We need to scale it up, but we are still mobilising resources from partners. 

(g)	The other intervention is the social behavioral change, where we ensure that our interventions are implemented, including sleeping under nets consistently and clearing bushes near homes.

Mr Speaker, my ministry continues with surveillance, monitoring, evaluation, operations research and epidemic preparedness and response. 
In conclusion, allow me to thank you for granting me this opportunity and to reassure the Members and our communities of Uganda that Government is committed to eradication of malaria by 2030. I also I thank this august House for their interest in ensuring that we get rid of malaria and for the enormous support we have received.

I have attached one page about contributions in terms of financing to malaria reduction strategy. Thank you for listening.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister, for the comprehensive statement. I will give the first opportunity to the Chairperson of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Malaria, Hon. Dr Batuwa.

5.37
DR TIMOTHY BATUWA (FDC, Jinja South Division West, Jinja City): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is also the Shadow Minister of Health.

DR BATUWA: I am also the Shadow Minister of Health. I take this opportunity to respond to the statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, let us make a deal. If you have spoken today, I will not pick you to contribute to this statement. (Applause) Honourable members, this is a general statement where we are not making any resolutions and I am very cautious. Where we make clear resolutions, I can pick you two or three times, but where we are not making any resolutions, I will pick people who have not yet spoken. Dr Batuwa?

DR BATUWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Sincerely, I support the statement. 

Mr Speaker, I was prompted by a sentence that indicated that the prevalence of malaria had come down from “42 per cent” to “nine per cent”. Knowing that we do not have any of the interventions that have been read to us - none has been scaled to be implemented across the country. They have just been implemented piecemeal. So, I am prompted to find out whether the prevalence of malaria has reduced. 

First and foremost, I contacted Namutumba District for a simple reason. Last month, it was reported, though refuted by the District Health Officer (DHO), that in Namutumba District, one subcounty lost 100 children in one month. That claim was refuted by the district health officer. Again, that prompted me to go there and find out. 

Mr Speaker, I found out that cases of malaria have been increasing just as the minister explained to us that we have lost the battle. Much as we had achieved gains against malaria, we are losing the battle. In 2016, it was 82,000; in 2017, it was 84,000; in 2019, it was 88,000; and in 2021, it was 112,000 so we are losing the battle unless we stand with the minister and support her. 

How are we losing the battle? The interventions that the minister is talking about are basically three and they are:

Mosquito nets 

Apparently, they are giving mosquito nets to two people in a home. Sincerely, the minister cannot achieve what she desires unless we support her.

Indoor residual spraying

Mr Speaker, this is being done in just a few districts as the minister has read. They are just a handful, yet Uganda has 140 plus districts. So, we need a lot of effort in that, but the minister is challenged as she has explained that the insecticide is not effective. 

What really works and what has worked elsewhere - Israel is one of the countries that has had success stories in eradicating malaria. They have taken the path of larviciding using larvicides. 

In Uganda, as the minister has explained, we are about to extend it to six districts. Going that path, with that level of weakness when we have just given the minister Shs 1 billion, very little money to do larviciding - yet the method is very effective.

Spending Shs 1 billion on larviciding is actually wasting money. You will kill the larvae in those six districts, but you have another 120 districts surrounding these six districts where mosquitoes still have the parasite and can go and re-infect those places, rendering you to have done nothing. So, Shs 1 billion we are giving to the minister is very little. In fact, we are just wasting it. 

Mr Speaker, if we are not up to the task of fighting malaria by  giving more money to fight it - I do not want to discourage you that we should not give any money, but we should stand up to the fact and give more money to that.

We, therefore, propose the following:

Overall, there is a need to seriously rethink our strategies and interventions to avoid sloganeering because we just launched a malaria strategy for 2021/2025, after failing to hit our target in the 2014/2020 strategy. Hardly a year into the implementation of the new strategy, we seem to be losing the fight as the cases are increasing just as the minister has stated. 

Prioritise effective case management of malaria to reduce the malaria mortality rate by ensuring the availability of blood in all health facilities in Uganda. Case management is a treatment as the minister has said. Mostly those under severe malaria or critically ill are the ones we lose. What we have noticed beyond medicine is that patients who need blood transfusion in areas - when you fail to get blood even when you are rich, you are likely to lose your beloved one who is infected with severe malaria. The idea of having blood is really very important.

Busoga subregion, Karamoja subregion and Bunyoro, just as the minister has indicated, are the most burdened regions. They all have one thing in common; they do not have a blood bank. Bunyoro has just been enrolled. It will get a blood bank this financial year. I also pray that Moroto gets it this financial year. It is important that Busoga gets it because it is highly burdened.

Mr Speaker, a blood bank, alone, is not enough. If you remember the discussion we had about this -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable, try to conclude.

DR BATUWA: If you remember the discussion we had about this – Hon. Sarah Opendi, from Tororo, rose and also indicated that they were challenged with blood transfusion, yet Tororo has a blood bank.

We pray that, beyond making blood available, let us make it accessible. The lower health facilities – health centres IV – should be functionalised to handle this by:

Availing them with refrigerators powered with the solar and electricity such that when they receive blood, they can store it. 

Letting them have the capacity to identify which patient needs a transfusion. There is a machine that does that – complete blood count analysers. Let them be availed to health centres IV such that this capability can enable them to use the blood for transfusion.

In the short term, ensuring that close supervision and support goes towards health centres III and IV. 

Fast-tracking and amplifying the use of larvicide as a method of malaria vector management –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, Hon. Batuwa, you have started repeating yourself.

DR BATUWA: In conclusion, Mr Speaker, I pray that you allow the parliamentary Committee on Health to interface with all the stakeholders that are in the fight against malaria such that we revisit the policy on malaria.

We want to see whether they want us to improve the framework in which they are operating. We want to see whether they are comfortable with the policy environment within which they are working – because they are injecting in a lot of money. As you heard, it is in excess of $120 million.

So, let us listen to them such that we proceed in this next five years – in the fight against malaria – on the same page. 

I beg lay my statement, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you have made your submission. You did not tell me you had a statement. (Laughter) So, on record, I do not have anything to do with a statement.

Ministers, on several occasions, also contribute on these issues; they are Members of Parliament. So, whenever they feel like contributing, I will be giving them opportunity.

5.47
MS AGNES AMEEDE (Independent,	Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her statement -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I try to balance because I look at the political divide in the House. I try to do that balance because debate must reflect the political shades, sometimes, in the House. (Applause)

MS AMEEDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, my wish is to request that you incorporate another perspective to the malaria fight – the issue of malnutrition, both for adults and children. 

In the case of Butebo, I suspect it has contributed to both the increase in incidences of malaria getting to severe and to other burdens of disease. 

Much as the issue of hunger is focused on Karamoja, I would like to inform this House that people in Butebo are hungry. People are having one meal a day and others are barely having anything to eat. 

We need Government to come up with a comprehensive plan on how they are going to address this issue of chronic hunger. In my view, it should be a cross-cutting issue such that the Ministry of Health – if it is spearheading it together with minister for agriculture, perhaps the intervention would be for Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to supply fast-maturing foods like vines, groundnuts, beans as well as education of the people on proper nutrition.
 
The other issue regarding the same is that whereas the minister has already hinted -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, your time is up. Colleagues, you have only two minutes.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister’s statement was on malaria. I am hearing statements about seeds, feeding and all that. Are we proceeding well by listening to a colleague talking about hunger when the issue of hunger was addressed by the Minister for Karamoja Affairs?

Also, Mr Speaker, I think you need to give us time – maybe two or three minutes per Member – so that other Members can speak. It seems it is open. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I gave a special attention to the Shadow Minister of Health, who also happens to be the chairperson of the forum – and this issue came here because of him. That is why I gave him time. The rest have two minutes. 

Let us not interrupt each other with procedure as we submit. The minister is taking note of the issues we are contributing. Issues of hunger should not come into this, for sure.

5.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (BUNYORO AFFAIRS) (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate my senior colleague for the statement. Kibuku and all the neighbouring districts have a very bad situation, where children are dying in big numbers. 

These children develop fever, with high temperatures and headache. They also end up, within a few days, urinating blood and becoming anaemic. The mortality rate for the children is very high. These children, if there is a need for blood transfusion, have to be referred to Mbale.

I have interfaced with my senior, but she also seems not to have support – in terms of intervening. I request that, at least, the districts of Kibuku and others that are neighbouring – including Namutumba – are given special attention to support them so that we save the children. There is no blood bank nearby. 

Even the chemicals that the minister talked about are not killing the mosquitoes. Even the mosquito nets were given far back last year – many of them do not have the nets. 

As leaders, we are at pain to bury over 10 children per day within a district. That is quite a big number. I request that -(Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now you have seen why a minister should be given a chance to speak. They are also stuck, sometimes, like we are. 

5.53
MR YOVAN ADRIKO (NRM, Vurra County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank our Minister of Health for giving us a wonderful report. However, what I have seen here is that Malaria cases are increasing. This means we have not done enough. West Nile is at 22 per cent. 

I request the minister to increase the number of nets. At least, if the households get 10 nets each, I think it will be okay because you see, in our villages, we have extended families. If you give two or one, it is not going to be enough. Still, mosquitoes will disturb other people who do not have nets.

Secondly, I request your office to inquire from the Members of Parliament because we have problems with local Government because of corruption. Sometimes, Government will send a lot of things to the local Government and because of corruption implementation will not be effective. However, if you involve us to be on the ground, to mobilise and sensitise, I am sure we shall reduce the number of malaria cases in this country. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Kamwenge -

5.55
MS SYLVIA BAHIREIRA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable Minister of Health for the struggle in the fight against malaria. With the interventions she has read to us, I have no doubt that by 2030, we can end malaria. I would like to thank her because COVID-19 did not affect the funding of malaria. Many programmes were affected, but malaria programming was not affected so, we thank you very much for that. 

We have kept lamenting about shortage of blood; it is a song. Mr Speaker, I would like to request the honourable Minister of Health that as top leaders of this Government, Members of Parliament, why can't we walk the talk? She introduces a programme where she sends here a team of blood collectors per quarter and once the whole country sees us donating blood per quarter, everyone will know that blood is very significant in this country and we shall end the song of shortage of blood in the country. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hoima City -

5.56
DR JOSEPH RUYONGA (NRM, Hoima West Division, Hoima City): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First and foremost, I would like to congratulate our Speaker. He was admitted as an honorary member of Rotary Club of Kampala Central yesterday evening; I represented all of you. (Applause) One of our staff is the President of Rotary Club of Kampala Central. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for the very good strategies and if you implement those strategies, we shall be able to eliminate malaria. We have been together in that talk when I was working at the district as a District Health Officer (DHO).

Honourable minister, the main challenge which we have been getting in implementing these programmes is that most of them are vertical programmes. Because they are donor-funded, when there are no funds, there are some activities which are not implemented, for example, the ICCM or the VHT. 

We used to have very vibrant Village Health Teams (VHT), but most of these were being funded by the donors. When the donors withdraw, those activities are not implemented. In fact, what the honourable minister was trying to tell Parliament is that she wants more money. If we give her more money, we will implement all these strategies and malaria will be eliminated. I beg to submit. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Bugabula then Agago – Hon. Amos Okot. Hon. Amos, you can be presenting as Bugabula -

5.58 
MR HENRY-MAURICE KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We thank the minister for the interventions that have so far been put in place. Before Dr Batuwa took over, I was caretaking the Forum for Malaria –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Maurice, put on your mask. 

MR KIBALYA: I was caretaking and we had several engagements with the minister, including some stakeholders. There are some commitments that the minister and Government were required to fulfil so that somewhere, somehow we move some miles. 

To begin with, there was a request from the last Parliament - the minister knows it very well – where the budget was, I think, around Shs 390 billion for internal residual spraying for the whole country; not just some districts because when you spray Namutumba and Iganga, just know that Kamuli will infect Namutumba and Iganga and your work will be like washing and putting in the soil. So, there was that requirement. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, the President came here and opened that forum himself and there was a request for a malaria fund. We were in a meeting with the minister and he re-echoed the need for a malaria fund. I wish the minister could make a comment on the malaria fund that was required. The President was here and he promised very many things when he was opening the forum, but we don't know how far we have gone. 

Mr Speaker, the minister said they give nets to pregnant ladies when they go for antenatal and so on - maybe in Kampala. I have not seen it in Kamuli and Busoga in particular or Bugabula. Unless the ladies I see in Bugabula – (Member timed out.)

6.00 
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. It is true malaria is a burden to our country everywhere you go. You can give the masses insecticide treated nets, but still, people have to face this same burden. 

I would like to thank the minister so much when she mentioned a case management treatment by using Village Health Teams (VHTs). The VHTs have been so helpful to the rural people. Remember, in many areas, health centres are very far, to the extent that it is not very easy for people to reach at the right time. If you could only strengthen the VHTs; train them well and give them the appropriate knowledge such that they can be able to reach out to the children at the right time, that will help us a lot in treating people who are infected with malaria. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, there are too many fake drugs in the market to the extent that we need to strengthen the monitoring of drug resistance in the area. You find that you can be taking malaria drugs, but at the same time, those parasites do not leave. At the end, somebody dies. That is accompanied with people who can be having some ailment which is not malaria and diagnosis takes some time. 

You find somebody is having an injury out of an accident. It takes so long for somebody to detect that the person is having malaria and he or she dies of malaria simply because they might have not done prophylaxis treatment. 

I would encourage that maybe they take an interest to put people under prophylaxis treatment, especially using Fansidar drugs that can help in those areas –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, your time is up.

MR AMOS OKOT: Okay. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for this time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rukungiri? You can use the same with Hon. Amos. Rukungiri, you can use this one. Please, give it to Rukungiri – Dr Rutahigwa -

6.03
DR ELISA RUTAHIGWA (NRM, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I, first of all, want to thank my minister for the report she has shared with us. 

Mr Speaker, I am not a fan of the target of 2030 to eradicate malaria. My biggest concern is between now and 2030, how many people shall we lose to malaria? What I would like to talk about is that we have seen people die when they get malaria. The cause of death is not that they have got malaria, but they have failed to access treatment. 

Recently I was in Oyam and we looked at the community programme that is there under the funding of “Living Goods” and the programme was working so well that even when I looked at the statistics/ data of the facilities which we visited, there was evidence that cases of malaria had dropped drastically. I would like to agree with my brother here that community programmes are the best to make sure that we control malaria such that it does not kill our children and people.

When we were in the facilities, we found out that some of the facilities have the medicines while in others the medicines were out of stock and even in others the antimalarial medicines had expired. Now, can we have a system in our facilities –(Member timed out_)

6.05
MS VERONICA NANYONDO (NUP, Woman Representative, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable minister for the statement. From the recommendations, you talked about the distribution of nets which is a good idea. However, I would request that when you are distributing nets, let them be placed in the health centres where pregnant mothers go for antenatal instead of these nets falling into the hands of people who do not value them.

We have seen that most of the nets are used for fishing and in gardens. Therefore, they do not serve their purpose. That is my request to you, honourable minister. Thank you.

6.06
MR FRED KAYONDO (DP, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, honourable minister. Mr Speaker, allow me to tell the minister that I am doing research on the resistance of micro organisms to pharmaceuticals.

The minister spoke here and she kept repeating that mosquitoes are not dying and the members here are also recognizing that. However, we have used one formulation for the last 25 years. The ministry has used alpha-Cypermethrin for the last 25 years on these mosquitoes. These mosquitoes have mutated and they are dealing with a mutant that is why they are resistant; they cannot die because they have gotten used to the same exposure for the last 25 years. 

I request the ministry to change the formulation; there are so many formulations that can be used to kill these mosquitoes. And some of us are here to be consulted if need be. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, we have a full authority in Uganda, the National Drug Authority, which is responsible for managing the effectiveness and the quality of pharmaceuticals on the market. However, Members can agree with me here; when you go to the pharmacy or a drug shop, you have to be inquisitive about which pharmaceutical you are going to buy and you even ask from which country.

There are pharmaceuticals which are not authentic at all and they are on the market here; yet we have the National Drug Authority which is supposed to control those drugs. How I wish that the ministry can strengthen the National Drug Authority to wipe out all those fake -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, that is an important point because sometimes we go to pharmacies and they say, “India costs this much, Europe costs this much.” Now depending on your pocket, you decide whether to heal fast or heal slowly because of your pocket. Now, why?

I had allowed Dr Lulume Bayiga; I am trying to pick the doctors first then Dr Kamara. I want scientists; these days we are promoting science. So, it should be reflected on the Floor.

6.09
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I would like Dr Luttamaguzi to keep quiet.

DR BAYIGGA: May I be protected, Mr Speaker, from hecklers? Mr Speaker, about three months ago, while engaging with the Ministry of Health, I indicated to the Director-General that there is a resurgence of malaria in my district, the microcosm was at Nkokonjeru Health Centre II where they had recognized an upsurge of about 34 per cent. 

When I asked the DHO, in some subcounties, it had gone to about 40 per cent. Maybe, because we are near Busoga, that is why this part has not been –(Interjection)- yes, information has been given that Busoga is one of the areas with high burdens of malaria -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Basalirwa, the doctor is speaking; so, the lawyers should come later.

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, information has been given, and I would like to be emphatic on this that Busoga is one of the areas with high disease burden. Maybe because Buikwe is near Busoga, that is why we are having a resurgence; we could be snapped up by Busoga –(Interjections)- instead of reporting that Buikwe is one of the areas with high disease burden.

Therefore, I blame our surveillance system and this has been reported last. The disease surveillance is taking a small budget and it is remembered last. Much of the information, which is generated in health centres may not reach the ministry because of the poor reporting systems–(Interjection)- I beg your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Dr Nicholas Kamara can start from where you stopped. 

6.11
DR NICHOLAS KAMARA (FDC, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for picking me and thank you, honourable minister, for the good report. I would like to add a little bit to the minister’s report that on top of what she has said, Malaria is a top cause of miscarriages, malnutrition and infant mortality. 

I would like to comment on two issues: one is the resistance to larvicides. We have seen that there is resistance to larvicides and at the same time, while residual spraying is taking place, there is an upsurge of malaria, especially in Busoga. Therefore, we need to do a lot of research or change the insecticide which we are using. 

The second issue we are talking about is the funding. As my colleague, Dr Ruyonga, has said and the minister has ably stated, most of the funding comes from donors. Now, Mr Speaker, we have reached middle-income status -(Interjection)-according to the President, we have reached middle-income status. Now, what is going to happen is that the donors are going to start pulling out because they assume that we have a lot of money. 

Therefore, I would like us, as government and Parliament, to take a big interest in this cause and make sure that the malaria interventions are well-funded by Parliament to make sure that they - for example ICCM in the whole –(Member timed out.)

6.13
MS FLAVIA NABAGABE (NUP, Woman Representative, Kassanda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to appreciate the Minister of Health for the elaborate report. I have a great concern on the mutation of malaria. As I speak, in my household, I have about five people who have had malaria that has resisted all kinds of drugs on the market. It manifests itself through hard diarrhoea, vomiting and headaches that are constant. Therefore, we need to find solutions to this mutant malaria. 

Also, the minister has read, with great concern, and I am deeply disturbed, that 80,000 women go to health centres with malaria. Mr Speaker, malaria is one of the leading causes of miscarriages. I have had encounters with women who have lost their pregnancies because of malaria without knowing they had it. Over 28 per cent of young girls between the ages of 15 and 24 have also lost pregnancies as a result of malaria. 

Therefore, it is my suggestion that we focus our priority on women's maternal health. We should increase the budget for women's maternal health issues to at least five per cent, especially in regard to malaria. 

The accessibility of malaria drugs in health centres III and IV is still lacking. We go to health centres, but there are no malaria drugs. Instead, they give drugs like Panadol and cough medicine to treat malaria. Our health centres III need to be equipped with malaria drugs and malaria kits. Thank you very much.

6.15 
MR ALLAN MAYANJA (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Minister, you have talked about routine net distribution to pregnant women and children under five years through antenatal care and EPI clinics.

In Nakaseke Central County, pregnant women are buying these nets, so, you need to clarify this. Why is Nakaseke Central County being left out of that programme? Could you also explain to us what these EPI clinics are? Maybe I could refer my constituents to where those clinics are.  

We can align the US $10 million from the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and bridge the funding gap for the net mass campaign planned for 2023. 

Lastly, as we think about eradicating malaria in Uganda by 2030, I do not know whether it has come to your attention, honourable minister, that there is a lot of fake medicine on the market for treating malaria. I have often got this kind of complaint from my constituents in Nakaseke Central. You could probably clarify this. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, this is an issue that affects all of us. All of us would want to speak to it yet we have other important issues. There is an issue with UPDF recruitment, which we must sort out today. I also have another official engagement at 6.45 p.m., which I pushed forward. Therefore, I am going to suspend debate on this matter until Wednesday.

Colleagues, you are all important. No one’s submission is more important than others. When I say “suspend” you cannot say, “for me one minute.” No. Even others would want it. I am going to suspend debate on this issue. We will resume it on Wednesday for one hour so that we allow as many Members as possible to debate.

Clerk, I would be glad if a list can be passed around for those who have not spoken and were present today so that I start with them. Clerk, circulate the list of those who are present today so that if you are present on Wednesday, we start with you and we do not get new Members. So, I suspend debate on this matter to Wednesday next week. 

I have consulted and the minister will be around. That is when the Chairperson of the Committee on Health and the minister will make their final remarks on this issue. Ensure those lists are given. They will be availed to me on Wednesday.

5(III) ON THE ALLEGED UNFAIR AND DISCRIMINATORY RECRUITMENT BY THE UGANDA PEOPLE'S DEFENCE FORCE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, this is a matter for both the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA), but they only listed the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs. I will also allow the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities – oh, it also touches Prisons. It is general recruitment. This issue was specifically for the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs. I do not know how UWA came in. Did the presiding officer then also allow UWA -[Honourable members: “Yes”]- I will also allow the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to speak after the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs. Members, please keep your submissions short.

6.19 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The statement was successfully uploaded on our iPads so I will try to keep it very short.

Mr Speaker, I think the list is being passed around as you directed. I hope I will also write my name after I have given this statement -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, go on, honourable minister. 

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, as you directed - I am skipping the introduction. I hope Hansard will capture the whole document.

Mr Speaker, you directed the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs to present to this House a comprehensive statement on the matter by Tuesday, 12 July 2022.

In 2004, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs undertook a comprehensive programme to transform the UPDF into a modern, professional and accountable force subordinate to civilian authority. Part of this is recruiting Ugandans who meet the standards prescribed in the Uganda People's Defence Force Act, 2005, Sections 51 and 52. The details of who qualifies to be recruited are captured on page 2 and the specific criteria used for – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, your statement is short so you can read all of it verbatim. 

MR OBOTH: On 27 August 2014, referred to as the “Census Reference Night”, a national census was commenced that went from 28th  August to 7th September 2014, whereby enumeration of Ugandans was done on a de facto basis, i.e., Ugandans were enumerated where they were at the time. As a result, Uganda’s population was put at 33.6 million people. This provides a backdrop on which the recruitment quota allocations are based. 

The Ministry of Defence and Uganda People's Defence Force carried out national recruitment from 18th June to 4th July 2022. The recruitment was for all Ugandan nationals and was based on a quota system. Slots were, therefore, allotted to districts based on the Population Housing Census of 2014 – (Interjection) - Mr Speaker, I seek your protection from the commissioner because he is over-engaging. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Commissioner, I do not know where you get the energy to interfere with the minister in charge of all guns in this country. (Laughter) So, please, for your own safety, do not interfere with the minister for defence.

MR JACOB OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the protection. May I reiterate that the census was based on de facto basis, i.e., Ugandans present in different locations at the time of enumeration. Therefore, it was not based on any other thing – either tribal or district. 

The criteria, therefore, for being an eligible applicant is/was:  

a. 	Be a Ugandan national (proof of which is on National Identity Card). 

b. 	Be adult female/male (18-30 years). 

c. 	Possess Uganda Certificate of Education or its equivalent certificate/qualification and/or any above. 

d. 	Be healthy and willing to undergo medical and physical tests. 

e. 	Have no criminal liability (proof of good citizenship is/was LC I/DISO recommendation letters). 

It should be noted that the role of the LC I is to prove that the applicant had no criminal liability, not his ethnicity, tribe or place of abode. The National Identity Card proves one’s nationality and presumes all biometrics and other details are with NIRA. Recruitment was for all Ugandans who meet the criteria, at whatever centre.

Quotas 

The quotas were distributed as follows; 

a. 	8,400 shared nationwide, based on the district’s population size. 
b. 	1,000 was allocated for mechanics and drivers. 
c. 	600 was air force. 
d. 	100 doctors.
e. 	100 brass band musicians. 
f. 	50 specialised sports. 
g. 	The balance were soldiers’ offspring. 

Mr Speaker, because of our unique equipment and task, Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) had a preference for scientists, artisans, science teachers and others. We want to thank Ugandans for their overwhelming turn-up for the recruitment. For all those who did not make it, please –(Member rose_)- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, I have allowed the minister to read the statement and it is uploaded. I do not want him to be interfered with. Please, honourable, go on – moreover he is for defence. (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: … and he is my friend. (Laughter) I beg your pardon, again. Please, those who did not make it should not be disappointed or dispirited: another recruitment will be in seven months. 

Suffice to note that not everybody who came or met the criteria could be recruited because of the limited slots. Not every first grader goes to the best school or law school – that is an explanation given there. Some complaints have even come through to the leadership of the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs - and that is why we are here – through this august House.

We want to use this chance to address these issues through responding to your queries and reactions to this brief statement. We will, however, first, address some specific allegations that were put forth about recruitment in Tororo, Nebbi and Lira.

Complaints from various districts

1. Tororo District

Allegations as raised by the Woman Representative, Tororo. Allegation was that people from elsewhere were recruited from Tororo.

Response

Recruitment was done for all Ugandans. 

All Ugandans can be recruited from anywhere in Uganda so long as they have a National Identity Card and LC I or DISO can vouch that they have no criminal record – because this has never been put clear, we are trying to put it clear. 

Paragraph 1.2.2 of the main report of the National Population and Housing Census shows that enumeration of Ugandans was done on 27 August 2014 (Census Reference Night) based on de facto basis – where every Ugandan was at the time between 28 August and 7 September 2014. It was a national census – and we are emphasising that. This is the basis of the quota system. 

That said, we have a list of all 195 persons who were recruited in Tororo and the list is here. We also have all their National Identity Cards – original – and they are here. 

We, therefore, invite the honourable member to mention names of those who were recruited wrongly. The recruitment criteria states clearly how Ugandans are recruited in UPDF. Once LCs I/DISOs recommend, that proves the person has no criminal liability. To add, they cannot go beyond that. 

2. Nebbi District 

The complaint was that out of the 57 places allocated, only 11 were from the district. 

Response

The UPDF recruited a total of 163 recruits from the districts of Nebbi, Zombo and Pakwach. Nebbi was just a recruitment centre. 

We have all their original IDs here with us in Parliament. While we were not recruiting by tribe – and this should be very clear: the law talks about “Ugandans.” UPDF does not go that side. It is so painful a truth – 99 per cent of the Nebbi recruits are Alur. Actually, we can prove through their National Identity Cards.

All were recommended by LCs1/DISOs. Their –(Interjection)– of the places where they – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are the one who made these rules which we use here. As long as a Member is not on record, you do not respond to him. You are allowing yourself to be distracted. (Laughter) You are falling into their trap.

MR OBOTH: Yes, that is true. Thank you for waking me up. So, all their National Identity Cards and LC I letters are available, if required. 

3. Lira District 

The allegation was that they dropped most applicants for reportedly being HIV-positive.

Response

a. 	It is true in Lira, as it was nationwide, all applicants with medical issues were not recruited. 

b. 	All the 245 applicants from Lira were healthy and came to the same centres as those who failed the medicals. We have their lists and original National Identity Cards – because they are now in our custody for the record.

Honourable members, the Uganda People’s Defence Forces lost a number of its members, within and without, on medical grounds thus the need to have mentally healthy personnel that can serve the purpose. Each recruit fills a pink medical form, which provides parameters to be considered on medical grounds.

Mr Speaker, most of these actors are civilians who impersonate. There were also several allegations on extortion and bribery during the recruitment exercise. The answer is that most of these actors are civilians who impersonate members of the UPDF and utilise names and offices of very important persons to manipulate the vulnerable population, with exception of some UPDF members who take part in such activities. These are quickly identified and arrested.

However, some of those apprehended had no complainants, which makes it difficult for prosecution. Nonetheless, investigations are ongoing to identify more culprits. Our soldiers are law-abiding citizens under the circumstances. A few who are indisciplined have been identified and arrested and they will be handled in military courts.

As I conclude, I wish to once again state that recruitment is the foundation of the UPDF's ability to sustain its overall force level. The recruitment process and criteria is therefore deliberately designed to make sure that we get the qualities we need while helping us identify the ideal role they will play while in service.

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Take your seat. Honourable colleagues, this statement has many issues and if I was to allow Hon. Sarah Opendi to speak, it would mean the statement is now closed because she is the one who raised the issue. I know Hon. Gilbert Olanya also came in, but we have very many issues. For example, people were dying during recruitment. You ask yourself, if people can die during recruitment, what about during training? Which kind of recruitment do you do that we even have victims? 

This statement has many issues. I therefore refer it to the Committee on Defence and Veteran Affairs. I would like you to investigate this matter thoroughly and report back in two weeks without fail so that all of us are able to debate and contribute. Any Member who has issues – let it be the Member who raised the issue and others – please go to the Committee on Defence and Veteran Affairs. 

Honourable minister, the Member has insisted that you have misrepresented her and you did not do justice. Honourable member, go to the Committee on Defence and Veteran Affairs. 

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTRY OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES ON THE ALLEGED UNFAIR AND DISCRIMINATORY RECRUITMENT BY UGANDA WILDLIFE AUTHORITY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, use only five minutes. 

6.37 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Martin Mugarra): Yes, my statement is much shorter than that of Hon. Oboth. 

Mr Speaker, Uganda Wildlife Authority advertised in the newspapers on l7 June 2022 about the recruitment of 850 positions of rangers to be recruited between 4th  and 8th July 2022 from 11 recruitment centres namely Gulu City, Arua City – I do not need to name them all, I think you can see for yourselves. The document is uploaded on our iPads.   

The requirements for persons to be recruited are the same as the ones of the UPDF that the honourable just mentioned. I do not need to repeat them. 

There were 11 recruitment centres namely: 

Masindi Sports Stadium where we recruited 49 rangers. 
Kidepo Valley National Park where we recruited 70 rangers. 
Zebra Grounds Minekye where we recruited 94 rangers. 
Queen Elizabeth National Park Playground where we recruited 127 rangers. 
Mbale SS Sports Stadium where we recruited 120 rangers. 
Arua City where we recruited 45 rangers. 
Kaunda Grounds – we recruited 48 rangers. 
Iganga Playground – we recruited 35 rangers. 
Bwindi Community Hospital Playground – we recruited 99 rangers. 
Boma Grounds – we recruited 110 rangers. An
Uganda Museum – we recruited 52 rangers 

It was a total of 849 out of the 850. 

A further analysis of the recruited personnel shows that from all recruitment centres, a total of 108 districts were represented in the final list. This represents a coverage of 79.4 per cent of all the districts in Uganda. Of the 108 districts represented, recruits from districts neighbouring protected areas, parks and game reserves represented are 64.2 per cent of the recruited, leaving 36.9 per cent for the rest. 

We have a table per district of the number of people that were recruited and I think Members can go through it and see how many we got from their districts. 

Mr Speaker, a number of issues were raised on the Floor: 

1. 	Unfairness 

From the table, one can largely see that there was a bit of fairness because 79 per cent of the districts were represented. 

2.	Nepotism 

Issues of nepotism also do not appear to be apparent in these figures. For instance, the Minister of Tourism, Hon. Tom Butime, who represents Kyenjojo got only seven recruitments. Me, who is a state minister, got eight recruitments. The director of Uganda Wildlife Authority got – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you speaking as a person or the district? 

MR MUGARRA: I mean the whole district.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, it is not you as a person, honourable. 

MR MUGARRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the guidance, but what I was trying to show you, Members, is that indeed, there was fairness. There was no peddling. 

3.	Allegations of involvement of the UPDF in the UWA ranger recruitment 

UWA has a historic relationship with the UPDF cemented through a memorandum of understanding. The UPDF has been supporting UWA with training of rangers in paramilitary skills, arming UWA and through a presidential directive providing a force to protect tourism investments in the country. 

The main role of the UPDF in the UWA ranger recruitment was to provide additional security during the management of big crowds turning up at the recruitment centre, and undertaking medical tests for selected recruits before they are admitted into the military training school, which is a standard. UWA was, however, in charge of the entire recruitment exercise. 

4.	Allegations of bribery during the recruitment exercise 

We have received complaints that we are inquiring into. Preliminary findings indicate that during the recruitment process, especially at the time of registration and short listing of candidates, some of the security personnel involved in keeping law and order as well as security may have extorted money from unsuspecting applicants promising to help them. Such would not be done in the open and we are investigating these allegations. Once we get clear evidence that such happened and the respective culprits can be named, they will be handled through a disciplinary process. We condemn such incidents, but believe they were isolated and not all over the place. 

5.	There was an allegation that some people passed all stages and were not selected. This indeed is true. Only 849 candidates were selected out of the very many who qualified and passed. There was a criteria ending with medical tests. If, for example, 80 candidates qualified for medical tests, but only 50 were required, it means that the last 30 in the running order would not be taken despite doing a medical test. 

Therefore, not everyone who went through all the stages passed, because the numbers needed were limited and some could not be taken even though they went through. So, Mr Speaker, that is all I had to present. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. This is the same as the one of UPDF, so I will refer it to the Committee of Trade, Tourism and Industry. What needs to be noted is that this recruitment is done; people are already on training. We cannot recall people from training; I want us to be honest on this. 

What we are trying to do is that, in future, for example, if UPDF is going to recruit in six months, or if we know that UWA will be recruiting soon - the aim, honourable chairperson and members of those committees is to make the exercise better next time, but not to stop the exercise, and make people who are on training to come back. That would be overstepping our mandate as a House. 

With that, I adjourn the House to Tuesday next week at 2 o’clock p.m. 

(The House rose at 6.44 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 19 July 2022 at 2.00 p.m.) 