Thursday, 25 July 2013

Parliament met at 2.22 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have received notification from the Clerk to Parliament on the deployment of hon. Rose Eryama, the MP Nakapiripirit; being an Independent Member of Parliament she had not been allocated to any particular committee, but she later indicated that she wanted to serve on the Committee on Education and Sports in accordance with Rule 176 (4) of our Rules of Procedure. I am required by the rules to make this announcement to you. I now put the question to that proposal.

(Question put and agreed to.)

2.24
MR RAPHEAL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, which is about the increased strikes by students in Bushenyi District and the surrounding areas. Since the beginning of this month, Bushenyi District and the surrounding areas have experienced several strikes by students of senior secondary schools in a very alarming scale. Almost every day, there is a school striking both Government-aided and private schools. To date, there are more than 16 schools that have been closed because of strikes; six of these are in Bushenyi. When I was coming to the House I was informed that two other schools striked this morning.

There are schools that have been affected, these  include: Valley College, Bushenyi, Kyeizooba Girls’ School, Basajjabalaba Secondary School, Kajunju Secondary School, Nyabubaale Secondary School, Ishaka Vocational School as well as schools from the following neighbouring districts: Kashaka Girls, Kashaka High School, Kibona Sec. School, Sheema High School, Bugongi, St Charles Lwanga, Kitagata Secondary School, Kasheshrero Girls, Bwibare Secondary. School, Kitunga High School, Kajuju Secondary School, Nyabubare Secondary School, Ishaka Vocational and Nganwa High School. 

Mr Speaker, most of these strikes have been violent leading to destruction of school property including the burning of a dormitory at Keizooba Girls’ School. At Basajjabalaba Secondary School, students had already poured paraffin on mattresses in the boys’ dormitory only that they were arrested before they lit the fire.

Also in most of these secondary schools like Nyabubare, students pile a heap of stones ready to strike and destroy buildings, including beating up teachers.
The strikes are said to be common during the second terms, but the reasons have not been established yet this is the term when finalists are supposed to sit their mock exams. So, students from such schools end up losing their precious time to study.

Our effort as Government, donors and parents ends up being wasted when such schools are destroyed.  Also communities that neighbour these schools suffer a lot as they are tortured by the striking students. At the end of the day, parents end up incurring expenses to renovate the schools in an effort to replace destroyed property. But also in some cases, lives of students, teachers and security personnel have been lost.

Therefore, I would like to request, through the Chair, that as an immediate measure, the Minister of Education and Sports should quickly send a team of officials to the area to assess the situation and take the necessary measures to stop these strikes.

Secondly, I also would like to ask the Minister of Education to give an explanation on this matter to Parliament within one week.

Finally, it is my suggestion that Government sets up a commission of inquiry to thoroughly investigate this phenomenon of strikes; its causes and possible deterrent measures, which might include improving schools administration as well as strengthening the legal framework, penalties against those who incite students to strike. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable ministers, you have heard the concerns from the honourable member. Any responses? Yes, Government Chief Whip.

2.26
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my colleague for raising this matter. I will inform the responsible minister. Mr Speaker, the minister will make a statement next week.

MR MUGEMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You directed the Leader of Government Business and the Chief Whip to consult with the Minister of Health to give us a statement on the feedback on what is happening in hospitals. As we talk, the death rate is coming to 12 yet we haven’t had any statement from the responsible minister.

MR MUWUMA: Mr Speaker, in line with what my colleague is raising there was a commitment for Thursday, which is today, Government would come up with a position and an update. Iganga Hospital is in a sorry state; people are dying. There is not even a single drop of water; they are just improvising and the medical team is about to give up. That is why I thought we would get some answers on what remedial actions are in place regarding this crisis.

MR MUGEMA: Finally, Mr Speaker, I think it shouldn’t be just a statement from these people because we should be considered. Otherwise, beyond Thursday, Friday and Saturday, I will go on a hunger strike. I will come to your Office, Mr Speaker, to seek permission – at least I will be included on the list of those who have died because Government neglected them.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, the issue of water is indeed very serious. You will recall that when the First Deputy Prime Minister responded on this matter, he immediately had to go out of the House to go and mobilise. So, I would like to appeal to my brother, hon. Mugema Panadol not to consider going on a hunger strike because the matter is being attended to. What we need to do is to continue with our mobilization so that this problem is resolved once and for all after all it is this Government that ensured piped water is wired to Iganga town, which also includes the hospital. This is just a breakdown in the system, which is going to be put right. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the draft Order Paper, there was an item on the statement by the Minister of Health. However, later I got a call from the Minister Health to say he was just entering Rwanda for a meeting scheduled to take place today. He said he had asked the Minister of State to come and stand in for him, which minister is in Tororo.
 
So, I took that item off the Order Paper because it would be in vain for purposes of our procedures today. So, last week when the matter came up, indeed I directed from the Chair that remedial steps have got to be taken even before his statement comes to the House; something should be done in the meantime. That is what we had agreed. So, I do not know whether there is anything that has been done so far. 

2.34
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When hon. Peter Mugema raised this issue last week, I informed the Minister of Health and the Ministry of Health got in touch with the administration of Iganga District and even the administration of the hospital. The hospital wrote to the ministry and their request, at least for the interim measure to solve the problem of water, which required Shs 6.0 million. The letter was brought to the Ministry of Health and the minister promised me that they were going to work and make sure this was done by the end of today. That is the update the minister gave me.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I think some other times there is a breakdown, particularly when your Chair directs, and we seem not to get feedback. Like in this particular matter, once a statement is prepared it does not mean that once ministers are away, Government is away. We certainly would have expected to have an update on the steps being taken. Like when she tells us, yes, we would have appreciated that.

There is a growing tendency, Mr Speaker, you give your directive, the frontbench promises, “next week” and next week becomes endless. As I was seated here, I remembered an undertaking by the hon. Minister for Lands who, the other week promised to come to the House on a matter of national importance about the vandalisation of the ministry offices -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is on the Order Paper.

MR SSEKIKUBO: It is on the Order Paper. Only that they seem to be endlessly “coming.” That is what causes anxiety among Members and we fail to have explanations for our constituents. 

MS LUMUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to give assurance to hon. Ssekikubo that no Member of Cabinet has any intentions of doing what he is insinuating. We as Members of the frontbench are very committed and that is why whenever we stand here to commit ourselves we endeavour to make sure we come and update the House. Let me give an example: the question now is the issue of water in Iganga Hospital. I have even given you an update to show you that we even followed up this issue. I have mentioned even the amount that the Iganga administration has been able to request the ministry to help them with as an interim measure. And as we talk, when he raised the issue the other week and I stood here and said the minister would make a statement, the following week the minister could not make the statement because they were still investigating. Even the Member of Parliament for Entebbe Municipality, hon. Kawuma, got up and –(Interruption)

MR MUGEMA: Mr Speaker, I am raising on a point of order. By the mere fact that an MP stands here and raises an issue, we should not be doubted. Is it in order for the hon. Chief Whip to stand here and say when we said something she had to go  out and find out again and then she comes and informs the House to see whether what we have said is truth or not?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, once information comes to a minister, the minister has to act through other people and use the system within the government infrastructure to deal with that matter. So, consultation is certainly necessary. He cannot take the decision on the Floor of Parliament; there are permanent secretaries and other people in the district. It is only proper that they should consult and harmonise this thing. It is not about doubting the statement made; otherwise they would not consult at all if they doubted it.

Honourable members, let me recognise the pupils and teachers of St John’s Nursery and Primary School from Kyotera, Rakai District, who are in the public gallery. They are represented by hon. Kyeyune Haruna and hon. Mutagamba Maria. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. Which side are they? They are this side. (Applause) You are welcome.

2.39
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. In Buliisa and the neighbouring boundary of Kigolobya and Hoima District, for the last three to four weeks, 600 farmers have not been accessing their gardens. They are being evicted, policemen are patrolling their gardens and their crops have been destroyed. This is an area where, in 2004, there was an alleged eviction of Congolese but it came out that most of these people were from West Nile -the Alur and others- and the President stopped the exercise through Minister Kiyonga. But we did not know by the time these people came back, that this land had fraudulently been offered to some land grabbers. We have found out that a title came out in 2008, but interestingly the President had directed in 2007 that no title for this area should come out. 

The problem these citizens are having now is that they are being called encroachers on land where they have existed before. And unfortunately, the police officers, with instructions from the Regional Police Commander in Hoima - has ordered policemen of Uganda to harass the citizens. They have lost their maize; they cannot get to their gardens and yet the President’s instruction was very clear that no titles should come out and the titles were supposed to be revoked, if any. 

I have a list here of 361 farmers who cannot access their gardens. Over 120 are on the run, eight women are in prison- by the same policemen who are now criminalising them that they are trespassing- they have now become trespassers; and 24 men are also in prison including a Catholic Catechist of that very area. This matter had come here much earlier and we thought that by now they would be waiting to get their land. Instead somebody is having a title of 3.5 square miles of land which belongs to the people.

Mr Speaker, the prayer is that Government immediately takes action because this is one of about 40 pieces of such fraudulent acquisitions. This is just the tip of an iceberg. This is the same place where oil wells are being claimed by individuals in Kampala. This is the same land which the President had ordered for the eviction of herdsmen. So, we are worried that now that the President intervened five years ago but we see the reverse - people are coming up with titles, farmers are being evicted and it is causing us a very big problem. We pray that all this investigation is done, titles are revoked and people are allowed to settle on their land.

Also most importantly, it is because of the speculation of the oil and gas. Can Government bring out a detailed plan including a settlement so that people know where to stay? Otherwise, right now they are at the mercy of speculators and when police - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Member.

MR MUKITALE: When Police and courts of law start working against the population then we get very worried. So, Mr Speaker, and this is the matter I thought I should bring and I want to lay on Table 261 signatures of the petitioners –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not a petition properly brought within the rules. You have just raised as an urgent matter and so you cannot turn it into a petition. You have made the statement, let the minister respond. If it is a petition you know the procedure to follow.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you.   

2.43
THE MINISTER OF LANDS (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Mukitale for raising this important and urgent matter. I will be meeting hon. Mukitale so that I can be able to pick all this information, go to the ground and institute corrective measures.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you need to liaise with honourable minister so that remedial steps are taken to help the people, according to you, who are not being treated properly; so honourable minister that is for you to handle. 

Honourable members, I have just received information from the Minister of Internal Affairs that there was a request made in a debate in this House that Memorandum of Understanding between the African Union and the Government of Uganda on the deployment of a police unit in Somalia be laid on Table. It is now ready for laying, so I will alter the Order Paper on item No.6 to let it come as the first item. When we come to that point, the clerk will read that item.

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER ON STATUS OF ENTEBBE RESEARCH STATION


2.45
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would request that the statement I am going to present be circulated to Members.

Mr Speaker, on Thursday, 11 July 2013, the hon. Minister of Energy and Mineral Development made a statement on the Floor of this House on the matter of destruction of Government property located onPplot 7 Lugard Avenue Entebbe.

On Thursday, 18th July, the area Member of Parliament for Entebbe Municipality, hon. Kawuma, raised a concern regarding Government land which was being allocated to private individuals and companies in the Entebbe area in an irregular manner. 

I have followed up these matters. On Monday, 22nd July, all key decision makers concerned with land matters in Entebbe such as Uganda Land Commission, Wakiso District Land Board, Entebbe Town Council and officials from my ministry, that is, the land registry, land administration, surveys and markings department Entebbe and physical planning held a meeting in my ministry.

We discussed the problem of illegal allocation of land belonging to Government institutions and NEMA buffer zone on the shores of Lake Victoria. A verification exercise was instituted and it has so far established the following:-

In regard to the land that hon. Ssekikubo referred to, the land on Plot 7 Lugard Avenue which was also a subject of wide press coverage the other week, belonging to Geological Survey and Mining Department in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. The land title was erroneously issued to Mr James Paul Ejuk by Wakiso District Land Board yet there is an existing title and a Government facility on that land. The allocation to Mr Ejuk was carried out by Wakiso Land Board which had jurisdiction over Government land occupied by the Geological Survey and Mining Department. 

The land was first registered in 1963 under freehold register volume 22(3) folio 10 in the names of Uganda Land Commission. The allocation was therefore irregular and the title was recalled and has been cancelled.

Land at Eric Magara Road belonging to Civil Authority as raised by hon. Kawuma. Land titles were erroneously issued to private developers by Wakiso District Land Board yet there are already existing land titles freehold register volume 224 and freehold folio 5, and freehold register volume 244, folio 14 in the names of Uganda Land Commission issued in 1963. The titles have been recalled for review.

Land belonging to Civil Aviation Authority allocated to Proline Soccer Academy. Thirty acres had been curved out of 132 acres of land belonging to the Civil Aviation Authority under leasehold registered volume 3159, folio 8 and allocated to Proline Soccer Academy. This was irregular and the title was recalled by Registrar of Titles in my ministry and has been cancelled.

Land at the lake shores in NEMA buffer zones claimed by Fisheries Training Institute. The title lease registered volume 4407, folio 12 was issued to Masindi Hotel Ltd within the stipulated 200 meter NEMA buffer zone by Uganda Land Commission.

The land in question was believed to be part of the Fisheries Training Institute but was found to be outside the land of the Fisheries Training Institute. The institute however has expressed interest in the same piece of land in order to facilitate their activities. This matter is going to be handled with NEMA and the district physical planning committee and we shall be in a position to update the House on the decisions taken.

Land along Julia Ssebutinde Road belonging to Survey Training School; this matter is still under investigation because when we looked at our records and the title, the title was intact. All efforts are going to be made to ensure that no encroachment or parcelling out of this land does take place because this school is the one that is training the human resource that is so critical to our sector. From the information so far received, it is evident we need on our part to step up coordination and information sharing between Uganda Land Commission, Wakiso District Land Board and my ministry.

We are convinced that we shall be able to stamp out all these irregularities and malpractices once the computerised land information system is fully operational and is utilised by all the intended beneficiaries.

I have also instructed the relevant officials from my ministry, Entebbe Town Council and Wakiso District Land Board to move to Entebbe and carryout field inspections to establish the facts on the ground in regard to Government institutional land in the Entebbe area. The report shall be ready within a month. 

I have also requested the team to look at the critical aspects of physical planning and develop a revised strategic physical plan for Entebbe, which caters for the new demands and developments that are coming on board while protecting critical ecological systems.

The reviewed plan shall be discussed with all stakeholders in and around Entebbe and in Government because quite a number of properties in that area actually belong to Government. I would like to thank my colleagues for raising this issue and I want to assure you that the necessary corrective interventions are going to be pursued to ensure that Government and individuals do not lose land under illegal arrangements. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is quite a number. I will start from the Member for West Budama North, then the members for Nwoya District and Bufumbira. Three minutes each.

2.54
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would, first of all, like to register my appreciation to the Minister for Lands for coming up with this statement. I, however, have a few issues to raise.

The minister reports on page 1 in respect to Plot 7 Lugard Avenue and all the subsequent plots that there was evidence of irregularity created by Wakiso District Land Board and if you read through the statement, he is basically politely saying these plots were fraudulently allocated to the beneficiaries in question while there were some existing land titles to Government departments. Now this is certainly criminal and there is no any other way of looking at it.  A person or the District Land Board of Wakiso committed a crime in issuing these land titles. Now you do not remedy crimes by simply cancelling the land titles but prosecute the criminals and I expected that to come out of the statement of the minister.  

If we continue along this path, I am afraid we shall not protect any Government property because you will be sending out a signal that it is alright to fraudulently deal with Government properties, the titles will be cancelled and you will walk away with your loot. 

I request the minister to consider handing over the ladies and gentlemen involved to the Police for investigation and subsequent prosecution. 

I also noticed that in respect to Plot 7 Lugard Street, the minister cancelled the land title. The following plot with similar facts - the land at Eric Magara Road belonging to the Civil Aviation Authority is all fraudulently obtained including the first one and what is the decision of the ministry?  To review! I do not even know what this review amounts to because you have already established that the title was fraudulently issued and in one case, you cancelled the title and in a subsequent case, you are reviewing. I do not know why the minister did not cancel this particular title and again I would like to convince him that the only correct course of action is to cancel this title and hand over these gentlemen to the Police for investigation. I thank you.

2.57
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My contribution is going to particularly dwell on the third last paragraph on page 3. I want to first of all thank the minister for the statement that he has made. I particularly got worried when this event happened where an individual can really go and take over Government properties in broad day light – whether at night but for me, I call it broad day light because the Police are supposed to guard such institutions and then take over. I was so worried.

I would like to request the minister not to only dwell on Entebbe because the situation is countrywide. In my district of Nwoya, there is a claim and I call it a “claim” because there is no proof by the ministry of about 10 square miles of land belonging to the ministry or to Government but there is no proof or document. Can the minister really bring for us all the list of Government land that are in other districts and if there are no titles for them, they should tell us why they do not have titles because if they do not have titles and the Uganda Land Commission goes ahead and keeps on issuing titles for the land, then it brings in a lot of confusion and that is the situation that happened in Nwoya.

So, I request the minister not only to dwell on Entebbe but to look into all the Government institutions and land and where there are titles, let the respective district land boards get to know and the list should be gazetted and we get to know that these are Government properties. As Members of Parliament, we know that these are institutions of Government that exist and they have titles and if they do not have titles, the minister should explain to us why they do not have titles for those properties. They are bringing confusion in the community. I thank you.

3.00
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the statement. However, the minister’s statement is lacking in a way that for these actions he has taken, we would be looking at the officers who were facilitating these illegal activities and as my colleagues have asked, what have you done to them? These officers have continued to pass out public land and so what action have you taken on these officers and the boards that are taking Government land?  

Mr Speaker, this same thing is happening in Kisoro where Government is losing land day by day to the extent that even leases have been issued on people’s land and people are now considering taking Government to court. I do not know who will be responsible to compensations where leases have been issued wrongfully. So I do not know whether the Minister for Lands is in charge or if he is aware. 

I also wanted to ask whether we have a data bank for Government land and what is happening with it? I thank you.

3.01
MR KENNETH KIYINGI (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to also register thanks to the minister for this statement.  However, I believe that there is an area that the minister has left out in as far as the destruction of Government property in Entebbe is concerned. There was live coverage and some people were shown on television taking these properties of Government. So I believe that as a matter of clarification it would be prudent for the minister to also address this matter so that we safeguard Government property. I thank you.

3.02
MRS DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the Minister for Lands for coming up with this statement to clear the air especially in this particular area. But I would like to tell the minister that I sit on the Committee on Local Government Accounts and we have been moving around this country, and it has been found out that most Government land and institutions do not have land titles. With the increase of population in this country, it has caused the problem of land grabbing and the target is on Government land because it is not titled.

So on this note, I would like to request the minister to take action because it is the same matter that caused a lot of havoc in my district with the Government in Rwamwanza whereby the people of Rwamwanza took Government to court and in the first case they won but the Government appealed. So, it is now a problem country wide. I would like the minister to take this important issue and where possible, raise money in the budget because we are in the budget process, to make sure that all the government land is titled. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member for Jinja Municipality and then the members for Bukooli Islands and Kinkizi.

3.03
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): I thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the minister for bringing this statement. However, the biggest problem we have in Uganda right now is the district land boards. The business in all districts is selling land. If land is deemed vacant, they send a surveyor to go and look at it, they check with the ministry and if the ministry has no records, they have to go to Entebbe and crosscheck. So, we should not give the land boards too much independence. 

The district land board is the eminent problem at the districts and at the national level. Because, if you look at the companies being allocated land – for a hotel in Masindi to be allocated land in Entebbe in a wetland! Are you going to build a hotel in a wetland? So, for some things, it is pure corruption between the Ministry of Lands and the districts. So, we have to crackdown on those who sit on the land boards. 

The districts have a lot of powers to appoint who sits on the land board. Sometimes you may find that somebody who does not qualify to discuss anything sits on the land board, and if we do not counter check who sits on the land board because it is the chairman that is authorised to appoint someone to sit on the land board and the council will approve - and if you look at cases in most districts, you have people who do not qualify to sit on the land board who are occupying offices at the District Land Board. The minister has to look into this and as Parliament we have to know who sits on the land board. We should look at it critically because we have given too much power to the districts and they are giving away Government land. 

The records in Entebbe and in Kampala are non-existent. Like my colleague said, we have to double check and once –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you, hon. Balyeku, for giving way. Mr Speaker, this issue is very serious and it has led to the production of many quack titles or double titles. You may find three titles on the same piece of land and we have capable people in the ministry but they have deliberately turned to be corrupt. For example, No. 3, you find CCAA had a title known by the commissioner of titles but how could he –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you debating now, hon. Member?

MR SSEMUGABA: I am giving information. How could he or she sign this title of Wakiso and yet she is the custodian there? Every land board brings the titles here to be authenticated and we believe she or he is well informed. So, honourable minister, you should help this Government and the people of Uganda to crack down this vice.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was a good debate.

MR BALYEKU: Mr Speaker, it seems my colleague from Kyankwanzi was reading my notes.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I would like to volunteer additional information. Early this year, I brought information to the effect that the project for National Water and Sewerage Corporation - Kampala Water Sanitation Project – has been halted because the same land commission has issued another title even when the National Water and Sewerage Corporation already has a title for the same land. 

So, you can see that even where a government project is running, that somebody in Ministry of Lands can still give a title to – I do not want to use the word Muyindi but some company in a Muyindi’s name has a title on a project and right now, they can’t proceed and with their problems of the board and management, I can see it is a very big problem. That is why as I give this information, I want to seek a matter of guidance on this matter. Mr Speaker, I am aware – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, you know the rules. Honourable member, please wind up.

MR BALYEKU: As I conclude, can Parliament review who constitutes the land boards and once this board is constituted, let the minister approve. We need to look at this law once again because once we do not clarify on issues of the land board and the commissioner, titles, we are wasting time. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.09
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands, Buvuma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take the opportunity to thank the minister for the response but from a technical point of view, I have seen the report and the minister presented that the district land board granted a title. I don’t think the district land board can grant a title. What they can do is to recommend. Even if it is a lease, they can recommend because the process is, when they grant you or when they recommend that a place be given to you, if you go to the land registry and that place is already surveyed, during plotting, what you have surveyed will not sit. So, they will tell you that this place already has a title. Even when there are two titles on the same land, there aren’t two demarcations on the same land. What we have are two titles, which is fraud. So, we cannot say that the district land board erred and then they granted a title because they cannot grant a title. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much, hon. Member, for yielding the Floor. Mr Speaker, the information I would like to provide to the House is that, this is just a symptom of what we are addressing. The problem we have in the Ministry of Lands is the Uganda Land Commission because the law is very clear that the custodian of public land is the Uganda Land Commission but there is a lot of connivance and collusion that is happening. We are losing a lot of public land out of collusion by the Uganda Land Board. Hon. Minister, we are appealing to you to review the operations of the Uganda Land Commission. Otherwise, we are just doing a litmus test on a bigger problem in whatever we are discussing here. I thank you. 

MR MIGADDE: I thank you for the information. Mr Speaker, we have almost a similar scenario in Buvuma where we have eight square miles of public land but the Uganda Land Commission went ahead to grant eight square miles to an individual. The title which was in the names of the Uganda Land Commission then changed to the names of an individual and there were government institutions like schools, prisons, health centres but it was granted to one person. When the case went to court, actually the members of the Uganda Land Commission were not ready to testify in favour of Government; they wanted to testify in favour of the individual. So, there is a lot which is going on behind the curtains, especially in the Uganda Land Commission and unless we deal with these symptoms because the people signing these different land titles are known, there is a way they benefit out of them. So, Government should come out openly even to survey and find alternative uses of this land. When you survey and simply leave it there, you are leaving it to the hands of encroachers. 

Sometime back, the President encouraged owners of land to fence it off. If we are encouraging private people to fence off their land, then why can’t Government find alternative uses of land? If they can plant trees on that land, let them do so that there is a way of keeping that land free from encroachers. Thank you.

3.13
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for the statement but it is a well-known fact in this country that, the Ministry of Lands colludes with these people to steal Government land and I hope the minister knows. I had a few questions for clarification from the minister and the first one is, if the media and Members of Parliament had not raised this matter, would you have known and would you have taken action as a minister because these are issues under your docket. 
Secondly, we are talking about Wakiso Land Board; has he, as a minister, put in place mechanisms to ensure that the land boards in various districts are not also taking this kind of irregular actions? And does he have any experiences –(Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. I want to give a wonderful scenario in Mbarara District. The local government building has no veranda because it was sold by the district land board. So there is a problem everywhere. (Laughter)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, hon. Bitekyerezo, for that experience. And that is the next question, Mr Speaker. I want to ask the minister, are there any experiences in other districts similar to what has happened to Wakiso Land Board and the land in Entebbe?

The other question is, Plot 7 which was first raised by the media and was brought on this Floor by hon. Ssekikubo – Government property was vandalised- Yes, you have reported that the new title has been cancelled but you are silent about the government property which was destroyed; how are you going to recover this property? 

The next question is: Have you looked at the law and policies to see if there are gaps so that they can be cured either by your ministry or this Parliament because there seems to be a disconnection between your ministry and what is happening in the various districts? 

Finally, you have mentioned about the process to computerise the land information system. Ever since I joined this Parliament, I have heard that statement from the various ministers – (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am going to reduce the time to two minutes and I will allow Member for Mitooma, Soroti Municipality and the chairperson of the Natural Resources Committee. Those three will do and we finish it. 

3.16
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the report and hon. Ssekikubo who drew the attention of this House to this matter. We got to know this because this concerned Government property. But one wonders what would have happened to this property if this matter did not come to this House. Yes, this is Government property but I also wanted to draw the attention of this House to the fact that very many Ugandans are being –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and hon. Kamateeka. If information does not come to anybody, how can they act? Ideally, we are all here to receive information and guidance from the citizens of the country. So thank you, the press, for having given the information.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, honourable minister, for the clarification. Government has employees, civil servants, that are employed to take care of Government property and so we expect the ministers in charge of these ministries to keep strict custody of Government property.

Mr Speaker, I wanted to draw the attention of this House to the fact that very many Ugandans are suffering because of the malpractices in land. Very many people have titles that were issued by the Uganda Land Commission only to find out that there are others who have been issued with titles for the same land by the district land boards – I do not want even to believe that it is the district land boards that are doing this. I am a victim of this scenario; I bought some land in the year 2000 but someone else came later and bought the same land and 10 years later he was issued with a land title by the district land board. But the new land title does not recognise access roads and so I have to pay Shs 1.2 million to surveyors to open up boundaries so as to establish a road that was there even before I bought that land. There are very many Ugandans who do not have the opportunity to come and express their concerns.

We need a firm land policy to protect Ugandans on this issue. I think the ministry should come up with the guidelines that no new land titles should be issued by the districts until they have checked with the Uganda Land Commission. This is because the commission used to issue leases and land titles and districts should not –(Member timed out_)

3.20
MR MICHAEL MUKULA (NRM. Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for having put this statement on the Floor. I would like to raise about three points: First, it appears that Government, through the Uganda Land Commission, does not have the inventory of all the assets and land that belong to it. 

Secondly, there is therefore a disconnect between the central government and the local governments. This disconnect is what has led to these arbitrary access to land. 

The third point is connivance at the land registry because the authority to sanction the issuance of a title is vested at the land board. 

I would like to suggest to the minister that all the land belonging to Government of Uganda should be presented in a statement to this House so that we know what Uganda has, including Parliament. We want to know whether we have a land title for this Parliament. We also want to know whether State House has a title. We want to know whether all this land that we have put strategic assets on has land titles. I beg to move. (Applause)

3.22
MR MICHAEL KAFABUSA (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My colleague has actually pre-empted – we discussed these issues at the corner there – (Laughter) – and you picked us one after the other. Nevertheless I will just emphasise. (Laughter) I did not know that hon. Mukula would hijack the points I was giving him as an expert in this field. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The point is already on record; so you may now resume your seat.

MR KAFABUSA: No, I just wanted to emphasise that Government needs to find funding to carry out the identification of all Government land. The districts and other private individuals have taken advantage because Government does not know where all its land is in this country. That is the challenge confronting Uganda Land Commission. So, there is need for the Minister of Lands to come up with a proposal of how much money is required to carry out the inventory in terms of identifying and surveying that land so that they can protect it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was closing this subject up; it was supposed to be 10 minutes but we have taken almost an hour on this subject.

3.23
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Mr Speaker, I do not want the general issues of land policy, land acquisition and land titling to divert this House from the main reason as to why the statement was demanded. Just to compliment what hon. Fox Odoi raised, Government lost property in Entebbe during this vandalism.

Secondly, there is the land title process. Can the minister inform this House, what has happened to the property that was vandalised and what action has been taken? We appropriate money for Government to acquire property, it is vandalised and we keep quiet about it! Can the minister inform this House what exactly has been lost and what has been done to either recover or take punitive action against those who have done that?

Thank you for your indulgence, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, the challenge we have is that the Minister of Lands does not know what is lost. It is the Minister of Energy who brought the first statement and I do not know the extent of coverage in that statement.

So the hon. Minister of Lands would not know which book was in which drawer. It would have to been the Minister of Energy, whose institution was holding that premise, to give us this information. That is why we should be making requests to the government to brief the House, at an appropriate time, on this particular issue and also on comprehensive issues regarding land that belongs to Government so that you could help the House to deal with this matter. 

Can I give you a month to do this for the whole country? A month would not be too bad so that you do something comprehensive. Hon. Minister-

3.25
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, we definitely would like to make sure that we have a clear inventory of all Government land in the country and this would involve identifying and surveying the land. The task is fairly enormous and cannot take just one month. It will clearly take more time but I will also need to access funding for this kind of exercise. My ministry has not been doing well in terms of budgetary provisions mainly due to the other pressures, which we have agreed on as a priority in Government. But I will get back to my ministry and I will be able to give a more befitting response on this matter because it is quite involving.

Hon. Werikhe, who was a minister in that ministry, raised this matter and I know they had started on this exercise at the time when he was minister. It was not completed because they run out of resources but, Sir, give me time to get back to the ministry and I will be in a position to respond appropriately.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the time is one month to come and report on the status of how far you have gone. You should report in one month. Hon. Minister, we will leave it there.

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Kinyaboga Seed Secondary School, Nakaseke District, which is represented by hon. Syda Bbumba and hon. Namayanja Rosemary. They have come to observe the proceedings, please join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers of Godfrey Foundation School, Wakiso District represented by hon. Issa Kikungwe and hon. Nansubuga Seninde Rosemary. Please join me in welcoming them. Can we go to the next item?

MR MIGEREKO: There is an issue of the land policy, which Members have raised time and time again. The fact of the matter is that Cabinet has approved a land policy and very soon I will be availing Members copies of this policy.

Regarding what would have happened if the media and hon. Ssekikubo had not brought this matter to Parliament, the fact is the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development actually contacted me even before hon. Ssekikubo presented this matter here. I went to Entebbe, got in touch with the RDC of that district and we took instant measures to stop the destruction, which was taking place. So we had acted. 

The only problem is that at times some of our institutions are faced with these problems and they never get in touch with us. For instance, in this particular case, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development contacted us but we have not heard from the ministries that suffered most, that is, Agriculture and the Audit Department and there we run into a problem. My appeal to Members is that whenever there is a problem of this nature, they should always contact us.

I thought I should say something about computerisation. We have computerisation in six zonal offices: Mbarara, Masaka, Wakiso, Mukono, Jinja and Kampala. I have been appealing to Members to visit these zonal offices because the only way we can be in position to tell whether computerisation is working or not and whether it is serving the intended purpose or not is by calling at these offices and making demands to the officers that they produce for you information, say a title and you see for yourself whether they are working or not.

As far as we are concerned, it is working. It can do better because we are also faced with connectivity problems but I want to appeal to Members once again to visit the zonal offices so that when we come back here - it is an issue of saying, Migereko go and improve on this. Otherwise, the requisite infrastructure, which were provided within those areas are there and should be working. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.

PETITION BY RESIDENTS OF NAMULANDA AGAINST ROSEBUD FARM ON ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member is not in the House. Next item.

PETITION BY RESIDENTS OF KABEHO LC1, KINONI BOOMA LC1, KYATTUBA B LC1 AND BIGAAGA LC1 OF BULONGO PARISH, NTUUSI SUBCOUNTY, LWEMIYAGA COUNTY, SEMBABULE DISTRICT

3.32

MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move this petition under Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. This petition is addressed to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.

The humble petition of the 2,553 residents of Kabeho LC1, Kinoni Booma LC1, Kyattuba B LC1 and Bigaaga LC1 in Bulongo Parish, Ntuusi subcounty, Lwemiyaga County in Sembabule District.

The petitioners are being evicted from a piece of land on Plot 5 Block 11, ARV995 Folio 5 measuring 2,930 acres that is four-and-a half square miles registered in the names of Uganda Investment Authority hence the petition being presented by myself.

Mr Speaker, this petition showeth and states that:
“Your humble petitioners being lawful and bonafide occupants of the above described land are aggrieved by the arbitrary action of Uganda Investment Authority and the unscrupulous actions of the area LC III subcounty chairperson, Mr Emmanuel Kamihingo, using force to unlawfully dispossess and evict them from their land contrary to the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Section 35 of the Land Act.

The land in question is part of the restructured ranches and was acquired by Mr Faustino Ntambara in 1990, but who in 1995 sold off 500 acres in exchange for 75 heads of cattle to two widows, namely, Ms Jovans Kekyitenderezo and Ms Merab Kemikufu.” The sale agreements have been attached.

Mr Ntambara later sold this land to – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, was that petition drafted by people at Parliament?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, go to the prayers then.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Where for, by this petition, the petitioners pray thus: 

“1. 	Parliament investigates the manner and circumstances of acquisition and disposal of the disputed Uganda Investment Authority Land at Kinoni, Block 11, Plot 5, LRV 995, Folio 105

2. 	The circumstances under which the Managing Director of Bench Farm Ltd who also serves as the area LC III chairman, ended up acquiring this land for himself. 
3. 	The circumstances under which Ms Keren Kayonga forcefully drove her cattle onto the residents’ land causing total destruction of crops, pasture, water, wells and wire fences put in place by the occupants.

4. 	To investigate the circumstances under which the Inspector General of Police made excessive deployment for a forceful takeover of the disputed land by Mr Karen Kayonga without lawful authority or court order. 

5. 	To clarify the contradictory directives of the principal private secretary to the President of 11 October 2012 and that of the resident district commissioner of Sembabule, dated 27th March.” 

The copies are attached.

“6.	That Uganda Investment Authority adheres and respects the resolutions reached by all stakeholders on 31 January 2008 allowing the lawful and bona fide occupants to enjoy their constitutional and lawful rights without any further delays.

Your petitioners as in duty bound, will ever pray.” 

Hereto attached, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures and the supporting documents. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. The petition stands committed to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for expeditious handling and reporting back to the House so that we can advise on the next steps regarding this matter.

MR OTADA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. Yesterday, in your communication from the Chair, you said that issues of petitions will have to be presented in accordance with the rules. But I don’t have off cuff which rule, but I think the rules are to the effect that the petitioner –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rule 29.

MR OTADA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. So, I am just rising in that spirit that you ruled yesterday – of course, I want to assure my brother, hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, that I still have a lot of respect and obviously I feel for your people and the petition you have just presented – mine is purely a procedural issue so that we can have it received.

Mr Speaker, Rule 29 is long and I don’t want to take time on this matter. But you cited the rule that says that petitioners will present their petition to the Clerk before it will be committed to the Committee on Business to look into it to point the petition to the right direction. 

What we witnessed here yesterday was a case of Parliament receiving a petition that was purely a matter for court, but which took a lot of our legislative time. It is on the basis of that I now seek your guidance, Mr Speaker - it is in regard to your ruling of yesterday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I made that ruling yesterday and that is what is provided for in the rules. We cannot again invent other procedures. That is why I am not even sure how this particular petition got space on the Order Paper. And that is why I asked whether it had been drafted by people at Parliament. I have not seen a copy. But I want to ask the Clerk to Parliament to ensure this procedure is followed. I have not seen a copy of this petition yet ordinarily I would have been given a copy on my file. So, please let us follow the rules; that will save us a lot of time. Thank you - I have already referred that petition to the appropriate committee so, please, let us save time. Next item. 

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN THE AFRICAN UNION AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA FOR THE CONTRIBUTION OF ONE FORM POLICE UNIT OF 140 POLICE OFFICERS AND OTHER RESOURCES TO THE AFRICAN UNION MISSION IN SOMALIA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable minister. This particular request was made by the House. So, please -

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, you are right. Last week, hon. Ssemujju Nganda requested, through the Speaker, that I bring before this House and lay on Table, the Memorandum of Understanding between the African Union and the Government of the Republic of Uganda for the contribution of 100 Police units for 140 police officers and other resources to the African Union Mission in Somalia. And as I committed myself, please, allow me to now lay this document on Table as was requested by hon. Ssemuju Nganda last week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is for the information of the Members. Any Member interested can access a copy from the Clerk’s Office. 

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I don’t know what is happening these days because it is difficult to find copies of the Oder Paper –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you had come early, you would have listened to my communication – 

MR KYOOMA:  I have got my friend’s copy but according to what the clerk - I don’t seem to locate where we are.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is exactly what I am saying that if you had come in early, you would have heard my communication in regard to the Order Paper.

MR KYOOMA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the interest of the urgent matters that are before us, we will lay those papers next week; they are not that urgent. Let us proceed to do the motion for a few minutes. We had started debate on this issue – please – procedure?

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure in regard to Rule 35, considering that today is Thursday and questions for oral answers are supposed to be answered on Wednesdays and Thursdays.

Mr Speaker, I happen to have raised a question for oral answer to the Minister of Works and Transport. That question related to the construction of Saaka Bridge, which links Busoga to Bukedi. A fraction of this bridge was constructed – about 150 metres – but was abandoned. So, I wanted to know what is happening to this bridge.

At the beginning of this year, after it had been abandoned for about a year, the minister told us that the money for this bridge was on the account. But up to this time, nothing seems to be done on this bridge.

Mr Speaker, the procedural issue I am seeking from you is: how does somebody proceed after the minister has declined to answer a question for oral answer? I seek your guidance on this matter because the people want to know what is going on. I have attempted to meet the minister several times; he has talked about it but there is nothing much that is happening. May you guide me, Mr Speaker, on this procedural issue? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, this matter has been raised so many times and I have made statements on this matter so many times; on a statement of this nature to save the House so that we can use the procedure of question for oral answer. That is a good avenue for Members to access information. But this has taken a while. Hon. Minister for Works.

3.45
THE MINISTER FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I apologise for delaying. It was not intentional. I am here most of the time; I have never really been given a chance. 

However, yes, it is true we started working on Saaka Bridge - this was I think in 2010. We procured a contractor who happened not to show capacity and we terminated the contract. So, what we have now is that we are going to do this by false account. And as I talk, we are mobilising the necessary materials and equipment to do this work. We have already put in place all the arrangements to ensure that we follow the procedure as required by the law and soon you will see people on the ground doing work by false account.  

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. The hon. Minister is trying to assure us and he wants us to believe him that what he is telling us will actually be done. 

On 15 May 2012, more than one year ago, I raised an issue here on the Floor. With your permission, let me just read what the Hansard captured as the response of the Minister for Works, hon. Byandala. He said: “Lastly, Mr Speaker, as hon. Baryomunsi said, I have already directed my people to ensure that in a few days the Birara Bridge, where what is remaining is just casting the deck, is done and then we can have a reliable route within the area. This is going to be done.” 

He was supplemented by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister who said: “It is not only the bridge at Birara which is going to be handled in the next two weeks but also grading the roads so that they are motorable. For the next two weeks, as an emergency programme, we are going to grade all the roads which he mentioned.”

All these assurances by the Minister for Works and the Prime Minister have never been honoured. So, is the Minister for Works in order to persuade this House to believe him when we the people of Kanungu cannot believe him because he made a promise over one year ago and nothing has been done? Is he in order, Mr Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have asked whether the hon. Minister is in order to attempt to persuade the House to believe him. It is extremely within his mandate to try as much as possible to persuade the House. You cannot call him out of order because he is trying to persuade the House to believe him.

Hon. Minister, now you have been reminded that some of the undertakings you made have gaps in terms of fulfilment. You have just made another one. Is it going to fall in the same category with the Kinkiizi Bridge or –

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, I thank my colleague, hon. Dr Baryomunsi for raising this one. The only disturbing aspect of this is that he is telling lies because he cannot tell me that the whole year I have not done grading of some roads in Kanungu. I have done and there are records to show that my machines have been there and roads have been graded but they have been washed by the rains we have had. (Laughter) 

Having said that, I am –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The bridge –

MR BYANDALA: That is where I am going, Mr Speaker. Hon. Baryomunsi, I am sure and I have a lot of respect for him, knows that there are procedures. We have the procurement procedure and many times he has also stood here complaining about the length- how long it takes. We have been going through this. There are many complaints but we are going to fulfil everything. There are other bridges in his region where I was about to start. Somebody went to the IGG and I am stuck. It is now about two months since. I want to do work but people keep on disturbing me. But we have to follow the procedure. So, I just beg him to accept that we must follow procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Minister, you made that statement that work is going to commence in a few days. You were therefore abreast of the procedure that was required. That meant you might have already fulfilled all those procedures for you to say, “A few days.” 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, some of these are not within my control. There are other- but I apologise. I know how the people of Kanungu are suffering. I am working around the clock but I will assure him that the ministry and Government are committed and we are going to work on those three bridges in Kanungu.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, I just beg your indulgence for clarification. On 13 May last year, the main bridge which connects Kanungu to the rest of the world collapsed. Two days later, I raised this matter on the Floor. Earlier on, the ministry had actually started on constructing an alternative bridge, the Birara Bridge, which I am referring to, and money to the tune of Shs1.8 billion had been passed by this Parliament for that purpose. When the contractor did about 20 percent of the work, the engineers in his ministry issued a certificate of completion and paid all the money and the contractors ran away with the money. This is the bridge the minister was assuring us that within two weeks it would be complete for the people of Kanungu to have where to pass. 

I do not know whether it is allowed to lay on Table the Hansard which is a record of this House but the words I quoted are actually in the Hansard which Members can see. These were the words of the minister and so for him to say that I am telling lies when I am not the author of the Hansard, is very shameful. 

For us, as people of Kanungu, we still insist that you should provide for us a bridge. As a matter of fact, his ministry has failed to give us a bridgeandwe arenow starting a crusade to mobilise on our own to build the bridge at least to ensure that ambulances can cross from Kanungu to the referral hospitals of Nyakibale and Mbarara. If you permit me, I will bring the statistics showing the mothers who have died and the people who have drowned in the river. So, it is a crisis. How I wish hon. Byandala would feel the way the people of Kanungu are feeling because of the incompetence and the inefficiency in his ministry. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, now you see the statement you make makes us even wonder whether the minister did not mean his word. You are saying it is the engineers who issued a certificate and the money was paid and taken. That means according to the minister, the money was released to complete the bridge within the timeframe he had said but the money was stolen. Would that not be- yes, hon. Minister.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, what hon. Baryomunsi is saying is true. This happened I think in 2010. This issue came up and the engineers are being investigated. It is a police case. So, we are doing everything possible, first of all, to ensure there is value for money and those who are misappropriating money are handled. We are tackling this from all angles. Honestly, me as Byandala, I am a human being like my friends in Kanungu and I feel hurt when they do not have the service. I do everything I can to ensure that every Ugandan gets the service to be provided by the government but everything cannot be put on a plate like a flash of a camera. We are trying our level best and I can invite hon. Baryomunsi to my office to see how far we have gone. We have done the evaluations and gone through so many things to ensure that what happened before does not happen again.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have heard this and we will follow up the minister on his undertaking specifically on the issue of the bridges in Bulamogi and Kanungu. It has come back to the House; we shall have a mechanism to follow up on what the Member has said. Let us move to the order paper.

DEBATE IN REPLY TO THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT ON THURSDAY 6TH JUNE 2013. 

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY, THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY 6TH JUNE 2013

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had started debate on this matter. Today, we had agreed to use one hour because there is another business on the order paper. I do not know whether the Member for Ruhamais ready with her contribution.

3.56
MS JANET KATAHA MUSEVENI (NRM, Ruhama County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, hon. Mafabi, talked about what Government has not done or has done badly and unemployment was among the issues that hon. Mafabiraised as a problem, and it is a problem.But I want to stand here today and say something about what I believe that Government has done about the investments in the youths of this country and the struggle against unemployment.

For the first time in the history of this country, this government is the first one that has put up free education forprimary and secondary levels that is universal and free. It is the first government in the history of this nation that has brought to the national legislature the youth members of Parliament to represent the youth in this country.

It is the first government in our history that brought the women members of Parliament on affirmative, which hon. Mafabi was also rubbishing. It is the first government that has put together people centred programmes such as NAADS that are designed to give a boost to struggling families in rural communities in our country. Young people are beneficiaries of this programme. Hon. Mafabi ridiculed the President even for programmes such as this one.

I believe that the President and this government have tried to put programmes in place to facilitate the people of Uganda that they may get out of poverty. It is true that NAADS has had implementation problems but that was not because the government was not trying to reach the people. NAADS is getting restructured; it may still do a good job on facilitating the people of Uganda to get employment in the private sector.

Hon. Mafabi also ridiculed the President on the idea of students’ grant scheme. This scholarship fund now has a vote in the budget that is earmarked to support higher education especially science students. The youth fund is available in the bank so that youth who are willing to go the business way could access this fund through the window that was put in place in the bank. This was an initiative that was put inside deliberately by the Movement government so that the youth do not always have to rely on welfare but do business. 

Therefore, I believe what Uganda needs right now is leaders at all levels of our society; leaders who have a stake in the development of our nation not just politicking for politics sake. I want to specifically limit my contribution to unemployment and the youth employment according to what hon. Mafabi said in his response to the State of the Nation Address by the President. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.02
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. When I was coming to Parliament, I vowed to die a Christian by speaking and saying what is right at its time and condemning what is wrong at its time also. I want to thank the President for the speech which he gave; he acted like a real scientist.

One, it was not a very big book and I think the intention was to make us understand very well the things the government has achieved. In particular, let me thank the President and the Government for constructing a new building at Mbarara and this is the message from my people. That building is wonderful. In the history of this Country, Mbarara region had never accessed a CT scan that is a computerised demographic scan that looks at the heads of people inside.

The people from western Uganda were spending a lot of money in Mulago and also in these private hospitals. I want to thank the President for giving us over Shs 1.8 billion. Now we have a CT scan which is functional. I was slightly disappointed by somebody who stole its memory cards twice but I went to Mbarara on the radio and said the names of the thieves and they brought them back. So a functioning machine is there and I want to thank the President for that.

I want to thank the President on the issue of immunisation; he said that we now have added the so-called Pneumococcal vaccinebut there is some little bit of a problem as far as vaccines are concerned.

When we were in Arua, we found that Hepatitis B virus infection in West Nile is very bad and they provided only 200 vials and they gave them to only 200 nurses and doctors but Arua Hospital alone has got over 334 people and so they missed out. This means those people are being exposed. I would like the minister in charge of Primary Health Care to take note of this to prevent this disease before it attacks our people.

The issue of vaccines is very important and the President talks about prevention being better than cure. I thank him again for talking about people who eat a lot. They put on weight and die of heart diseases and diabetes. He also talked about bad behaviour and how people can avoid some funny behaviour. I felt like I was in church when I was listening to his speech and I took the message. I have vowed to take that message and for me that is the gospel I am now preaching. 

I want to tell you that now in Mbarara Hospital, we have a problem. In that wonderful building, we do not have an oxygen plant and we are spending over $230,000 on oxygen alone. If we were given an oxygen plant in Mbarara, we would be supplying oxygen to all hospitals in western Uganda.  

Two, there is a problem of a laboratory. Mbarara Regional Hospital does not have a laboratory of its own. Other laboratories are private and charge people a lot of money and yet in the hospital, they have written that everything is for free. So there is a problem and controversy.

I have an issue concerning health workers’ recruitment and payment. I want to brief the rest of the people here in this august House that 8,078 staff were appointed but only 6,839 reported to work. What is killing me most is that out of these, only 3,337 people have accessed the payroll and so we have again a problem as far as paying the people whom we recruited are concerned. 

I think on that note, we have to be very careful and I request the Minister for Public Service to help the President who appointed you - at least help him because he has done the work for you and everything is very nice. Please pay the people. I do not want him to be abused on your behalf.

We must prevent malaria by making sure that we kill the mosquito. Research has it that in places like Lango and Acholi where indoor residual spraying was done, malaria drugs have actually expired and have been taken back. People do not have malaria. I was of the view that in order to complete what the President wants, we go into indoor residual spraying for the whole country and we remove malaria from this country and we spend this money which we are spending on anti-malarials on something different?   

Last but not least, as I finish, I want to thank His Excellency the President, for giving us inMbarara – when you are going to Mbarara, the road is very nice. Patients can access the hospital and this is something you cannot actually joke around with. We have a good road in Mbarara but what we need right now is enough doctors, drugs plus this issue of spraying the mosquitoes. In Kashari you know - the Member for Parliament for Kashari – I said Kashari because I also belong to Kasharisince I have got two farms there. So I know my - I can accept the information.  

MR AYOO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the Member representing Mbarara Municipality that I come from Lango where indoor residual spraying is being done and it is still being done as an on-going programme.

But I want to inform the Member that there is need for us to move and use DDT. What is being used now is going to be very expensive because after two or three months, you find that the mosquitoes are back and malaria is increasing in the hospitals. I found this out a few days ago when I went to the hospital. 

So I want to inform you that even with that indoor residual spraying, the insecticide that we are using is not very effective. I would want you to advocate for indoor residual spraying but using DDT which will be more effective and they should also increasing the distributionof insecticide treated mosquito nets. I thank you.

DR BITEYKEREZO: Thank you so much, hon. Ayoo, for that information. Whether you talk about DDT or using another chemical, it is still indoor residual spraying. I am not saying that we should actually leave the mosquito nets. They should also be used. But I want to add that the critical cadres whom we wanted to be recruited were the doctors, midwives, laboratory assistants and – officers – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Member for Mbarara Municipality. The Member for Mukono South?

4.09
REV. PETER BAKALUBA MUKASA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Five minutes.

REV BAKALUBA MUKASA: I also want to thank His Excellency, the President for this State of the Nation Address. I want to begin with page 3 where His Excellency highlighted the importance of procuring borehole drilling equipment for Mukono District which can also be useful for the rest of the districts in this country.  

I thank the President because he listens and actually when we visited him, we tried to convince him on the importance of each district beginning with Mukono to have at least drilling equipment. We receive about Shs 480 million in Mukono District every financial year for water and we realised that we can procure our own water drilling equipment at a tune of about Shs 350 million. When you look at the Shs 450 million, it can only drill 20 boreholes and when we procure our own borehole drilling equipment, it can drill about 50 boreholes. So we thought it would be very useful and we want other districts to buy this idea.

Our district communicated to the water department but they have been very slow in responding to our letter and we hope if we get support from Parliament and the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Water, it will be very useful. Water is a problem in many of our districts and contracting and hiring such equipment at times becomes very expensive. Mukono District, as a model district, wants to start on this campaign and if we are availed this money, we can use about 70 percent from that budget to get this equipment.  

Secondly, the President talked about the introduction of UPE, USE and even higher education and vocational skills training in our schools. However, we still have a problem of disbursement or sending, for example, UPE monies to help our schools. At times it delays; it takes three or four months and it has actually halted the on-going process of educating our children. We still have a problem of paying salaries to our teachers and it has delayed up to this time. 

When I look at the money going to be introduced as students’ loans and even for the 4,000 best performers, most of the students who are beneficiaries of these loans schemes are the ones coming from the best schools like Budo, Namilyango and all those schools attract well to do parents like Members of Parliament, Speakers and those who can actually pay. But students and parents from my villages of Mukono South like Mpongwe, Mpata and Koome where we hardly get a first grade or even a second grade will never access this money. 

So, it will be better if we send this money to improve on the standards of our schools and to equip them to pay our teachers. Right now, teachers are boycotting and are not going to classrooms and many of our schools in rural areas are going to suffer but in Budo, Gayaza and Namilyango where most of us 
around here take our students, those teachers will be there but in these poor “takataka” schools, there will be nothing and at the end of the day. They are likely to actually fail exams. I think these loans and this scheme should be introduced in a broad perspective in many of our schools. 

I thank His Excellency, the President for our Katosi-Kyetume road. This time after 15 years, it was mentioned. Let me hope that this time, and I see hon. Byandala raising his hand, it is going to be worked on and I thank His Excellency the President for this arrangement. But still, after 26 years in government as the NRM, we have a problem of revamping our railway station – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourablemember. I will now take the Member for Kabale Municipality and then the Member for Bulamogi County. You have seven minutes.

4.15
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (NRM, Kabale Municipality, Independent): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address and the programmes that he showed in his address. I will specifically talk about energy. 

I thank Government that they have started implementing the ad hoc committee report that has been put on the Floor of this House but has not yet been debated. We envisaged REA getting its own vote and it has been achieved. However, much as REA has got its own vote; they also need the money to run these programmes and I think we are giving them little money in comparison to the programmes that REA should be handling.

I also want to thank the President for the transformation that he talked about in the energy sector. He talked about Karuma, Ayago and Isimba. Since he brought it up, I hope that this Government will indeed achieve it because once we have those stations running, the movers and shakers of this energy sector will be brilliant. However, we need to also go back to the procurement procedures on how this energy sector should be procured and how it should go. For example, when you look at the biggest energy plant today which is Bujagali, even if it is running and we have the energy from it but at what price are we receiving this energy? 

Around the world, the price of a unit of energy is between 6 and 8 American cents but right now we are getting it at between 17 and 16 American cents from Bujagali. So, the price is very high. In actual sense, Uganda could be among the top five countries with high energy prices. So, what were they envisaging? I think if we would get Karuma on board with the 600 Megawatts and then get it at the lowest price, it would help Bujagali on the other side and we would get better energy and even the so called clearance of forest cover would perhaps stop. 

Secondly, we should facilitate rural electrification such that we increase the coverage of energy in the country from 12 percent to over 80 percent;maybe if we have power at its cheapest, then instead of using charcoal to cook and deplete the forests, we would use electricity because it would be affordable. We really need to look at the energy links better. 

I am happy that Karuma is going to start but I saw a Build, Operate and Transfer (BOT) instead of a Private Public Partnership (PPP). So, looking at Bujagali again with the cost escalation, this man says. “I will first reap out all my money and profit and then I will give it to you.” But what will you give me? You might give me something that has already been damaged, something whose lifespan may have ended. 

So, I imagine we would go for a Public Private Partnership and we receive a turnkey whereby this facility is ready to be used but it is only the government to know how they will pay for it. If we are going to reap money from the oil sector, maybe we will get the money from the oil sector and pay for these energy things other than waiting for a BOT and we transfer later. Otherwise, I really thank the President for that elaborate State of the Nation Address but I believe the Ministry of Energy should get stronger and ensure that when procurement is being done, it is done in the best way possible.

We also need to look at the price because we have read in the papers and I have moved even a step further and gone to the courts of law. The courts of law pronounced that procurement of Karuma should be finished in the best way possible. My reasons were that the company that had won the contract had stated the price at $1.39 billion. The price for the design of consultants was $2.2 billion, $800 million less the price of consultants. So, once you stop this company, which has already been awarded the contract from starting, the more time you take, the more expensive the dam will be. Remember at the time of Bujagali, this august House was blamed that they had stopped the procurements of Bujagali. What happened that time was that because it took long for us to procure it, the price increased by more than double. It came from $580 million to $1 billion. So, once we procure it, we will get the best price. 

Secondly, you need to look at the designer of this very dam you are going to build. If the contracts committee approves the design technically, they have given you the cheapest price, then why would you refuse it? I believe we need to be more patriotic and help the President and this country. Let the Executive know that they will have to account to our children’s children - (Interruption) 

MR BBOSA KIYINGI: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is the untapped resource of wind energy and the solar power energy. If the government also ventures into the wind energy, we can be able to boost the power across the country. Maybe we could cut the taxes on the solar power equipment so that we can be able to have electricity. 

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you very much for the information. In fact, it is not only wind energy. How much garbage are we collecting today and how much of it do we take to Kiteezi? Suppose we came up and got companies that can come and supply energy from this garbage collection? All the municipal councils that we have in Uganda have the capacity to produce more than 3 megawatts from garbage but we are just wasting it and it is not only that that we would get but we would also get fertilisers from this garbage -(Member timed out.)

4.23
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to join my colleagues to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address that he submitted to this Parliament. I am going to focus my submission on page 2 on the area of economics and political integration of the East African region.

But before I submit, I feel it is important for this House to also take keen interest in the performance of this House which is indicated on page 14 especially as far as questions for oral answer are concerned. In the whole session, only three questions were answered in this House, meaning that either ministers are deliberately refusing to answer or have failed to answer the questions. 

Getting back to the point, on page 3, the President talks about the need for the regional economic and political integration; it is my considered opinion that it is important for East Africans to consider the political and economic integration cautiously. Particularly, I would like to submit that it is not the right time for East Africans to start thinking about political integration. And I will give my justification for that.

Before the region takes serious steps into political integration, it is important to look at the following things: 
(a) 	The quality of our population.
(b) 	The morals of our people – which also touches on the area of corruption.
(c) 	The quality of our education.
(d) 	The levels of innovation
(e) 	The levels of democracy in the partner states.

I am not shy to say that Africans have demonstrated to the world that we are not capable of governing ourselves in very wide geographical boundaries, under a unitary government. I will give three examples on this. The largest three African states – just recently South Sudan seceded from the North. The big territorial boundaries of this country were a cause of problems for administration. And it seems that even the remaining part of the original Sudan is about to break up. Surprisingly, our President actually supported the secession of South Sudan from Sudan. I wonder what East Africans are hurrying for to start thinking about political federation. 

Let us look at the Democratic Republic of Congo – a very huge state in Africa - and see how it is performing in terms of security and level of development. This somehow leads me to the question of whether by integrating, politically, it is a reason for strategic security or strategic insecurity instead -(Interjection)– Thank you. I will take the information.

MR MUKULA: Mr Speaker, I thank my colleague for giving way. I am the chairman of the Pan African Movement-Uganda. I would like guide him by supporting the President on the merits of political integration. Political and economic integration for the East African Community and the region is very important. We now have a population of about 135 million people; it is projected that in the next 100 years, the most populous continent in the world will be Africa, with a population estimated at 3 billion people. China and India combined will have a population of about 2.3 billion. This is a huge market and it is therefore important to know that once we integrate, the potential of the region – the African Continent is a sleeping giant. The moment we rise up, there will be no other continent which will be as strong as Africa. Moreover, East Africa has now discovered oil and gas and I assure you that the future of Africa is very bright. I thought I would be able to guide you.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you. Actually, I was going to talk about the population later. But maybe what I can tell you is that the population of Malaysia is far less than that of Uganda but its GDP is three times more than the GDP of the entire East Africa. So we may have to look at the quality of the population before we talk of numbers. It is important to look at what kind of population we are talking about; it is not about how many people – Nigerian population is bigger than the whole of East Africa combined. So when we are talking about the value of the population and its impact, it is very important to consider other factors.

The next geographically large country in Africa – which is Algeria - considering what I have talked about in Sudan and DR Congo, Algeria is also not a country worth emulating or drawing a lesson from. It is not free from the political ups and downs. So are we really ready for a political federation for East Africa?

Moving to the economic integration, which the honourable colleague was talking about, the President in his State of the Nation Address states that the turnover of one company in South Korea – their population is almost equal to that of Tanzania – but the President notes that the turnover of just one company is more than – maybe we could look at that page. He says that the annual turnover of Samsung is $32 billion while the total GDP of East Africa is $79 billion. That meansthat one company has a turnover which is half the total GDP of East Africa. So even if we are looking at the population, we must not forget its quality.

I have some documents here which show how Uganda might actually lose out in the East African economic integration. It is noted that regionally, Uganda’s export volume to Kenya and Tanzania is one percent and three percent respectively, which is very low compared to Kenya’s intra-regional trade with Uganda, which is at 60 percent. Now, if Uganda exports only one percent of the total export volume of the region to Kenya and Kenya exports 60 percent, how is Uganda going to compete? (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. I think when you are talking about the growth of the economy, you must take into consideration our history. Kenya, since Independence, has been stable and in the last 10 years, it has not been depending on donor funding. But when you see a country which started at 52 percent donor funding and now having 80 percent of its domestic funding, it means the economy is growing. If you are to say what the country must emphasise, we should emphasise the consumer confidence within the region. What are we able to produce? And what the President is saying is that the major component of production and which can provide employment and cause a favourable balance of payment is exports. And if the focus is on energy, like the President says, then we can outplay Kenya because they have been stable for the last 30 years while we have been unstable. If we continue with the stability then we are going to move forward. (Hon. Ssekikubo rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that goes into your time.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, hon. Lubogo, and the other Members. The way I understood his presentation – and I am surprised that it is being distorted - his line of argument was; what do we have to enjoy in the federation? And he was pointing out the figures to show that we are net importers without exporting much to the region. And I think the challenge would be: How can Uganda enhance its competitiveness so that once we join the federation, we can be at par but not to appear to be apologists like hon. Kakooza is saying to show that we have had - how do we move- (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, I thought I was clear and the formula for economics is also clear. I can read the equation, which is YCS and (x-m). Any country, which has a baseline or major component of production, which is power, will have a favourable balance of payment, which is exports minus imports. This is the emphasis of the economy. Is the hon. Member in order to misunderstand me in the line of my argument?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now he has understood you. (Laughter)

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. According to statistics available from-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you gave out your time. I will have the Member for Mpigi District.

4.35
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two concerns and one is on the Education sector. His Excellency talked about the students’ loan scheme, which is a good idea in transforming the education system but it should particularly target the disadvantaged students because they are not necessarily the best performing ones as some might be coming from unstable families. So my concern is that they should put into consideration those students that would have performed better but come from poor families.

The other concern is on human resource development. The government has put much energy in human resource but in remote areas, it is very low. There is a system of giving allowances to those employees in hard-to-reach areas but the employees that are mostly considered are the teachers and health workers yet there are some other civil servants that are in hard-to-reach areas that are never considered.

I request that if they are considering hard-to-reach areas, they should consider all civil servants. This is because in my district of Mpigi, there are some islands, which we consider hard-to-reach but none of the civil servants has ever been given an allowance for being an employee in a hard-to-reach area. So we do not know the criterion that is used to establish hard-to-reach areas. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.39
MR KENNETH ONGALO (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for according me this opportunity to thank the President for his clear, precise and relevant exposition of the government policy as was contained in the State of the Nation Address.

I thank the NRM Government for its clear economic policy, which has seen our GDP grow from $ 1.5 billion in 1986 to $ 21.2 billion today. These are not just figures on paper but are visible through the changing skylines in Kampala and the changing landscapes in our countryside.

I believe that contrary to what our detractors and the traducers of our government say both at home and abroad, the NRM Government is neither a failed nor is it a failing system. The challenge that remains for us now is how to thrive out of our modest resources.

Once again, I want to thank His Excellency for identifying the bottlenecks, which are actually limiting our growth, one of which is our failure to modernise agriculture. My colleague from across the room talked about irrigation yesterday, which I think is very important if we are to use our land properly according to the President’s analysis of four acres per household. 

However, one of the challenges that we face is the post-harvest handling of our crops. We do not have facilities that can enable farmers to keep their harvest and be able to sell them when prices go up. Therefore, every year after harvest, farmers are forced to sell their crops at give-away prices and at the end of the season, we always suffer from famine as if we did not have any harvest at all.

I would like to encourage the government to develop a policy of building silos in districts where we can store grain such as millet and simsim. For example, a farmer can store his grain in that silo and then be given a receipt, which he can use to obtain a loan. At the end of the season, he goes and sells his produce and he can pay back the loan and remain with some money to meet his other needs.

Also, we are not going to modernise unless the people who teach these farmers to modernise are equipped to teach. I am referring here specifically to our NAADS policy - for example, in my sub-county, the NAADS officers have only one he-goat, which they move with from one village to the other until it ends up dying from being overworked.

We could emulate the example of Tanzania and encourage every extension farmer- (Hon. Otada rose) - hon. Otada, I would really like to give you time but my time is limited, thank you very much. If we could equip our extension farmers to be model farmers themselves so that their farms can be used as learning centres by others, we would go a long way towards modernising agriculture. (Mr Mukula rose_) I will give you 30 seconds.

MR MUKULA: Mr Speaker, I thank my colleague for giving way. The point of clarification I rise on is on the current drought that appears to have taken over many parts of the country. It is a very worrying trend and the hunger, which we expect in most of these areas, is going to be of critical concern to all of us even in government. 

I would therefore like to make a statement on the Floor of Parliament at an appropriate time, maybe on Tuesday and address this issue to the Minister of Agriculture to see what can be done to avert the current problems and challenges that we are facing in the countryside particularly the North and North Eastern partof the country. I thank you.

MR ONGALO: Thank you very much, honorable colleague, for your clarification. Actually, I decided not to address the House on the issue of the drought because my colleagues talked about it at length. But to add to what honourable –(Member timed out.)

4.44
PROF. EDWARD KIDDU MAKUBUYA (NRM, Katikamu County South, Luwero): Mr Speaker, I thank you for recognizing me and I would appreciate if hon. Mike Mukula did not refer to history that does not apply now. (Laughter)So, Sir, I am referring to page 3 of the State of the Nation Address where the President reviewed the introduction of UPE, USE, the proposed student loan scheme, vocational education and some of the challenges we are facing.

We need to remind ourselves that those who want Uganda to develop seriously have no alternative but to support these educational programmes. May I, refer to Article 30 of the Constitution, which talks about the right to education whereupon it says thus: “All persons have a right to education?” Article 34, which talks about the rights of children whereupon in clause 2, it says that a child is entitled to basic education, which shall be the responsibility of the state and the parents of the child.

The responsibility for general education is specified but we assume that the state has a role to play it. Otherwise, for the child’s basic education, the responsibility is shared between the parents and the state. And the programme says that everything else is taken up by the state except clothes, which the child will wear, writing material, exercise books and pencils. So, this cry about the state taking over everything is actually unconstitutional if you go by the content of Article 34 (2) because it says that the responsibility for providing basic education is to be shared between the state and the parent. And the state has taken over the major part of this responsibility. So, it is our duty as leaders to mobilize our people –(Applause)– to take advantage of this bounty. 

Then of course –(Hon. Stephen Baka rose_)– yes, sir.

MR BAKA: Thank you, Prof. KidduMakubuya. I would like you to clarify on this: if it is the responsibility of the parents and the government, would it be constitutionally right for us to levy mandatory fees for the parents to pay to ensure our children eat food while at school? That is an issue that has been disturbing us with the President – the issue of “Entanda” is unacceptable to some of us. So, is it okay for us to levy some money to help our children eat food at schools such that this “Entanda” thing is – (Member timed out.)

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Stephen Baka for that intervention. I think this is the relevant history which hon. Mike Mukula should have referred to.

The issue is not whether the parents should be asked to pay or not. The objection is that people want the headmaster to – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, one minute.

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The objection is that the parents and other self-seekers want the head teacher who is employed by the state to exclude children for not paying such money; to use the same state authority to exclude them for not paying for lunch. That is the objection. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

4.50
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda North County, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank Government and the President on issues to do with infrastructure development especially the road network. When you traverse the whole of Uganda, you realise that we are somewhere in terms of road network. Actually, for the first time, the people of Ibanda North are going to have a tarmac road going through their constituency, which has five sub-counties and two town councils. So, really I must extend the appreciation of the people of Ibanda North.

When you go to page 6, I also want to appreciate the initiative to rejuvenate railway transport. When you go to the places where the railway lines used to pass, you realise that some of the towns that had then developed, have now gone silent and dormant. So, it is my hope that when revamped, such towns will again come to light. But also not to the towns alone - I also hope that this will help to cheapen transport costs and because of that, the cost of production will come down for investors to benefit. 

Maybe and specifically to the people of Ibanda - since we want to become a first world by 2040 – there is this problem of water. Actually to say, if you separated Ibanda North from Ibanda South, then Ibanda North should be described as an arid county or constituency because we don’t have any water. The population accessing water is about 3 percent, which is very low. But all the same, we are grateful, Mr Speaker.

I agree with the President’s statement on page 9 where he says that the sector that can reach many Ugandans is agriculture because about 68 percent of the population is employed in agriculture. But on the other hand,it seems we are giving it less attention because when you consider the share of agriculture on the national cake- that is in the budget- it is always between 3 percent and 5 percent which is very small compared to the population which is involved in agriculture. I am even more worried because like my colleagues were saying, for this season there is a big worry. If I am to refer to my constituency specifically, it is known for grain growing but it is regrettable to say that for this season, we shall have zero harvest because of the drought. This calls for intensive intervention by Government in terms of thinking about irrigation systems. And perhaps as a remedial measure, since we are in the budgeting process, we need to reinforce the disaster preparedness ministry because we are heading for disaster.

On page 3, I thank the President for his initiation of the student loan scheme. This time round, my questions to him whenever I meet him will be reduced because this is an issue I have been raising with him every time I meet him. But still there are questions that are unanswered. 

One, we hear that it will benefit only science students and I think this needs to be reviewed - (Member timed out.)

4.56
MR ASUPASA MPONGO (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this chance to have a say on the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency, the President. I would also like to thank the President for being articulate and on spot and renewing our hope that our country is going in the right direction and that we are developing.

In his speech, the President talked about the endeavour to bridge loopholes in revenue collection. For any country to develop, the state must have funds and there must be strict endeavour to widen the resource envelope so that those services can reach everybody.

In Uganda, we have a very big problem of the so-called informal sector. I call it the “so-called” because the informal sector is not supposed to be as informal as we call it. I will give an example of markets. What used to be Shauriyako Market today comprises of importers and wholesale shops. And partially, Owino and Kisekka markets are in a similar situation. Very many traders are operating those markets in a market style without keeping records and therefore Government is unable to bring them in the bracket for taxation. 

I have a background of a revenue officer. When I worked with Uganda Revenue Authority, we used to go out and register new taxpayers and try to expand the register. But when we left Uganda Revenue Authority, almost half of the taxpayers were deregistered that they were not complying. Now, Mr Speaker, how can we as a country be supported by a few effectively paying taxpayers?

I also have the experience because I am in business and the businessmen are complaining. The percentage for VAT was 17 and it was raised to 18; then the tax authority is so much on the back of the few taxpayers who are shouldering the burden of this country. What I request of Uganda Revenue Authority is to go out and register everybody who is in the bracket of tax payment. This will have a double advantage. 

One, they will require accountants. So many of our sons and daughters are on the streets; they lack jobs and yet all these enterprises are supposed to be creating jobs. In every enterprise, we require a sales person/ a marketer. We also require an accountant. All this will be creating jobs - as much as we would like to keep in the informal sector, our youths will continue pacing the streets for lack of jobs. 

I have a comment on agriculture. One of the issues in the President’s speech was modernisation of agriculture. But we have continued to stress the hoe against the tractor. In the late 60s and early 70s, almost every county of this country had a tractor service. Those services died and I do not see any endeavour to revamp them. Now we have a problem of uncertain weather. The sunshine is too much and when the rains come, they wash away the soils. So, the farmer is required to prepare these soils during the dry season like right now so that when the short rains come, that farmer would be able to plant. But without tractors, they cannot do it. How can we modernise agriculture when we are still using the hoe? It does not help the farmer very much. Mr Speaker, thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Member for Busiki.

5.00
MS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers' Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the President of this country for the State of the Nation Address. I also support the motion. Let us be sincere, colleagues that credit should be given where it is due. Our President has made effort to see that this country within the next few years is among the first world countries; at least in the period between now and 2017. 

But I have some few concerns. One of them is about the human resource development in Uganda. When you look at the skills development that we have today, it has a lot that it lacks because it is not commensurate with the requirements of the labour market that we have. Today, we are in the dot.com era and we are operationalising what we call free market and liberalisation of our economy. When you look at the way our people are being trained- for example, the hoteliers. There is quite a big difference that if you find a Kenyan waitress in a hotel, that waitress will serve you with a smile to attract you so that she can also continue to sustain the business of the employer. But our people here tend to be proud and rude to the clients and that brings us back to the curriculum of our training and skills development. So, what I want us to do is to go back to the drawing board and look at the skills development of our graduates.

The second issue is about agriculture. Yes, His Excellency has tried his level best to modernise agriculture through different agencies like NAADS. But then, we have not really put in effort to sensitise our people about the degradation and environmental destruction which has prompted droughts in this country and which has resulted into famine where we have communities suffering from hunger. This is a big shame because Uganda is known to be a food basket. So, I think we need to stop depending on nature. We need to emphasise the issue of irrigation and make sure that we train the people about the purpose of irrigation in our country –(Interjections)– yes but my time.

MR OTADA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the honourable member for yielding the Floor. I want to seek clarification because on page 9, the President says the following things:“The sector that can reach many Ugandans and quickly is agriculture. Let us work on the 68 percent of the homesteads that were found by 2002 census to still be in subsistence agriculture.” He goes ahead to say, “There are two disappointments in the sector of agriculture and fisheries”; he points out that one is overfishing and the second is mismanagement of tick control in Uganda.

You are well aware, honourable members, that the NRM government has proposed about 3.6 percent of the overall budget to go to the agricultural sector. You are also aware that the NRM caucus sat and passed a resolution that seven percent of our budget should go to agriculture. Now in light of these facts, would you like to clarify and tell us where your clear conscience lies in this matter?

MS SENTONGO: First and foremost, I would not like to dwell much on your information and clarification because right now, we are debating the State of the Nation Address and the issue of the caucus does not apply here. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is now past 5 O’clock and we still have an item on the agenda. I am going to request you to come back tomorrow at 10 O’clock and we see how far we can go with this debate because Members want to contribute. We shall come and continue with this debate tomorrow at 10 O’clock. For now, I am going to ask the honourable Dr Okuonzi to speak for 10 minutes.

5.06
DR SAM OKUONZI (Independent, Vuura County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I want to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. I want to concur with him on the 10 points that he lists on pages 1 and 2. Those are the key elements of his speech and also the direction of the Government that has brought us this far. The 10 points are: the ideology, state building, human resource, strength of the private sector, issues of infrastructure, agriculture, providing services, industrialisation, integration and democracy.

I think the President has done his best to explain different aspects of those key points. What I want to focus on is his speech on the health sector. I have been following the State of the Nation Address for many years, even before I came to Parliament, and for many years the President has been so involved with the economy and paying less attention to health and education services. I think for the first time, the President has elaborately addressed himself to the issues of health on page 3.

I want to concur with him on the fact that the NRM Government has emphasised prevention of measles through immunisation since its inception in 1986.We need to give credit where it is due because the rate of immunisable diseases in this country has indeed fallen. Measles used to be the biggest killer in different hospitals followed by other immunisable diseases. Today, measles occurs very rarely, thanks to the elaborate programme of immunisation. This is an observation that is all over the country, not just in Mulago but also in other hospitals that may be having this programme.

The President has gone further to state certain important principles and policies on public health especially on prevention. He says on page 3, “If Ugandans, individually and/or collectively could add hygiene, nutrition and personal discipline - and he mentioned avoiding something there called umalaya or prostitution, alcoholism, smoking and obesity - the total disease burden eliminated would be about 80 percent.” He is very right because most of our diseases in this country are preventable. There are few diseases that come that we cannot do anything about because they will be there, but for the majority of the diseases we can do something about them in terms of prevention. 

I would like just to highlight some of the key things that the Ministry of Health could take a hint from basing on what the President has put in this document. Most of these preventable diseases do not have any programmes today. When you read the policy of the Ministry of Health or you see the programmes on the ground, you actually do not see specific programmes addressing some of these preventive measures. They are talked about but there are no concrete programmes addressing these issues. 

The first one is the prevention of cancer through surveys and early detection. Here, I would like to draw our attention to five cancers which are common in this country and about which we can do something. The first one is the cancer of the prostate for men. All of us men who are above the age of 40 are potential candidates. We should go and check our prostates every three or six months to just check whether there is something wrong with it. This is something that should be imbibed in our programmes on a day-to-day basis, but you do not hear anything from the Ministry of Health or anywhere in this country about routine checking of prostates. It is one of the killers of men in this country.

We also have cervical cancer for women –(Interruption)

MR BAKA: Thank you, honourable, for giving way. This is serious because you are touching a topic that concerns many of us who are approaching 40 and those who are above. You have told us what we can do to prevent. Can I briefly seek information from you on what causes this prostate cancer? (Laughter)Is it because during that period, the activity is slowed down -men above 40 are not very active? Why is it prevalent among those above 40? What exactly causes it?

DR OKUONZI: Well, we do not have much time to explain what causes it but in general, as you get older, the body functions begin to get dysfunctional. I think you just need to be informed that different parts of our body begin to reduce in function, rigor and in the way that they perform their duties. One of the first ones in early adulthood is actually the prostrate. For your information, the last organ of the body that eventually degenerates is the brain but all the others begin to degenerate much earlier. For your information also, the eye begins to degenerate at the age of nine years. So old age does not begin after 40 but even before 10 years. (Laughter) So, different organs of the body have different age limits but I did not really want to go into this, Mr Speaker.  

Let me just highlight the five cancers that we have to check ourselves for. The other ones are cervical, breast and uterus cancers for women. These cancers cause the biggest adult death in this country and they can be prevented by early detection and by early treatment. However, you do not see these programmes; you see them haphazardly put. Somebody comes from abroad and does a survey today and it is forgotten about, but these should be routine services that this country should offer for prevention and it would save us a lot of money.  

If you go to the cancer ward today, you do not want to go there again. The misery with which these people suffer is something that you do not want to see.  So, that was on cancer. 

The second area that we routinely –(Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Your 10 minutes are up and as I said, at this stage we need to go the next level. We had allotted one hour to this particular business but we have done substantially more than one hour.   

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE 

THE PUBLIC ORDER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you will recall that we had a good discussion on this Bill and we had gone up to clause 8,on which we had extensive discussion. Looking back, I made recommendations that certain positions needed to be harmonised between the minister and other people who were raising issues on this particular clause. I am sure the chairperson will be able to brief us on how far they have gone with this particular item so that we can move forward. 

Clause 8

MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you. We had discussions on this matter on 23rdMay this year and you directed that we harmonise our position with the honourable minister. We have, over a period of time, done so and the position is as follows:

The committee made recommendations to this House that were discussed in detail in respect to clause 8. The first one is that the committee recommended that we delete clause 8 (1) (c).The justification was given that the paragraph is ambitious and it has the potential for broad and arbitrary application. 

The committee also recommended that we delete clause 8(4) especially the words, “other than the Inspector-General of Police” in the second line. The justification was, and still is, that the authorising officer is a delegate of the Inspector-General of Police and as such, the Inspector-General of Police is not the appropriate appellate forum.  

We recommended that we substitute the words, “Inspector-General of Police” in the last line of the clause with the words, “a magistrate in whose jurisdiction the meeting is scheduled to take place.” The justification is that since the authorised officer works on the instructions of the IGP, a magistrate is a neutral arbiter.

We also recommended the deletion of sub-clause (5). The justification was that this follows the amendment of sub-clause (4). 

The minister had proposals only in respect to sub-clause (4) and (5), that we redraft sub-clauses (4) and (5) to read as follows: “A person aggrieved by the decision of the authorised officer under this section may, within 14 days after receipt of the notice under subsection (1), appeal to the magistrate’s court in whose jurisdiction the meeting was scheduled to take place.” This was discussed at length in the House and the committee has no objection.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there was the issue of 14 days if the meeting was supposed to take place in three days, and we had a debate on that. How was it resolved, Minister?

MR JAMES BABA: The one you are referring to - three days- was the period required for notification. Originally, the committee had suggested three days and we had proposed five days prior to notification, and that was dealt with in an earlier clause. However, this particular one that hon. Odoi-Oywelowo is referring to is now combining clause 8, sub-clauses (4) and (5), to give it an appropriate appeal process for any aggrieved person.

I think we all agreed that within 14 days - it could be earlier or less - somebody should be able to appeal to a court which is very near to the place where the meeting is supposed to take place.So I would go along with the proposed amendments from the committee beginning from the deletion of clause 8 (1) (c), which we think is a reasonable proposal. 

I am glad with the proposal to merge sub-clauses (4) and (5) of clause 8 now to read as follows: “A person aggrieved by the decision of the authorised officer under this section may, within 14 days after receipt of the notice under subsection (1), appeal to the magistrates court in his jurisdiction where the meeting was scheduled to take place.” You no longer have to appeal to the Inspector-General of Police but to a court near the place where the meeting was supposed to take place. So, if we can concur with this, I think we have an agreement on clause 8, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, honourable minister. There was another objection that clause 8 amounts to re-enacting section 32(2) of the Police Act which was annulled by the Constitutional Court. Learned Attorney-General, what is the contention on this?

MR JAMES BABA: Well, there was that objection raised especially by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, but I recall very well that I also did draw his attention to clause 32 (1) of the Police Act, which really gives the power to the Police to regulate assemblies, meetings and demonstrations. So, this objection raised by hon. Kivumbi does not apply here because it was not struck off by the Constitutional Court when we went there. 

What was struck off was clause 32(2), which essentially had given powers to the Inspector-General of Police to prohibit, but this particular one deals with regulation, which under the law still persists. So, I request Members to concur with me that we retain this clause dealing with notifications and the powers of the Police to regulate demonstrations and assemblies. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. Learned Attorney-General, do you have any further explanations on this? 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I think the sector minister has put it well. I will give just a brief background. On 27 May 2008, the Constitutional Court issued a ruling in the constitutional petition of Muwanga Kivumbi v the Attorney-General annulling section 32(2) of the Police Act. This particular section previously empowered the IGP to prohibit public assemblies or demonstrations where the assemblies or demonstrations posed a likelihood of breaching the law. 

As a result of the annulment of section 32(2) of the Police Act, the Police no longer has the power to prohibit a procession or assembly on a public road or street or at any place or public resort, even where the Inspector-General of Police has reasonable grounds to believe that the assembly or procession is likely to cause a breach of the peace. Therefore, this ruling created a gap in the management of assemblies and public gatherings, making it very difficult for the Police to maintain law and order and to preserve peace at public gatherings and events. That is why this Bill we are debating is very important; it will create an avenue for regulating assemblies, gatherings and demonstrations. 

When you look at clause 1 of section 32 of the Police Act, it talks of the power to regulate assemblies and processions and specifically, as the minister mentioned, clause 1 of this section was saved. It says, 
“(1) Any officer in charge of police may issue orders for the purpose of-
(a) regulating the extent to which music, drumming or a public address system may be used on public roads or streets or at occasion of festivals or ceremonies; 
(b) directing the conduct of assemblies and processions on public roads or streets or at places of public resort and the route by which and the times at which any procession may pass.”

Essentially, what the Constitutional Court did was to annul the absolute powers of the Police to prohibit these processions but saved the power to regulate. You can regulate with benchmarks. As you may notice, these benchmarks are enshrined in clause 8 of this Bill and this is why Government agrees with the committee that clause 8(1) (c) should be struck off. It says, “for any other reasonable cause”. This implies that this regulatory body has got to invoke her wisdom or sense of judgement in deciding whether a procession should go on. This is why we are retaining (a) and (b); these are the benchmarks. 

The benchmark is: “Upon receipt of a notice under section 7, where it is not possible to hold the proposed public meeting, for the reason that-
(a) 	notice of another public meeting, on the date, at the time and at the venue proposed has already been received by the authorised officer; or 
(b) 	the venue is considered unsuitable for the purposes of crowd and traffic control or will interfere with other lawful business.”

Unfortunately, those who said that (b) contravenes or goes contrary to the Constitutional Court ruling were stopping at the word “unsuitable” but you must read unsuitability in terms of “for purposes of crowd and traffic control” or “will interfere with other lawful business”. So, these are the benchmarks. These no longer give the Police absolute power to prohibit. Even if the decision of this Police officer has got to be challenged, a person would actually have to prove any of these grounds by way of evidence. I hope, Mr Chairman, I am understood. In other words, I do not see any contradiction with this proposal in terms of the ruling given by the Constitutional Court. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think that is clear and we can now proceed to process clause 8. I put the question that paragraph (c) of sub-clause 8(1) be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that sub-clauses (3), (4) and (5) be deleted and replaced with what has been read - “A person aggrieved by the decision of the authorised officer under this section may, within 14 days after receipt of the notice under subsection (1), appeal to the magistrate’s court in whose jurisdiction the meeting was scheduled to take place.” In other words, this proposition now replaces sub-clauses (4) and (5). Is that correct? I put the question to the deletion of sub-clauses (4) and (5).

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the replacement of that new sub-clause (4) in the terms I have just read. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, before we move to clause 9, we are proposing a new clause 9 to deal with spontaneous public meetings. If you recall some Members raised issues of when they go to their constituencies and then supporters and well-wishers come to greet them; how can that be handled under this Bill?

We thought it prudent and we discussed it here at length, that it was necessary to make a provision to deal with spontaneous meetings which do not fall into the strict meaning of public order management. I would like to read it, although it is fairly long. It is contained in the paper I circulated earlier, entitled “Responses to the Committee’s Report by the Minister of State for Internal Affairs”. For those without copies, I still have some and we could have them distributed so that Members can follow me.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, will that insertion be before Part III?

MR JAMES BABA: It will be before the new clause 9.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In other words, that will be before Part III. Part III will run with the existing clause 9, so it will be part of II.

MR JAMES BABA: Yes, it will part of II. That is correct.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: For the record, you need to read the whole thing.

MR JAMES BABA: Okay, it will be part of Part II and it will be a new clause 9, following clause 8, which we have just adopted. It will read as follows: 
“Spontaneous Public Meetings
(1) 	The notification required under section 7 shall not apply to a spontaneous public meeting. 

(2) 	An authorised officer may direct any person participating in a spontaneous meeting to disperse where-
(a) notice of another public meeting, at the same venue, date and time has already been received by the authorised officer; or 
(b) the venue is considered unsuitable for purposes of traffic and crowd control orwill interfere with other lawful business. 

(3) For the purposes of this section, a spontaneous public meeting means an unplanned, unscheduled or unintended public meeting.”

The justification for this new provision is: to cater for unforeseen and unplanned meetings and how these meetings can be handled in case participants become unruly or they are being held in an unsuitable venue. The document is being circulated. You will find this at the bottom of page 5. I beg to submit.

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, I thank the minister for coming up with this new clause 9 because as Members may recall, the problem most Members of Parliament had as they were debating was that as they go to visit their constituents, they do not plan meetings. They go and park somewhere and within a few minutes, their constituents gather and they have to address them as well as listen to their issues. They were worried that the Police would use that as a meeting that was organised, and that a meeting of that nature would therefore be unlawful under the original clause 7. 

This proposal would, therefore, give a window of hope to some of us who were worried that a Member who has a spontaneous meeting would have problems, save for the new clause 9(2) (a), in a situation where the spontaneous meeting has taken place where a prior organised meeting of which the Police was notified is scheduled and therefore that spontaneous meeting would have to be dispersed. Also in (b), where the venue is unsuitable; for example, you are walking in a market and within a few minutes, your constituents gather around you demanding for you to address them. In that case, that would be unacceptable and the meeting would have to be dispersed. So I think this is a proposal that Members should embrace because it caters for unforeseen, unplanned and unscheduled meetings that we normally encounter when we travel to our constituencies. Thank you.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, just to restate the obvious; first, we as the House demanded that the minister comes up with this provision and he dutifully did. Secondly, as a committee, we looked at it and found that it conforms to the principles we had already passed in clause 7. It adds value to this piece of legislation. I, therefore, encourage you to support it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that the new proposed clause as read by the minister becomes part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose amendments to clause 9 by way of deletion of clause 9(1) (b), sub-clause (2) and sub-clause (3). The justification is that these powers are adequately catered for under clause 10(2) (f). When we get to clause 10(f), the minister has amendments that we shall concede to. I think he agreed with that position. 

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, I thank hon. Odoi-Oywelowo but I did not agree to that position. I would like to retain clause 9 as it is because clause 9, unlike clause 10, deals with the powers of the Police and clause 10 deals with the duties of the Police. These are two different responsibilities under the same Police. So I request that we retain clause 9 as it is. 

Clause 9 is specifically to ensure that the Police keep a watchful eye in their role to detect and prevent crime. These provisions in clause 9 specifically deal with the detection and prevention of crimes before they occur. So, I would like to plead with the committee chairperson that we retain clause 9 as it is. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, there was also a letter dated 6 May 2013 and signed by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi. The amendment he proposes in clause 9 is that it should be deleted, and he gives justification. What explanation did you give because you had a copy of this letter?

MR BABA: Yes, I did and I also discussed with him. I still maintain that we retain the powers given to the Police under clause 9 for the reasons I have already given.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, the view of the committee was that we retain sub-clause (1) and that would basically empower a Police officer to disperse public meetings held contrary to this Act. If you may permit me to read (b) verbatim -“the public meeting is one which, having regard to the rights and interests of persons who participate in that public meeting, poses a clear, present or imminent danger of breach of the peace or public order.”

We thought that if you read this together with 10(2) (f),this would be sufficient. Clause 10(2)(f) empowers the Police to disperse defiant or unruly crowds at a public meeting, where the police officer has reasonable grounds to believe that a breach of the peace is likely to occur or if a breach of the peace has occurred or is occurring, in order to prevent violence, restore order and preserve peace. 

In answer to the minister’s position that one deals with powers and the other deals with duties, there is a very thin line between the powers of the Police and the duties of the Police. I cannot fathom the fundamental difference between what we empowered them to do and what we give them as their duties. I really do not see the difference. If the minister insists that he needs this badly, we would probably have to put it to vote.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, you had enough time to-

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has come a long way with me on this Bill and Chairman Tashobya also spoke to me at length. I remember having visited my notes here and maybe I can give in now that we can accept deletion of clause 9-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The whole clause?

MR JAMES BABA: Sub-clause (1) (b), but (2) and (3) would remain. If the chairman could accept, we could only delete 9(1) (b) but 9(1) (a), (2), (3) and the rest would remain. I beg to submit.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I concede, Mr Chairman, that we can retain (2) and (3).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is for deletion of 9(1) (b). I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes a couple of amendments to clause 10. In sub-clause (1), we propose to insert the word “before” immediately after the word “order”. We further propose to insert the words, “and after” immediately after the word “during” but before the letter “a”. The justification is: to widen the Police responsibility to extend to before, during and after a public meeting.

In sub-clause (f)-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we deal with that? That is easy to process. Honourable members, are we together on this? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, in paragraph (f) of sub-clause(2), the committee instructed me to adopt the minister’s proposal, which reads as follows: “disperse defiant or unruly crowds or individuals at a public meeting, in order to prevent violence, restore order and preserve the peace.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is clause 10(2) (f). You are proposing deletion of what is in the Bill and its replacement by what you have just read. It is redrafting, but we have to delete what is in (f) right now in the Bill and replace it with the proposed (f) as read by the chairperson. I put the question to that.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, in 10(2) (f), the committee’s amendment to substitute the word “crowds” with the word “individuals” is okay. However, when you continue reading, “disperse defiant or unruly crowds or individuals…” I would rather we retained the word, “crowds” but improve it by adding the word “individuals”.“Disperse defiant or unruly crowds or individuals…” I do not know whether you cannot have individuals who are not a crowd. In my opinion, two individuals do not constitute – (Interjections) -No, the amendment-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We are looking at the minister’s amendment.

MR RUHINDI: Okay, we shall go with that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The minister’s amendment is to the effect that (f) would read, “disperse defiant or unruly crowds or individuals at a public meeting in order to prevent violence, restore order and preserve the peace.” That is the one the committee has agreed to now.

MR RUHINDI: I concede on that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, can I put the question to that amendment in 10(2) (f), that we delete what is in the Bill and substitute it for what the minister read?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Rt Hon. Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 11 by deletion. The justification is that the provision is already made under section 28 of the Police Act, Cap. 303 of the laws of Uganda, and therefore, this clause is redundant. I beg to move.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, clause 11 deals with the use of firearms by a police officer. As the chairman says, we concede and accept the committee amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 11, as it stands in the Bill, be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, deleted.

Clause 12
MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairperson, the committee had made proposals but when we interfaced with the minister, we agreed that we adopt the amendment of the minister in sub-clause (1) (b), which is to delete the current (1) (b) and replace it with the following: “inform all participants of the traffic or assembly plan and provide a sufficient number of stewards proportionate to the number of participants in a public meeting who shall be clearly identified with nametags.” 

The justification is: to eliminate the obligation upon the organiser of a public meeting or his or her agent to provide a specific number of stewards who should clearly be identified with nametags. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is the amendment. The amendment is in respect of clause 12(1) (b), that we delete the existing (b) in the Bill and replace it with what the chairman has just read. I now put the question to that amendment.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Sorry, Mr Chairman. We have further proposals in clause 12 (1) (c) –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, I was still putting the question for the adoption of the amendment. I now put the question for the adoption of the amendment proposed in respect of clause 12(1) (b), in terms read out by the chairman of the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 12(1) (c) by adding at the beginning of it the words “co-operate with the Police to.” The justification is: to ensure that there isco-operation between the organisers and the Police to ensure the elimination of firearms at public meetings.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, amendment accepted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 12(1) (d) by deletion. The justification is that is it difficult to enforce.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, we would like to attempt a redrafting of sub-clause (1) (d) to read as follows: “ensure that statements made to the media and public by the organiser or his or her agent at a public meeting do not conflict with any law.” We think this is very important so that individual organisers or their agents adhere to the laws. That is the new formulation we would like to replace what is in the original Bill with. I beg to submit.

MRODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, it makes sense and I am tempted to proceed because the only duty it imposes on the organiser is to ensure that what is said at a public meeting does not breach the law. Since there is already a law laying down prohibitions, then probably why not; I concede, Mr Chairman.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I can hear some bit of murmurs, but you see, the way the original expression had been put – “ensure that statements made to the media and public do not conflict with any law” – was too broad. Here is an organiser, here is an agent and they are to ensure that whatever anyone involved in the procession or demonstration says does not conflict with any law. 

In criminal law you have to establish two major ingredients, the actus reus, which is the act, and the mensrea, the intention. The two must be present. By the time you get it at this level, from the way it is worded in the Bill, it is very difficult to point at any particular person for having committed a crime with these two ingredients in mind. That is why we are pinning the responsibility that this should only be attributed to the organiser. By the way, in any case, it is trite - it is common sense, and also for avoidance of doubt - that if this organiser or agent makes statements to the media and public that conflict with any law, that person will be brought to account.

In my opinion, therefore, this has been made better. In any case, it is really for the avoidance of doubt; when we are enacting a law of this nature, we are trying to communicate to those people who will be participating in some of these activities that they should not do a, b, c, d.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just want to seek clarification from the Attorney-General on how the agents of the organisers will be identified. I can agree to the amendment up to the organisers because those are very easy to identify because whenever they are arranging these meetings, they register with the Police to ask for permission. However, for the agents, I donot know how to go about that. Will these people we are talking about have to move with nametags or will the organisers be required to register their agents with the Police?

MR JAMES BABA: In the Bill, somewhere we talk about stewards and agents that the organiser will be working with in organising the demonstration, assemblies and so on. Those are the ones specifically mentioned in this phrase. So, when you organise a meeting, your stewards who will be helping you in doing that work are the ones we are tasking to take responsibility.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. If the minister in his explanation is interchanging the words “agents” and “stewards”, why don’t we just say “agents/stewards”?He has consistently used the word “stewards” instead of “agents”.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: If I can hazard an explanation; if anybody alleges that a person who breached the law at a rally organised by me, for example, is my agent, it is that person’s duty at law to prove that that person is my agent. It is never your duty to prove that that person is not your agent. It is the duty of the person who alleges. So, it is a very safe provision, in my view.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, would the phrase “or his or her agent”, impose an obligation to have the list of these agents also made available? If so, wouldn’t they then become organisers, in which case the word “organiser” would capture the entire meaning?

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, just a while ago, we adopted clause 12(1) (b), which reads thus: “inform all participants of the traffic or assembly plan and provide a sufficient number of stewards proportionate to the number of participants in a public meeting who shall be clearly identified with nametags.” Those, I believe, will be his or her agents as the organiser.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister and the chairperson of the committee. Yes, I am a member of the committee, but I beg your indulgence. Supposing an agent is bought, what happens? We all know that in the political arena, some people may be bought - supposing someone purports to be my agent and makes statements that conflict with the law, will I be responsible?

Secondly, I am aware of the principle that ignorance of the law is no defence; how fair are we to expect every Ugandan to know all the provisions of the law that people will not make statements that conflict with the law? Would it not be fairer to say that statements of this nature should not, for example, incite the public? 

MS AMODING: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also want to add my voice to that component and seek clarification. What I seehere is that adding an agent of a politician might become problematic for many of us in future, especially if you are in a battle politically. Of course, you know in this politics anything can happen. Your opponent can influence even your own agent that you really trust, and he can be given something to influence him to do something against you. He will stand in this meeting and speak and make allegations and some other things which are contrary to the law; are these statements going to be directly associated with you, the main organiser of this activity and meeting? That can become a very big problem. 

Here I am, Amoding, chief convener of this meeting, and I have a trusted agent who for some reason, maybe he is falling out with your team, is going to use this as an opportunity to bring you down. This can happen. If a Member of Parliament is fighting another, you can use any mechanism to get your enemy down in politics. So, I think this is a very sensitive provision for all of us politicians here. You might trust that person but he will come and speak in that meeting and these statements will be directly associated with you, even when you do not agree with what he stated. So, I need clarification on how we can be protected from this kind of incident.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, it is very difficult for me to control the words coming out of the mouth of another person; that we impose a punishable obligation on me might be asking a bit too much. 

MR BAKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also seek further clarification. As a committee, we have conceded to the amendment but it does no harm to fine-tune it further. I want the minister to clarify further. For sure, all of us at some point can make statements that conflict with the law but sometimes we go unpunished. To put such a provision for the agent or the organiser who just makes statements that conflict with the law, and then there is a follow up and the law catches up with them, would be applying the law selectively. 

Surely, we all know that at one time or another, either through ignorance or unthought-out statements, you could conflict with the law without really causing much havoc. Wouldn’t it be better if you qualified your amendment by taking on hon. Jovah Kamateeka’s proposal that the issue should be making statements that breach public peace? This is because, anywhere you make those statements, whether you are at a public meeting or not, the law will surely follow you and catch up with you. So, our interest should be in maintaining public peace. So, you would be better off deleting, “conflict with any law” but ensuring that the statements made do not cause a breach of public peace.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just want to see whether the minister could probably agree that this burden of making statements that can incite the public can be restricted to the organisers so that we leave out the words “his or her agent”. As such, the organiser knows that he or she has the obligation to make sure that they do not do that.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, I have heard the pleas. I hope this will be helpful. We can leave out “or his or her agent at a public meeting”. I hope hon. Kamateeka can live with the rest now. Even if you incite the public, even if it is going to be a breach of the public peace, it still has to relate with conflicting with any law. So, I can concede on removal of “or his or her agent” so that the sub-clause will now read as follows: “ensure that statements made to the media and the public by the organiser at a public meeting do not conflict with any law.” I beg to submit.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay? I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we have a proposal to amend clause 12(1) (e) by substituting the words “6.00 p.m.” with the words “agreed time”. The justification is that the organisers of a public rally or meeting can agree with the Police at what time they want the meeting to be concluded peacefully. Paragraph (e) in the Bill reads as follows: “ensure that the public meeting is concluded peacefully before 6.00 p.m.”We are saying it should read as follows: “ensure that the public meeting is concluded peacefully at an agreed time.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Would that be in consonance with what we passed in clause 7? 

MR JAMES BABA: Exactly, Mr Chairman. Under clause 7(2) (b) we agreed on between 7.00 a.m. and 6.00 p.m. and that is the one we would like to import to this amendment brought by the chairman now. I understand time could be impossible to agree on so, let us go with what we agreed upon earlier onso that we limit it to between 7.00 a.m. and-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Was it 6.00 p.m.? That is what we agreed? I think we need to be consistent with that one. Is there any other amendment on clause 12?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, with respect to 12(1) (h), the committee proposes to delete the entire paragraph and replace it with the following: “in co-operation with the Police, undertake measures provided for under section 12 to ensure that there is no loss to a person or damage to property as a result of holding a public meeting.” The justification is that it is not possible for every organiser of a demonstration to ensure that no loss or damage whatsoever is caused by the participants.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You are departing from the responsibility to compensate to this new arrangement now. What is the justification for that? You are taking away the duty to compensate and now you are proposing what would stop events that would lead to destruction of property. What happens if properties are actually destroyed?  

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Chairman, I think this is overstretching the capacity of the organiser because damage or loss may occur as a result of factors beyond the control of the organiser- natural factors like weather, theft, ill health. I think this one now makes the whole affair very complicated. I would propose that we delete that clause.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, we need to look at the proposals by the minister on page 7 of the document he gave us. He says that the paragraph has been redrafted and incorporated as a new sub-clause 12(3) and I think (4). He says, “insert immediately after sub-clause (2) the following new sub-clauses…”

So, on page 11 of the Bill, after (2) above, the minister is proposing two new sub-clauses. The first one is (3) which says, “A person who contravenes this section commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 24 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding 12 months or both.”

The second one is (4),“A person convicted of an offence under subsection (3) shall pay compensation to a party or person who has suffered loss or damage as a result of the conduct of the convicted person.”

The justification is that liability should fall upon a person who does not fulfil his or responsibilities as provided for under this section. Two, responsibility to pay compensation for damaged property or goods as a result of the chaos at the public meetings should fall upon any person who through his or her conduct at the public meeting causes the damage.

I really do not know, Mr Chairman, why we should be afraid of this provision; in any case, this is after conviction. You have been convicted, you have been found wanting, you have caused damage, you have caused mayhem and you are in a position to compensate this person who has actually lost his property; I do not see why not. So the idea was to subsume (h) of 12 into the minister’s proposed (3) and (4).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In other words, (h) should be deleted.

MR RUHINDI: In other words (h) should be deleted and subsumed in the (3) and (4) of the proposals by the minister.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, I think the proposal of the minister is superior and it is very convincing. The responsibility to compensate is only after a conviction and the standard of proof in criminal matters is much higher than even in a civil matter. So I will concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that paragraph (h) of sub-clause 12(1) be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MAGYEZI: I propose an amendment on (1) (g) that will replace the word “co-ordinate” with “co-operate”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Where is that?

MR MAGYEZI: Clause 12(1) (g). We replace the word “co-ordinate” with the word “co-operate” because the co-ordinating in terms of the Police force, I thought, is technical. What is required of an organiser is to co-operate with the Police.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, that is 12(1) (g),to replace the word “co-ordinate” with the word “co-operate”. Minister, do you agree with this?

MR JAMES BABA: It is a very good proposal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that the word“co-ordinate” be deleted and in its place put the word “co-operate”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is a new proposed sub-clause (3) and sub-clause (4) in the terms read by the Attorney-General, but that is what is in the Bill; how do we vote on it?

MR JAMES BABA: Clause 12(1) (e) was amended to read, “to ensure that a public meeting is concluded between 7.00 a.m. and 6 p.m.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I see that is to go back to clause 7. Can I put the question to that amendment to make it similar to clause 7 which was passed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, there are proposals for the insertion of new sub-clauses (3) and (4) in the terms read by the learned Attorney-General. Can I put the question to that?

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, on the word “co-ordinate” under 12(1) (g), I thought this is at the planning stages when the organiser is making arrangements and wants the Police to be in the know. Is that co-ordination or co-operation?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We can use both words.

MR WERIKHE: That is why I am perturbed by just the word “co-operate”. I think here, co-operation would be when you are already in it and I think the Police want you to do a, b, c and d and you must co-operate. However, at the planning stage, actually you want the Police to know how you are going to go about organising, working hand in hand with them. I thought this word “co-ordination” is fine.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, in view of that, I propose that we use the two words -“be present at the public meeting, co-ordinate and co-operate with the Police to maintain peace and order.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the new sub-clauses (3) and (4) be adopted by this House to constitute part of clause 12.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chair, we propose to amend clause 13 by deletion of the entire clause. The justification is that the clause is redundant since it reproduces the provisions of sections 40 of the Police Act, Cap. 303,Laws of Uganda.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 13 be deleted from the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, deleted.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chair, we propose to amend clause 15 in sub-clause (1) by substituting the word “tranquillity” with the word “order” and by deletion of the words, “at which it is reasonable to suppose that more than twenty-five persons will be present unless a permit has been obtained by the person or persons concerned.” The justification is that the clause imposes very stringent restrictions on the enjoyment of the constitutionally guaranteed freedoms and rights under Article 29 of the Constitution. 

In sub-clause (2)-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we deal with that first?

MR JAMES BABA: I concede, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal is to substitute the word “tranquillity” with the word “order”. Also, the last part of that sub-clause, “at which it is reasonable to suppose that more than twenty-five persons will be present unless a permit has been obtained by the person or persons concerned” is proposed to be deleted. So I put the question to the substitution of the word “tranquillity” with the word, “order”. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the deletion of the phrase as read in the last bit of sub-clause (1) of clause 15. I put the question for the deletion.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we also propose to delete sub-clauses (2) to (9).The justification is that the provisions are already contained in Section 35 of the Police Act.  

MR JAMES BABA: I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal is for the deletion of the rest of the sub-clauses - (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8) and (9) - of clause 15. In other words, we only retain the remaining bit of sub-clause (1) to constitute clause 15. I put the question to the deletion of those sub-clauses. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to insert immediately after sub-clause (1) a new sub-clause (2) to read as follows: “A statutory instrument made under this provision shall, before taking effect, be laid before Parliament by way of a motion for a resolution of Parliament approving it.” The justification is: to ensure that Parliament scrutinises the powers exercised by the minister that affect the rights of the citizens. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But where are you giving the power under clause 15? Is there any authority given to the minister to – oh! by statutory instrument?  

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: By statutory instrument.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay - “…be laid before Parliament for approval.” That is what it will require. Yes, honourable minister.

MR JAMES BABA: This time, I have some difficulties with this proposal. First of all, these gazetted areas are normally valid for only one year and they have to renew them. 

Secondly, the issuance of statutory instruments lies with the Executive and the powers of the minister. Now, if you want it to be brought to Parliament for scrutiny and approval, you know our procedures for approval in Parliament can take so long; do you really want us to do this? I suspect this is one of the powers that the minister may even never exercise. So, I request that we do not insist on this if it is not so pressing. Laying it before Parliament will be cumbersome. That is what I am saying.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, the issue here is that they are giving you the powers to do the details but for it to become functional, they want to retain the powers as Parliament. For you, you can go and do your survey because Parliament cannot go do surveys in the villages of Omoro to find out which part should be declared as such. However, once you have now determined that such a place should be gazetted or whatever, Parliament now needs to take the decision. That is what they are suggesting. In other words, they are not giving you the power to do it on your own; they want that power retained.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, you have almost said it all, but what Parliament is saying here is that we cannot give you a blank cheque. You say that the power to make a statutory instrument is the responsibility of the minister, that is correct, but the power to legislate is with Parliament.We only delegate you to do that function and we are at liberty to regulate that function. 

We are saying that in case the minister is unreasonable and decides to gazette the entire country, then what happens? If the entire Kampala is gazetted or the entire Jinja District, what happens? In that case, we would require you to bring that instrument and lay it here as a way of checking your powers, which is within our rights. We are not in any way blocking you from doing your work but just doing this as a regulatory measure not to give you a blank cheque.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Those similar provisions are in the Amnesty Act as amended and several other laws. 

MR AYOO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I wish to urge the minister, just like the chairperson of the committee has put it, that this is a matter that affects the rights of the people. If the minister is making a statutory instrument in good faith, then there would be need to bring it to Parliament for approval.

I also know that Parliament may not take that long; his major fear is that sometimes Parliament takes long to take decisions on things like Bills, but the minister should know that it would be now the responsibility of the minister and Parliament to take fast decisions to approve this. I think there should be no fear, and I would ask the minister to concede and we proceed without much debate on this. I thank you.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I think the contention is whether a statutory instrument is subject to approval by Parliament. I want the Chairman to guide.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, some instruments are. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: If it is your guidance, then it is okay. 

MR JAMES BABA: Well, I will not let down my supporters. (Laughter)I concede. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So a statutory instrument made under this section shall, before taking effect, be laid before Parliament for approval. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We propose to delete the whole of clause 16 and the justification is that it is already catered for under clause 15. I beg to move.

MR JAMES BABA: I propose that we redraft clause 16 (1) to read as follows: “A person shall not hold a public meeting in any of the areas specified in Schedule 3”.So clause 16 would specifically address where the restricted areas are as specified in Schedule3 of the Bill. 

The justification is that this Bill is in respect of public meetings and not entry by the organisers or participants into these places. We do not have provision for entry of organisers or participants into these restricted areas. These are restricted areas so there should be no meetings in those areas. So we need to specify this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable chairperson, I think it is clear. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, the position of the committee was that under clause 15, we are giving the minister power to prohibit entry of persons or the convening of public meetings by any person to any particular area of Uganda where he considers that in public interest and in the interest of maintaining law and order, it should be restricted. Also under sub-clause (2), we have required that he lays a statutory instrument before Parliament for approval. That would sufficiently cater for all the provisions of clause 16 because in that statutory instrument, he would then include all such areas that he thinks should be restricted and Parliament would have to approve it and he would then implement the law. That was the argument of the committee. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, there is a difference. In clause 16, those places are already restricted from the word go; nobody has to say anything about them. Places like Parliament, State House and the state lodges, do not even think about it; do not even bring it to Parliament because it is Parliament taking the decision that those areas are restricted. The authority you are giving the minister under 15 is about any other place other than these in the schedule.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, I think the problem here is that the committee had a completely different view. We had proposed to delete the entire schedule as subjected to parliamentary approval. However, if it is the view of the House that we should reserve these areas, then I will concede to the minister’s amendment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, can you restate that amendment.

MR JAMES BABA: Clause 16 would read as follows: “A person shall not hold a public meeting in any of the areas specified in Schedule 3”.In the Bill, the restricted areas are Parliament and its precincts, State House, state lodges countrywide, international airports and Courts of Judicature. Those are the restricted areas in Schedule 3. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If he or she does, what happens?

MR JAMES BABA: Then the law will apply.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: How? Learned Attorney-General, is there a general penalty clause or sanction clause in the Bill?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, I have seen through the list of restricted areas and I have realised that international airports are one of them. There are certain events that can cause a lot of excitement and eventually gather very big crowds and in the end, it can result into spontaneous public meetings. I wonder whether in such restricted areas, spontaneous public meetings can be allowed. In case they are not, then what happens if such events happen? When Kiprotich came back after getting the gold medal, for example, very many people were there and it was a big crowd. He interacted with so many people. These are now restricted areas; so, what happens?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Was it inside the airport? Did they go inside the airport where the planes land?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Yes, Mr Chairman; maybe at the exit and not where the planes land. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, the airport has places gazetted where actually they say, from this point you need some authority to enter, and that is a restricted place. Just like State House; you can go and play your games outside the fence but the minute you come inside the fence, the rules change. Just like Parliament here; you can go to the street there and do whatever you want but the minute you enter the precincts of Parliament, the rules change because to access the precincts of Parliament, you need to go through the gate and there are rules on who can be admitted. That is the kind of restriction they are talking about here. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I just want to say that when they say “in the precincts of Parliament”, I think it also works with the precincts of the airport or when you get into the airport boundaries. But we can demonstrate outside and I remember when Kiprotich returned, they stopped us near CAA. So, that is where you stop and then proceed with your processions. 

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, there can be a qualification to this. The minister is avoiding the construction as it was in the Bill, ends with “unless he or she has obtained permission from an authorising officer.” Why don’t you allow the construction to go on up to the end such that those who want to access those areas can go to the authorising officer and seek permission?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us get a restatement first.

MR JAMES BABA: I think hon. Baka has made an improvement that we continue with the construction under the original Bill -“A person shall not enter any of the places prescribed in Schedule 3 unless he or he has obtained permission from an authorised officer.” I think I can live with that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, are you going back to what is in the Bill?

MR JAMES BABA: Yes, because the committee had recommended complete deletion.

MR YAGUMA: Mr Chairman, under Schedule3, on restricted areas, I want to propose that we add hospitals because these people are fond of going to such places and disturbing the sick and pretend to show sympathy in mortuaries when people have died.

MR MUWUMA: Mr Chairman, I am compelled to agree with hon. Yaguma because I remember in 2006, our colleague was arrested in Mbale when he had gone to address patients and medical workers. There was fracas and confusion in the hospital. The same thing happened in Mulago recently with politicians taking politics to the hospitals. So, I think he has a point in saying that we add hospitals to the list. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, can we deal with that when we come to the schedules. After that improvement, is there any other?

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, the spirit behind the restricted areas as they are is that on any day, to access those areas you would need permission whereas in the hospital you will just go in. So, the minister has powers under the statutory instrument, which he will bring under this specific law –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we defer that to when we come to the schedule?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, in respect of the punishments, I was inclined to look at clause 7 (4), which we have already passed. There is a way we must have coached it, but in my opinion sub clause (4) is more or less broad. It says, “An organiser or his or her agent who holds a public meeting and fails to comply with the conditions under this Act…” – so, it is really broad –“…commits an offence of disobedience of statutory duty and is liable on conviction to the penalty for that offence under section 116 of the Penal Code Act.”The punishment under section 116 of the Penal Code Act is two years. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Learned Attorney-General, still that would mean that if that is going to be a general clause, then it has to stand out of that clause, or you restate it differently in the general clause.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I think the best thing is to agree with you that we can restate this same clause as 16(2) – more or less the way it is drafted here - and you are still subjected to the same punishment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, can you proceed with it. It will now be sub-clause (3). 

MR RUHINDI: Sub-clause (3)- “A person who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act commits an offence of disobedience of statutory duty and is liable on conviction to the penalty for that offence under section 116 of the Penal Code Act.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So you are now making it general; so we should now take it out of clause 16?

MR RUHINDI: Yes, take it out of clause 16 and make it clause 17.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. There is clause 17 proposed here. Have we finalised with clause 16 now, so that we take an amendment to do a general penalty clause?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, we want to have that amendment circulated because it is talking of contravening and the penalty under the statutory order. I did not follow it exactly and yet it appears to be fundamental. So instead of creating clause 16 and 17, we need to know the extent of that provision and we come to terms with it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, what they are trying to say is that if we leave clause 16 as it is, there are no sanctions. So he was proposing that we adopt the phrasing, which we adopted in clause 7(4). However, the one in that clause only relates to notice of public meetings, so there should be a general penalty clause for other violations of the Act under the Act. That is why this general clause is now being proposed. The terms are the same as in clause 7(4).

MR RUHINDI: I think his problem is the absence of the Penal Code from his hands, which I have. Let me read it for you because it is just a short provision. This is 116, and in any case it is not new; we have even already adopted the same principle in the penalty in clause 7 of the Bill which we passed. It says, “Any person who wilfully disobeys any written law by doing any act which it forbids, or by omitting to do any act which it requires to be done, and which concerns the public or any part of the public, commits a misdemeanour and is liable, unless it appears from such written law that it was the intention of the legislature to provide some other penalty for such disobedience, to imprisonment for two years.”

So, all we are saying is that a person who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act – of course meaning without prejudice to those ones which are already specifically provided for – is liable upon conviction to imprisonment for a term of two years. That is what the Penal Code says.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it clearer now? Let us hear from Igara.

MR MAGYEZI: The clarification I am seeking from the Attorney-General is: the spirit under the Public Order Management Bill was to tighten the penalty and make it more deterrent. Now under the Penal Code, there is a clause which you read which says, “unless in the other law there is a reason to provide special penalties”; don’t you think that in this case it applies? Otherwise, if you leave it hanging like that, we shall only be providing penalties as provided for in the Penal Code and yet the spirit in this particular Bill is to tighten the penalties.  

MR RUHINDI: This is a very serious punishment, in my opinion; there is even no option of a fine. If the magistrate or a judge gives this to you because you have actually contravened any of the provisions of this Act – Well, this is a policy matter; if you want to stiffen the punishment, you can even recommit clause 7 which we have already passed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, clause 7 is specific to notice.

MR RUHINDI: But it is equally bad. I do not think there is any much difference between that one.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think let us go with the one in the Penal Code.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I beg for your indulgence and that of the minister and honourable members. Any person who contravenes any provision of this Act will be liable to two years’ imprisonment without any alternative. Mr Chairman, does the minister realise that “any provision of this Act” can mean any which you may overlook and you may be inconvenienced here and there?

For Members to put such a provision – I am surprised hon. Magyezi is saying that we needed to even tighten it further. I do not know whether hon. Magyezi has ever been to jail even for just a week to know what it means and to know the consequences of being behind bars for two years. I think we should find some other way because we are all potential detainees and for this Bill which – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you might find solace in the fact that that is a maximum sentence; you could be cautioned. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Even then, Mr Chairman, a maximum of two years! I know that if you spend just a night in jail, the day does not break. However, even then I would not imagine that the spirit of the Public Order Management Bill is to criminalise, and Members, let us not look at this as though we were legislating for others. This should be deleted.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I seek your indulgence. The way we have been proceeding is that you propose and then we weigh your proposal. Now the Attorney-General had referred to the Penal Code – a law that is already in operation - and he is saying that the maximum sentence is two years. So, the judge can give you a sentence of three minutes, two hours or up to a maximum of two years. So it depends on the judge’s discretion. Unless hon. Ssekikubo can propose otherwise, then we are not proceeding.

MR SSEKIKUBO: For that matter, if the intention to be cured was to desist from holding unlawful assembly, I propose 12 hours because that would be enough time to allow the intended meeting to expire.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That would be preventive detention.

MR SSEKIKUBO: The maximum should not exceed 24 hours.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. My heart bleeds when a colleague decides to take the entire House for a joke. Mr Chairman, we have had months reflecting and consulting on this Bill. Is the Member in order to begin taking us as actors, to talk of hours in a law that brains have consulted on? Inspite of the fact that we are about to conclude it, he takes us back that we should begin deleting? Is he in order, Mr Chairman? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the spirit is that we regulate activities of public order in a fair way. Members have concerns and that is why this Bill has stayed for a long time. That spirit should govern us. This Bill is the smallest Bill I have ever handled, - 18 clauses - so let us accommodate each other. We should recognise people’s fears and once they come, we should find ways of making them understand what the situation is. That is the only way we can move forward without difficulties.

MR BAHATI: I think he has moved on. Mr Chairman, I can appreciate the fears of hon. Ssekikubo that for any offence you commit here, you must go inside. There is no other way. I just want to ask the Attorney-General whether if we included a fine - we normally stipulate a fine or something - that can cure this as a window. I think that will make hon. Ssekikubo a bit comfortable.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What is the corresponding currency point to a term of two years? Is it Shs 200,000? Would that be in the spirit of the Bill, learned Attorney-General? You see, because there is already a term of two years, there must be a corresponding fine; would it be reasonable to give the alternative? That is the question you should be addressing. Okay, while the Attorney-General looks at the law, let us hear from the Member from Namutumba.

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We can agree, in principle, to include currency points. The legal people know how to correspond the jail term and the currency points.So can we just agree and then they put it right?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we have to agree on it. If the principle is that you have an option of a fine, then the corresponding one has to be agreed upon.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In clause 12(3), there was an alternative of, “A person who contravenes this section commits an offence and is liable to conviction of a fine not exceeding 24 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding 12 months.” Since we are talking of 24 months, maybe that one can be translated into-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, so that there is consistency. So the alternative would be how many currency points?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: That would be 50.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I would like to associate with my colleague, hon. Nyakikongoro’s proposal of 50 currency points but it should be “or both” - “Two years or 50 currency points or both.” I beg to propose.

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Chairman, I think it is important to remain consistent. If the provision for one year is 24 currency points and a currency point is Shs 20,000 that is Shs 4.8 million. I think if we say two years, then it should be 48 currency points. It is important to understand that this is a maximum. The magistrate or judge would have to give anything lower than that.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, save for the Constitution, I rarely find a law being enacted with a blanket penalty. This Bill of 18 clauses has wide ranging issues right from the commencement, regulation of public meetings, the powers of the Inspector-General of Police, delegation of powers, duties and responsibilities of Police, organisers and the miscellaneous provision.

Mr Chairman, we are making a mistake. We cannot legislate for a blanket penalty of the entire Act because we are providing that contravention of any- Let us look at it. Why are we coming up with such penalties? Which other law have you ever seen that says that contravention of any provision leads to this? Some could necessitate caution, some could necessitate preventive detention, while others still could necessitate varied punishments. Save for the Constitution, there is no other law that I have come across in my life that has a blanket penalty, which says that contravening any provision of the Act will mean two years in jail. We are talking of very many people. Some could be the ring leaders, others could be people who are genuinely without any bad intentions but are just coming to see what is happening. We can cure this.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I think hon. Ssekikubo needs to read and understand the Penal Code because there are many provisions in this law, which do not provide the option of a fine.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, his point is that you are now criminalising every section of the law. 

MR RUHINDI: No, that is not what he is saying.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, that is what he is saying. He is saying you are now making a blanket penalty for all the clauses of the law. That is his point. Please let us try and see if we can resolve this in a shorter way. 

The reason for this proposal was to provide for clause 16, so we can just make this specific to clause 16.In which case, we will have dealt with the issue the Member is raising? Is that okay, honourable member? Yes, that was the understanding, but when you say “provisions of this Act”, it makes him concerned. So, can we make the general thing only for clause 16.

MR RUHINDI: Well, we can make it clause 16(3) and we can say thus: “A person who contravenes the provisions of this section commits an offence and shall be liable, on conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or to a fine not exceeding 48 currency points or to such fine and imprisonment.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, is that better now? Honourable member for Lwemiyaga, I think that deals with the issue you are raising. Can I now put the question to that amendment? I now put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, clause 16(2) reads thus: “The Minister may by statutory instrument made with the approval of Cabinet, amend Schedule 3”. This is inconsistent with clause 15(2) that we have just passed. What actually this means is that –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, just propose that you want it to come back to Parliament. It is as simple as that.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Yes, we propose to amend clause 16(2) to read as follows: “The Minister may, by statutory instrument made with the approval of Parliament, amend Schedule 3.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is it. It is as simple as that. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 16 as amended stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

MR JAMES BABA: Before we go to clause 17, Mr Chairman, I have a new clause 17 after clause 16, which we have just adopted. It features on page 8 of my amendments and it is about concealment of information regarding a public meeting. It reads thus: “A person who knowingly conceals knowledge of a public meeting held or to be held in a public place belonging to or occupied by him or her or over which he or she has control commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 24 currency points or imprisonment of a period not exceeding 12 months or both.”

The justification is that concealment of knowledge about a public meeting should be criminalized and sanctioned. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is clear from the amendment proposed. Can I now put the question to that amendment?

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Chairman, the amendment is good but it does not specify the fact that the person will be concealing knowledge of an illegal meeting. The way it has been framed, itseems like if one conceals knowledge of a legal public meeting, they will be at fault. I think there is need to do some slight amendment to it.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I am sorry I am tempted to seek the indulgence of the minister. This is a new insertion and you are now tending to legislate on a question of conscience - “A person who knowingly conceals knowledge of a public meeting…” What is happening? Whereas we can understand the spirit of the Bill, it is not good to stretch it to this point. “A person who knowingly conceals knowledge of a public meeting held or to be held in a public place…”Imagine, in a public place where a member has no ownership! – (Interjections) – okay, “…held in a public place belonging to…”By the time you talk of a public place – Maybe I do not understand this but when you talk of a public place, then it is already a departure. 

It then continues, “…belonging to or occupied by him…” -Once you occupy a public place, you do not necessarily have to take responsibility for what happens in it. You are there at that time and once you exit, somebody else takes over. So, for you to say, “occupied by him or her or over which he or she has control commits and offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 24 currency points or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 12 months or both”, Mr Chairman, you may have to guide us on this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, is it absolutely necessary, since you did not even remember to include it in the initial Bill?

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, there are places that are accessed by the public like churches, community halls and so on, which are privately owned. If a public meeting takes place in such a venue that belongs to someone and that someone fails to notify, that should be a problem.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. How will I know that actually that meeting is illegal when I own that public place without any notification? I believe that already in the previous clauses there are provisions for seeking for permission to hold a public meeting. So, why should I, who is not concerned with the meeting, be penalized when the culprit should have sought permission to hold a meeting in that public place?

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, hon. Ssekikubo is wondering whether a public place can be owned by someone or by a group of people. The answer is, yes. St Balikuddembe is owned by SLOA under a lease and there are many other public places that are owned by companies and individuals under leasing arrangements. 

However, the clarification I want to seek from the minister is: aren’t we now adding a burden to the people, because the work of the Police is to detect and prevent crime? We are now giving additional responsibility to innocent people who just own these premises to go and do due diligence to find out whether this public gallery that is being talked about has been cleared by the Police. That takes time. One has to go to the Police to find out. Sometimes the police is even uncooperative to give you the information. So, aren’t we burdening this group of people?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, this does not seem to be going well, but I will put the question to this amendment by the –

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, can I make an appeal to the honourable minister. I understand where you are coming from, honourable minister, that the owners of public places should have a duty to notify the Police if a public meeting is going to be held in their premises.However, the problem you will have here is that as it stands, this is completely unenforceable because you will have to go to court to prove that the owner of the public place knew that a meeting was going to be held at their place. How will you prove that knowledge? As a lawyer, I will tell you that this is practically impossible. I plead with you to withdraw this and we move on.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Besides, you are already punishing the person who holds that meeting. 

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, do not say I did not try. I will concede.

Clause 17

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to insert a new sub-clause (4) to read as follows: “Any regulations made under these provisions shall, before taking effect, be laid before Parliament for approval.” That is consistent with all the others we have passed. It is consequential.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we withdraw our amendment. It fell by the wayside.

MR SSEKIKUBO: On, “The minister may, by statutory instrument, with the approval of Cabinet…”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is Parliament. We have changed that already. We amended Schedule 1. No, it is under Schedule2 that we took a decision on restricted areas. Schedule 1 is on currency points. Will they amend currency points with the approval of Parliament? I think that was something that we used to leave to the minister. This is currency points. Do we need Parliament to approve a currency point amendment?

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, from the past Bills, we have always left schedule 1 regarding currency points as it is because we cannot come to Parliament whenever there is need to actually change the currency points.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, it is not something substantial.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I agree entirely, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, I put the question that clause 18 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, agreed to.

The First Schedule, agreed to.

The Second Schedule

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, on the second schedule, I wish to add No. 8 below to say, “Did the organiser obtain consent of the owner of the venue?” So, you just tick “yes” or “no”. This is on that form of notification, which is sent to the Inspector-General of Police. When you send notification to the Police, you fill in all those details, from 1 to 7, and now instead of No. 8,  “Other relevant information”, we want to insert, “Did the organiser obtain consent of the owner of the venue?” and you tick either “yes” or “no”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Did we approve the question of that consent in the main Bill? 

MR JAMES BABA: Yes, we did.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is the point you should make.

MR JAMES BABA: Yes, we did approve that consent. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is where you get your amendment from.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Does it mean that he has abandoned his amendment?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Which one?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Obtaining consent, No. 8?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, he is just now applying principles we approved in the Bill long time ago, that if you are going to use the premises, you need consent of the person who owns the property. That is what we agreed upon last time and we adopted it. So, this is now to add it to the form, that you indicate that there is consent.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I propose that if we passed it elsewhere then we leave it so that it is not part of the standard form.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, when do you indicate to the authorising officer that you have obtained consent under the law?  

MR SSEKIKUBO: That would be between the owner of the venue and the one organising a meeting. This is because there are those venues that could be related or connected in ownership and for that matter, for you to say I need to have the consent on that form I think is being too restrictive. Let us leave it to the organiser because certainly, he would have done so anyway. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable Member for Lwemiyaga, this form is implementing clause 7. You can see on the top of it that it is made under section 7. Now, what does that section 7 say should be the content of the application? Section 7 says you should also obtain consent from the owner of the public place. They are trying to standardise the form so that we do not have to submit too many things. Did you obtain consent of the owner? You tick “yes” or “no”. It is actually in clause 7(3). That is what they are now putting in the standard form that you just fill, because this form is going to be sent to all the places so that you just fill and you send. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, my problem is that if it was as easy as that, why do we want it in the first place? When you look at clause 7, it has its own problems and that is why it took long for members to agree.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I would like to draw the attention of hon. Ssekikubo to clause 7(2) of the Bill. It starts by saying, “The notice referred to in subsection (1) shall be in Form A in Schedule 2 and shall include- (a)…(b)…(c)…”and the minister moved an amendment to include (d). If you look at this paper, just below page 4it says, “in sub-clause (2), insert a new sub-clause (d) as follows: ‘indication of consent of the owner of the premises’.” Does this put the matter to rest?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Can’t it be achieved without necessarily making it mandatory on the form? The form of consent can be indicated. The problem I have, Mr Chairman, is that we are making this law for ourselves but this is for the entire country. There are those who shall be deliberately denied venues to convene meetings and in spite of all this, you are again continuing to make it extremely difficult. I am concerned. Okay, let it be passed elsewhere but allow the form to pass the way it is. You are squeezing it and it is making us feel uncomfortable.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, Form A in Schedule 2 is supposed to simplify section 7 for whoever wants to give notice of a meeting. Section 7 has already been approved with what must go into that application. You remember there was a debate that what form should this take and they said you can also just write if you do not find any forms but you make sure that you make mention of what is in clause 7. So, Form A is now simplifying the process to just put the ingredients of the things that need to go in your application so that you now just fill in the gaps to indicate that it has been done. That is what it is saying. So, it is not inventing anything new by asking if consent was obtained or not and then you say, “Yes” or “No”.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. When you look at clause 7(3), it says, “The notice shall be accompanied by a letter of clearance from the proprietor of the venue or place where the meeting is proposed to take place giving approval of the place to be used for the public meeting.” So already, the application will have an attachment of a letter of approval –(Mr James Baba rose_) - The rules are clear that you ask for clarification or information; you do not just rise while I am still submitting. 

My question is:  what value will you be adding since you have a letter from the proprietor? However, I have no problem with what the minister is proposing – (Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: When you look at question No. 10 on the form, the authorising officer is required to answer the question whether the grounds are free for the public meeting and the only way he can answer that question is through the other question–“has the owner allowed?” That is why I think the minister is right. Before we go to the clause which is for official use only, you who is filling this form before No. 8 should indicate whether the proprietor has agreed or not. It is necessary for final approval.

DR BARYOMUNSI: You are not departing from what I am saying. I was saying that already, we have provided for the proprietor to give a letter.

I also want to suggest that there could be some venues which probably do not require authorisation from the proprietor if he or she is not there. So we could have “yes”, “no” and “not applicable” so that the question is:“Have you got authority?” The answer is “yes”, “no”, or “not applicable”. There could be venues where you do not need to get authorisation from any proprietor and they are public places; we do not have to restrict it to “yes” and “no” only.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman and hon. Ssekikubo, if you may be reminded, this is like you proposed in the oil Bills, that we should have a sample of the agreement so that we are being clear when you are talking about the form. It is in the same spirit.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, with a heavy heart, hon. Bahati knows very well that a standard template was thrown out by his own active participation and now he comes to emphasise it here. Is he in order, knowing that what he is trying to pass had a stillbirth, which he administered and now wants to impose it on me?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is a difference between a template and a standard form. A template is a guide to what you can do but a form means that you must fill it the way it is provided. The template is to guide you on the things such as language.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I was politely saying that if a template was rejected by him, how about this form that you cannot dodge in any way?

MR RUHINDI: With all due respect to hon. Ssekikubo, the best he can do in the circumstances is to propose a recommittal of clause 7. For as long as clause 7 has been passed with Form A and one of the ingredients is indication of consent of the owner of the premises, the best you can do procedurally is to propose a recommittal of this clause. Otherwise, my view is that we are on the right track to have it included in the schedule unless you guide otherwise.

MR SSEKIKUBO: If that is the case, we have already had it in clause 7 so why don’t we let it lie there. Some clearances may not necessarily say “yes” or “no” and the minister is clearly saying “yes” or “no” straightjacket. Why don’t we delete this?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What it is saying is: have you obtained consent from the owner? Then you are the one to say, “Yes, I have” or “No, I have not” or “not applicable”. If it is not applicable, you are the one filling the form and they are asking you whether you have obtained consent then to you it is not applicable because there is nobody to obtain consent from.

MR SSEKIKUBO: For that matter, Mr Chairman, if indeed it is under clause 7 and was put immediately after (c), why are we emphasising it here? I want to get it from you. If it is well catered for here - You are causing this form to be a contested document.

MR JAMES BABA: Let me answer you and hon. Baryomunsi. First of all, under clause 7, section (3) has been deleted because we now provide the details in this form, which hon. Ruhindi referred to as Form A.I will go along with the proposal of hon. Baryomunsi to include “not applicable”. 

In notifying the Police, we all agreed last time that you do not need to write a letter; you notify by filling that Form A. Now one of the requirements, while filling that Form A, is the consent of the owner to you as the organiser applying to the Police. I do not see why this should cause a problem for you.

MS AMODING: Honourable minister, you have read something that just tickled me a little. If you are saying that the organiser does not have to write a letter to notify the Police, what will the evidence be now? Will it be a verbal notification from the owner of the public space? How shall that prove that you have received permission from the owner of the event? I think there will be a problem because if it is just verbal and there has to be a criminal procedure to take effect in case there is a problem, it will be difficult to prove consent to the using of the venue. I do not know whether I am clear.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, why the committee was objecting to this sub-clause (3) was because of unnecessary intimidation, where the owner has got to write to the Police. Now, I like that question because it is very good. They are now leaving you, the organiser, together with the owner of the premises or public place where you are going to hold your function - They do not want to involve the owner and the Police. You go and get your consent in whatever form; whether you want to get it in writing from the owner or verbally, it is up to you. All you need to indicate on the form is whether you have obtained the consent or not.

When the Police officeror whoever is responsible is now doing their investigation, they will go to the owner and tell them, “This person says he got consent from you, is it true?” That, to me, lessens the burden of putting unnecessary strain on the owner of the premises to write to the Police that he or she has now authorised so and so. Really, that is the spirit in which (3) was deleted.

MR SSEKIKUBO: To be candid, now that we have criminalised and made this Act very tight, I can tell you the reason. You can go and see the owner of the venue and he says “yes” but because of some intervention, tomorrow he turns around. You all read in the newspapers; just before passing this Bill, the other day one of the presidents of one of the political parties, Gen. Mugisha Muntu, had booked a venue in Bushenyi but when he went the following morning for the meeting, it was closed. (Mr Magyezi rose_)

You see, hon. Magyezi, you are fond of saying the minster is right. Let me first drive my point home. We saw in the photos people standing outside. Your word is as good as anybody else’s and we have all been involved in these organisations, Members. I wonder what is happening. You go and get consent and agree and when you go back, because of some intervention somebody denies that they gave you consent.

MR MAGYEZI: The honourable member for Lwemiyaga has made a statement which is an error in fact, that the President of FDC had booked a venue in Bushenyi. This is a venue at Katungu Mothers Union but the fact is that he had not. Some of us who were on site checked with the Police and we found that he actually had not booked. Mr Chairman, is it in order for the honourable member to misinform the House and the nation at large that actually the President of FDC was denied entry to a venue he had booked. Is he in order?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I was not in Bushenyi or anywhere near there on that date and so I cannot verify the fact from where I am sitting. I am unable to rule on those facts - not for me.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, even if we leave out that Bushenyi incident, I know it is easy for one to put a tick on “yes” or “no” and they turn around. The minister has mentioned that an investigating Police officer will go to the owner and ask, “Is it true; I can see it here?” Somebody will say “no”, obviously. Once there is some other intervention, what has been a “Yes” will turn to a “No”. That is why I propose - (Interruption)

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Chairman and honourable members, I want to thank the Member for yielding the Floor. If it is a place which is owned either by an individual or an institution, basically if it is a business, I think when one goes and talks to them, they give an invoice and that could also be a form of consent from the owner of the place. 

Also, instead of the Member dragging and keeping us here longer than we should, and yet he came in late, the best thing for him to do is to propose. He should propose, other than keeping the debate going without proposing. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: He has proposed.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: He proposed deletion and so let us vote on that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: He proposed that that particular amendment should not be included. That is what he proposed.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I want to seek the indulgence of Members. It is not only venues but we have all seen people go for talk shows and they want to go on that specified appointed date but they say “No”. Now, if it is business and there is a refund for that, this will be catered for anywhere. So I will seek the indulgence of Members; we have already done the much that we wanted, let us delete this from the Bill. It has been by consensus. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the particular requirement for indication for whether you have obtained consent or not was passed in clause 7 and so it would be proper for it to be accommodated in Form A because clause 7 refers to Form A.  If the Member has an issue with what was passed as requiring consent in clause 7, he will move a motion of recommittal and then we take it out from there and then automatically, it will disappear from the form. I think that will be helpful.  

MR SSEKIKUBO: For that matter, Mr Chairman, before you put the vote, may I propose that we hold onto this matter and we first get other Members since we are even not enough in this House –(Interjections)-There is no quorum. When we are really good in number and we have other Members sit in, we can be able to vote on this. Let us wait for other Members and probably when we have quorum, minds would have changed on this and we do the needful for this country.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there is nothing you can say to improve on this situation.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: The matter is consequential -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, a point has been made in those respects. We need now to stand over this Schedule 2 and then we reconvene another appropriate time and we deal with this matter.  

Did we stand over any other clause of this Bill? There was no clause stood over, so it is just the schedule that is left. We would not even be able to take any further decision on this matter, for example complete the Bill today, because of the nature of the House in the final decision on third reading.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.  


THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “the Public Order Management Bill, 2011” and passed, with amendments, the following clauses: clause 8; a new clause 9 was passed under Part II; clause 9, as amended; clause 10, as amended; clause 11 was deleted; clause 12, as amended; clause 13 was deleted; clause 14 was adopted as it is; clause 15, as amended; clause 16, as amended; clause 17, as amended; clause 18 was adopted as it is; Schedule 1 adopted as it is; and we stood over schedule 2. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FORM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much for pushing this far –

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, earlier on you communicated that we will be reconvening tomorrow but from what I know, we have several committees that will not actually be available. Three of them will be in Munyonyo where the Speaker will preside over the Public Finance Bill and I think other committees will also actually attend to other activities. I do not know whether it will really be possible for us to attend tomorrow at 10.00 O’clock as you had communicated earlier on. I seek your guidance on this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the proposal was to have debate on the State of the Nation Address for two hours tomorrow morning. That was the proposal. It will not require a decision, but Members who want to debate would have the opportunity to debate from 10.00 a.m. to 12.00 a.m. That was the proposal, such that Members who want to contribute tomorrow can have the slot to come and contribute. However, if it is in the Members’ interest that tomorrow we do not convene, we can convene next week on Tuesday. The House is adjourned to Tuesday, 2.00 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 7.46 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 30 July 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)

