Wednesday, 25 July 2012 

Parliament met at 2.17 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:
Mr Birekerawo Nsubuga Mathias.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You are welcome hon. Nsubuga. This place is no new place to you; you know the rules, but it is still my singular pleasure to give to you two instruments that you require in the conduct of your business in this House, while representing the people who have sent you here. I give to you the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda and the Constitution. (Applause) 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable members. I welcome you to this sitting and I welcome the honourable Nsubuga, who is the mugole in the House, but to a House in which he has already been before. So, I am sure he will very quickly be finding his way around and engaging in the business of the House. 

Honourable members, you are aware that tomorrow we will be laying to rest our friend, former Member of Usuk County, Katakwi District at his place where some Members will be travelling. We continue praying with the family that they find the strength to deal with the tragedy, and we also continue praying for this House to find the strength to deal with the problem that we have just suffered.  

We have a lot of business on the Order Paper; there have been pending statements though I see some of them on today - are they there? The only statement that is there which is urgent will be dealt with today; we will deal with the issues that have been raised by the honourable members time and again on the situation in the cattle corridors of Uganda. You are welcome to this sitting.

STATEMENT ON FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE

2.25
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali):  Mr Speaker, I would like to pray that we stand over this item until such a time when the respective Minister arrives.  I believe that there is something that has happened to the minister though I don’t know what exactly it is. But I would pray that we stand over this item so that the House is not delayed.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of procedure. This matter came up yesterday and there was a ruling. Really, the minister and indeed the government was aware that this was going to be business on the Order Paper. The Leader of Government Business has not given any explanation as to why the minister is not in the House.

Is it not time for this House to take a tougher stand on the ministers who fail in their responsibilities in addressing the issues raised by the House? We cannot sit here and wait for the minister. If a directive has been made, the minister should be in the Chamber, and if he is not in the Chamber, then the Leader of Government Business should be able to explain to us why the minister is not here. We have no time to waste, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Katuntu. I received the copy of the statement this morning in my office from the minister himself, and he said he was ready to proceed with the statement, and that is why it is on the Order Paper. I always tell the House that if something is not ready, I will not put it on the Order Paper to just occupy space for nothing. But the minister came with this statement and I have a copy here. As to why he is not here, I have no explanation. It is certainly highly irregular and we have said this time in, time out. The House starts Business at 2.00 o’clock every sitting day of Parliament so this is not easy to explain.

MR EBIL: Is it possible, Mr Speaker, to ask the Leader of Government Business maybe to move out briefly and make a phone call?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That does not require permission of the Chair. It would be the decent thing to do, but the Chair cannot order that in the circumstances.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, the Leader of Government Business informed the House yesterday that he had actually been perturbed by the absence of his team. Most of the business we handle here is Government business. The one leading that team is perturbed. On the second day he cannot account for the whereabouts of one of his ministers. Maybe this government collapsed and they did not have the courtesy to tell us.

The guidance I am seeking from you is, What happens in a situation like this, when a government has collapsed and they have no courtesy to inform the country that there is no government?

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The guidance I am seeking is, I want to know how these ministers rate these statements. Do they take them seriously or is it a matter of coming here and just laying statements on the Floor of Parliament? For example, you can see lots of business to follow by the minister on delays of release of funds for Government-aided schools. These are schools that are running, yet the statement is not coming out, and we have taken over a month demanding for this statement. And how are schools running? Now, when these students go to school and beat head teachers, they will even beat the ministers. I am warning them in advance because schools are not running, and students are not learning. So, the guidance I am seeking is, I want to know from the Leader of Government Business whether these ministers take this to be very serious?

Honourable members, it is high time when making new rules, that we put a rule on these ministers. They should get a separate book for signing in when they arrive here so that we know how they attend and the time they arrive. I am seeking for your guidance, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable Ssewungu rose on a point of guidance and he is asking the Speaker to guide on the absence of a minister. Wouldn’t it be very unfair on the Speaker to begin doing guess work on the whereabouts of the minister? I think it is not guidance, but a procedural matter on which we have ruled that it is not fair to this House and it is time the ministers started taking this House seriously.


Honourable members, please join me - in the VIP gallery this afternoon, today being an important day for the Democratic Party, I have the Lord Mayor Erias Lukwago, former Member of Parliament. He is the Lord Mayor of Kampala City Council Authority.

I also have the honourable Paul Kawanga Semwogerere, former President General of the Democratic Party. They have come to observe the proceedings. I am not so sure whether they have come to observe the entire proceedings or just one item of the agenda. Do we have copies of the statement?

2.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Mr Bright Rwamirama): Mr Speaker, that is why I was late. We were trying to get copies. I apologise for coming slightly late, Mr Speaker. I was in the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, how do we proceed? The copy of the statement is here and more copies are coming. Should we wait for them or - it eats on our time. Can we go to the next item for now?

PETITION BY THE FORMER WORKERS OF COFFEE MARKETING BOARD

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ayena, I see that your petition is very long, so you will read the first page and the prayer.

2.35
MR KRISPUS AYENA (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament. I rise to present the petition of former employees of Coffee Marketing Board who are seeking redress to receive their terminal benefits.

This is yet another matter that calls for the intervention of this Parliament, particularly to consider seriously those who have diligently served this country and are in the wee hours of their life.

Mr Speaker, a total of 1,568 former workers of Coffee Marketing Board remain unpaid. Unfortunately, there has been confusion about their payment, especially orchestrated –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to present the petition?

MR AYENA-ODONG: Yes, I am going to present. Mr Speaker, by way of explanation – and I will be very brief; in two minutes I will be done. This is a case where the petitioners sought and actually received the intervention of His Excellency the President, who graciously intervened and called upon the Prime Minister to convene a meeting of the Ministry of Finance, the Attorney-General and many other related departments to handle this matter. When the meeting was convened, somebody in the Ministry of Finance unfortunately misinformed the Prime Minister that – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please present the petition. 

MR AYENA-ODONG: Mr Speaker, some of us are trained in manners of presentation that a preamble -(Laughter)- but for the benefit of this august House, I beg to present this petition and lay it on Table. It is signed by former workers of Coffee Marketing Board; they are seeking the intervention of this honourable House to investigate the circumstances under which they have not been paid for more than 18 years now. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please read the prayers of the petitioners.

MR AYENA-ODONG: Well, they are praying that: 

1.	Parliament carries out an investigation to establish the reasons why the former workers of Coffee Marketing Board were not paid the balance of their terminal benefits.

2.	Parliament investigates the manner in which the properties of Coffee Marketing Board were disposed of and the application of the proceeds thereof.

3.	Parliament investigates circumstances surrounding the payment of Shs 1,753,934,488 to MAKKS Advocates, the lawyers of Coffee Marketing Board even before the litigants themselves were paid. 

I beg to lay this petition and the signatures on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the records capture that and it stands referred to the appropriate committee responsible for that sector. The 45-day rule kicks in, but petitions are normally shorter issues, so we ask them to expeditiously handle this matter and get back to the House for the conclusion. I will allow another petition.

PETITION BY RUKUNGIRI DISTRICT BUSINESS COMMUNITY

2.41
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Mr Speaker, I am here to present a petition on behalf of the Rukungiri District business community, moved under Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

The humble petition of the members of Rukungiri Mobile Traders Association states that:

Mr Speaker, your humble petitioners are mobile traders of Rukungiri District, who move from market to market. Your petitioners are unique in nature in a sense that they move in trucks together with their merchandise and the money from sales as they move. 

That on several occasions, they have been targeted and attacked by highway robbers; their merchandise and money stolen, including suffering death in many cases. Most of their businesses run on loans and are under security threat by robbers whereby most of them have ended up selling their homes to repay the loans after being robbed. On many occasions, they have involved and engaged Rukungiri Local Government administration, the security personnel and the District Police Commander for their intervention, but all in vain.

In view of your humble petitioners, who for very many years have been paying market dues and all taxes, contributing to the economic development of this country; and as it is the commitment of Government to protect the people and their property, we would like to have the security/patrol cars travel with us from market to market as the schedule for such markets is well known by the district authorities and security organs.

Therefore, your humble petitioners seek the indulgence of this august House to intervene and ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to come to their rescue and provide security to accompany traders as they travel from the markets. And your petitioners, as in duty-bound, will ever pray. 

Mr Speaker, the petitioners have appended their signatures, with the chief petitioners as Karoli Turebuza – chairman of the association, Stanley Tumushabe – former chairman, and others. In total, there are 92 members. I beg to lay this petition on the Table. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the petition. It stands referred to the appropriate committee for quick action, so that the House can pronounce itself on the issues raised and the prayers sought by the petitioners. Thank you.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE DELEGATION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES ON A WORKING VISIT TO MALAYSIA, 3RD – 9TH MARCH, 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we were handling these matters concurrently. Please read the next item.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS ON THE WORKING VISIT TO THE EMBASSY OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA IN BEIJING AND THE CONSULATE IN GUANGZHOU, CHINA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you remember we opened debate on these two reports on sexual slavery. Debate is now open; each Member will be taking three minutes.

2.46
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday I sat in this House and listened in silence to two very sad reports. This afternoon I would like to add my voice to those who condemn, in the strongest terms possible, the vice of human trafficking. The human body is probably the most sacrosanct possession anybody can ever have. This includes all the parts of the human body. 

But, Mr Speaker, we are talking about three things here: we are talking about slavery, which is probably one of the greatest vices the world has ever witnessed. Growing up as a little child, I was taught at school that slavery had been abolished many years ago and I thought for a while that this had been consigned to the dustbin of history where it should be. I never thought that in our lifetime we would see any man or woman being enslaved. 

We are also talking about prostitution, which is probably the oldest profession in the world. If you read the Bible, you will find that there were prostitutes before Jesus Christ was born. And it is precisely where the problem is: That we have to recognise, as a society, that there are prostitutes in our midst. We have to recognise, as a society, that our failure to protect them exposes them to the kind of exploitation that we are talking about. For as long as we bury our heads in the sand, for as long as we criminalise prostitution; we shall have this problem -(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I was hesitant to seek clarification, but on seeing the honourable member losing track, I thought I would seek clarification. Should the honourable Member inform this House whether prostitution is a profession or bad manners? (Laughter)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Speaker, by any standard prostitution is a profession. Anything that you do to earn an income is a profession. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I beg your protection. I have very unconventional ideas over this same issue. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member is entitled to his opinion. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: For as long as we pretend that we do not have prostitutes; for as long as we do not go out as a society to protect the people who have been dehumanised to the level that they sell themselves for money, we shall not solve this problem permanently. (Member timed out_)

2.50
MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The information in the two reports gives a different picture. There are Ugandans who have been lured, but it appears there are also those who went willingly. That is why in the report of the equal opportunities committee, an international organisation offered to return seven girls and they refused. Therefore, as a Parliament, we need to go to the root cause of this problem. 

We are talking about girls in Malaysia, and both girls and men who are in China, but we have Ugandans all over the globe. I met Ugandan girls in Scandinavian countries who are getting married to very aged men who are about to die. The other day you must have seen in the media some Ugandans who were jumping to their death in Dubai because they were being chased by Police. We need to deal with the problem that creates desperation. You remember before the system of acquiring visas here changed, Ugandans were queuing both at the US and UK embassies at midnight.

The Leader of the Opposition, in his reply to the State of the Nation Address, told you that nearly 20 million Ugandans are living in abject poverty. Instead of castigating - of course we must and they can be arrested, but that will not stop the vulnerability and levels of desperation. I saw the sentiments rising high yesterday, but we need to ask - I keep receiving phone calls from my people in the constituency asking, “Do you know people who are taking people to Iraq? Do you know how I can get into such and such a country?” If there was an opportunity, I can assure you, this country would remain empty. Ugandans will run away because of poverty which is exacerbated by the corruption of this Government. Because the amount of money that we must spend on creating employment, we spend it just on consumption. 

I was perusing through one of the policy statements. The President is going to spend Shs 13 billion on inland travel to go and campaign in Bukoto South; to go and visit one farmer in Masaka. Look at the ministries; how much money are we allocating? Are we not the very cause of this problem? We can come here and condemn Police, condemn embassies, and cry, but what –(Member timed out.)

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, thank you very much.  I do think that this debate is a very important debate. It is arising out of reports of committees. The reason as to why we come up with these reports is to make sure that Government takes action or our recommendations serious.  I am looking at the front bench and I do not see the relevant ministers around. We are just talking to ourselves; literally gossiping and conversing. The Minister of Gender is not here. The Minister of Internal Affairs is not here. In fact it is only just one minute ago that these other three ministers walked in. Otherwise, we only had the chairperson of the committee and the Deputy Leader of Government Business.

Is it procedurally correct, therefore, for us to continue talking to ourselves when the people who are in charge of these sectors and who should be listening and taking appropriate steps to save the situation are out of this House? There is no explanation.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this report is before the House. I think we should proceed and make our contribution. 

2.55
MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the members, especially of the two committees that have submitted these reports before us. When it comes to the issue of exploitation and especially exploiting the young girls who are taken innocently to foreign countries to do sex business unknowingly then we should have a reason to worry as a country. 

As a young person and a person who represents all people, whether young or old in this august House, and the fact that we know our culture, traditionally, we are not supposed to sell sex. You are not supposed to be taken for granted - to be sexed around. (Laughter) So, Mr Speaker – yes, our traditions are very clear. We might be laughing, but I can assure you that what these girls are going through is serious; sleeping with over 10 men in a day forcefully!
 
Therefore, as the Ninth Parliament, I want to call upon you to take this as a matter of emergency and a matter of urgency so that these young girls are rounded up wherever they are and Government of Uganda pays for their tickets and they are brought back to Uganda. If we just debate and end there, we shall still be having a very big challenge.

It is not necessarily Beijing, but it is important now that we take note of all the countries where these young girls are taken to do sex. From here, they are recruited that they are going to do - I want to give an example in my neighbouring district Kumi. There are so many young girls who are excited there that they are going to do different kinds of jobs in Abu Dhabi and different countries. When these people tried to come to Ngora, I said, “Wait a bit. I know the law is there, but can you explain to me where girl X is going to be; her address and what she is going to do, so that when I go to that country, I am able to get the evidence.” It is very important -(Interruption)

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the honourable member is raising a pertinent issue, especially on selling sex. But I want to inform my honourable sister that traditionally, when men could come and pay bride price to the lady’s home, they would pay for the same except that now, the girls and the families of the girls do not consent to that and that is why you find that when the relationship gets sour in certain cultures, actually, the man’s home follows up to be paid back. (Laughter)

MS AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, I think that was not called for because traditionally, a woman would get married to one man and have enough sex with that man -(Member timed out­.)

2.59
MR JAMES KYEWALABYE (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the Members. First of all, I wish to thank the committees on Gender and Foreign Affairs for the good report which brings out the various issues which this House needs to address. I wish to bring to the attention of the Members that many of our people have got in their minds the lure of the bright lights, the good life, better living and so forth, abroad. 

As it has already been pointed out by some of our colleagues, that life is much easier to access when you have got the right skills and qualifications. Therefore, you find that many of the young people that leave Uganda to go and work abroad are actually going to do the menial work which the people in the developed countries no longer want to do. I do not have any problem with the people doing the menial work, but then there are those who reach there and find that they are unable to do any of the work available, which requires skills, and yet they need to survive; those people then find themselves in the sex trade. 

I have also been watching on television Ugandans and other Africans - Somalis and others who have been dying in high seas in small boats which are unsafe for crossing. Some of them are rescued by big boats which are passing by. So, you can see the desperation of our people. What we really need to do is to first of all improve the skills of our people so that they can go abroad and offer themselves to work in respectful places.

I wish to request Government to publish the reality of life abroad to the people who want to go abroad so that they know that you cannot go there if you do not have any proper skills to sell. If you go abroad without a proper skill, probably you will end up being exploited. 

I also want to request Government to look closely at the companies which are exporting labour abroad and ensure that they meet the proper criteria and standards for exporting our people to work abroad -(Member timed out­.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are two issues here. There is sex trade and then there is sexual slavery. The matter that is before the House now is about sexual slavery; it is about trafficking in persons who are later sold into prostitution. I think that is what we are discussing now, not somebody voluntarily fighting conditions that are severe, engaging in it willingly. Let us make that distinction in our debate and when we make this distinction, the issues raised by hon. Jalia Bintu will not arise because those matters are not before us for now.

3.03
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Mr Speaker, thank you so much. The issue before us is a very sad one as per the two reports. Sex slavery, I think, is one of the worst vices you would think of, and when I was looking at these recommendations, you can imagine, out of this bad act of sex slavery, the Committee on Foreign Affairs somewhere on page 15 says that the committee was shocked to learn that prostitutes were Uganda’s best export to China. 

I think in the first place, I would not agree with the committee on that assertion, because if you left it to appear this way, then it will mean that actually, Uganda as a country supports sex slavery and, therefore, we have an earning from sex trade in China. 

Therefore, I would like, first of all, for this statement to be removed from this report. It is not true that that is our best export to China; when you found that the slaves went there unwillingly; it cannot really qualify to be an export to China.

The recommendations which are made, for example, on page 16 - unfortunately, I just want to read, “Returning home” and the last paragraph. “Unfortunately, the embassy and the consulate in China as in the case with all other countries where the vice is common, does not have capacity to help Ugandans who want to come back home.”

I think it would really be embarrassing if we have Ugandans out there who were taken into sex slavery and they want to come back home and our consulate or embassy in China cannot afford to bring them back home. I think this must be taken with a lot of seriousness. We need to task the Minister of Foreign Affairs to ensure that those out there who were taken as slaves should be facilitated to come back.

Mr Speaker, like you have guided, I also know - because somewhere, the recommendations of the Equal Opportunities report recommends that the labour export laws should be reviewed. I know there are some Ugandans who go out there for a good cause. There are also those who go out there willingly and knowing that they are going into prostitution, and that is what they go out there to do. So, I think this report should try to avoid victimising those companies which are exporting labour in very profitable ventures. 

3.07
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in condemning the act of trafficking of human beings in other countries. Yesterday, I was here the whole afternoon listening to the two reports. The recommendations which were put there were really strong. I stand here to support the recommendations made by the two presenters.

My concern is about the way Government sometimes relaxes on issues when they are mentioned or forwarded to them. In the last few months when this issue was advanced, the minister was here. He was also told that the consulate was not able to bring these girls back. But up to now, the minister has not made any statement to that effect or put any effort to make sure these girls or the consulate is given the mandate to support the girls. 

Yesterday, we heard that the sponsor the other side has HIV/AIDS. This person has been sharing the same men with the girls. Here we are bringing back 600 girls to Uganda. These girls are going to share the same men with the Ugandan girls and women here. (Interjections) Which modalities have you put in place as the Minister of Health, to safeguard the girls in Uganda who are still safe from getting HIV from Malaysia? 

It is a very big issue. We are fighting HIV and the men here, you know it very well, have been buying sex here, even near Parliament. In the night, the girls come here, “Where are the customers?” The clients -(Interjections)- are among us and –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member -(Laughter)

MS NTABAZI: Okay, I wish to withdraw that. The clients are not here -(Interjections)- but they are somewhere. So, Mr Speaker-(Interruption)

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable from Bundibugyo for giving way. The information I want to give is that yesterday, our colleague informed this House that nowadays, prostitutes come up to the gate of Parliament. If there were no clients here, why would they bring their services nearer? 

MS NTABAZI: I think there is no need to withdraw since the instance is there. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, unless you are just declaring your interest in this matter. You will be asked to withdraw that statement. Please, it is unfair to the House.

MS NTABAZI: It is okay. I thought Nambooze was giving more evidence, but for your interest, I really withdraw. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is for the whole House.

MS NTABAZI: Okay, to the whole House -(Member timed out.)

3.11
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for bringing the report. What I would like to observe first is on the staffing of the consulate in Malaysia.

I would like the Minister of Foreign Affairs to explain why there is only one staff in the Malaysian consulate, and according to the report, the person working at the consulate is even a student. Is Government really serious, to establish a consulate which has only a student working? I think that is lack of seriousness. 

It is very important to address the root cause of this trafficking. Also, I know many Members are in support that the government should be responsible for repatriating those who have already been trafficked.  I think we should address the root cause and try to put in place long-term recommendations like, maybe, Members of Parliament should be assigned responsibilities because these girls who are trafficked come from within our communities, within our constituencies. If we can take the responsibility of sensitising our people, giving information about the dangers of just going for jobs which they are not sure of, that may reduce the rate of trafficking.

When HIV/AIDS came, it was made clear that the origin of HIV/AIDS is from Rakai District. I think we should also come up and mention the region where most of these people being trafficked come from. That is when we shall be able to lay strategies and programmes to address the root causes - and talking to the people in those regions, advising them so that our children do not easily accept to be trafficked. 

It is very serious because those who are promoting - who are supporting trafficking - for instance, in the case of China, those who were receiving these people were able to come up and say, “Yes we are the ones receiving them and this is what we are doing.” What is our Government doing about that? My -(Member timed out.)     

3.14
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I come from Iganga District and I think honourable members are aware that there is a recent story about a Turkish man who had slept with almost all the girls in one village in Iganga. He had just been given a fine of only Shs 3 million. Good enough, the civil societies came up and he had to go back to prison. 

Basing on that, regarding human trafficking, I will just use a simple example. When I was travelling to Bangkok, I heard that most of the people who were applying for visas to China had different intentions. Some of us had to withdraw from travelling to Hong Kong. Incidentally, when we move on the streets, there are many placards showing job opportunities in several countries. Through that, our people are innocently taken to countries and in the long-run, they become sex workers. 

When we were interacting with the ministry, they told us that every month, they get 7,000 applications for people pretending to take employees abroad. We are calling upon the government to put stringent laws against people who pretend that they are taking our people to work.

I happened to be moving on the streets in London and I heard around 30 ladies speaking Luganda; they thought I was a Nigerian. Incidentally, their intentions were different from what I assume people are doing in London.

Lastly, you find that the Ministry of Gender through a former minister had recruited 4,000 Ugandans to go to Dubai. We beg that a databank be established so that we can know what those people are doing in Dubai. We have heard that most people who are in Dubai are just prostitutes. Thank you very much.

3.17
MS GERTRUDE NAKABIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank all my colleagues for the contributions. I also thank the committee, especially the chairperson who has been crying day and night about this issue. I have hopes that according to the contributions, we are going to recommend that those girls be brought back. I know that Government has the capacity to do it, although they may be slow. 

But Mr Speaker, I have fears; after we have brought those girls back, what strategies is Government going to put in place to accommodate them? They need counseling. So, when making recommendations, we have to cater for that; we cannot just dump them into the community; they may instead create more problems than they have been facing there.

I propose that when we bring those girls back, we establish special homes and institutions to accommodate them so that they can fit in the society without being harmful. Thank you.

3.19
MS JENNIFER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the two committees for their findings on this serious matter of our people in those countries where they are suffering from. 

When I listened to the reports that were made yesterday, I was saddened. Uganda is known for good things and I think for the first time in history, we are portraying a bad image in those countries. So, I appeal to Government to take this matter seriously and we should take very urgent action. 

First of all, we should look at the cause because I believe, much as these ladies are being trafficked to those countries, they must have a base here where they are first mobilised from. So, I request Police and other relevant authorities to investigate and take action on the people who are trafficking those people into those countries, and also to work hand-in-hand with the respective embassies. 

When it comes to China, the ministry can liaise with the embassy of China so that the visa requirements are hardened. They should always make more investigations on the people who are traveling so as to prevent these problems. I also ask the responsible ministries to implement the recommendations of the committee so that we can have our people brought back. Those who need counseling should be counseled. 

Mr Speaker, like other Members have said, on this act of prostitution, much as we are feeling bad about our colleagues in other countries, it starts here in this country. Just get out of Parliament along Speke Road, if you are a lady driving, you might even fear to stop your car; you would be surrounded. So, I can see that now prostitution has reached international levels; it has been upgraded. So, I ask the relevant authorities to begin here and go up to the other countries where this is taking place.

3.22
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. For Members to appreciate the gravity of this issue, I would like to share my experience when I was in China. Around the time when the Committee on Foreign Affairs was to travel to China, I was already in China. I was there for the whole of April. There was committee work for me to do, but I requested to cross over from Beijing to Guangzhou. While I was in Guangzhou, I was booked into a hotel through my embassy. But on the third day, when I returned from an exposition, I was requested by the receptionist of the hotel where I was sleeping – actually the receptionist gave me back my passport. He said that while I was away, they were ordered by the Police to send me out of the Hotel. I asked, “Why?”  They explained to me. That was the beginning of my experience of that whole issue. I shared it with the consulate there and they requested that the matter be handled expeditiously. I also told him that the Committee on Foreign Affairs was visiting and that I would share the matter with the members of the committee; which I did. 

I want to thank the committee very much for handling this issue in the way they did. Actually, whoever was in China between the months of March and April, if you are a woman, you would not get accommodation in China because they thought we had all gone there for sex work.  

So, I request that whoever is involved in the activities of sex slavery should be dealt with. I do not know what the Ministry of Internal Affairs is doing. Flyers of these people who are seeking for our girls to be exported are all over the streets of Kampala. (Interruption)

MR KYEYUNE: Thank you honourable member for giving way. Mr Speaker, the honourable colleague has not informed Members as to why they stopped her from occupying the hotel. So, I really want to know why the Police ordered the hotel manager to stop you from occupying that hotel. 

MS AKELLO: Mr Speaker, I was trying to save my time; that is why I did not go into the details of it. But if you could give me an extra minute, I would share that information. I shared with the members of the committee the reason I was supposed to be chased away from my hotel room. (Member timed out.)

3.26
MR BENSON OBUA (UPC, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you Mr Speaker for the opportunity to contribute to this debate. I am thankful that this debate came today because yesterday, Members were waxing emotions and for understandable reasons, because this is a very serious matter.  As a country, Uganda is suffering from what I call oxymoron - a state where things do not go the way they should. 

Ordinarily, we should be lauded and for the right reasons. Early this year, at the invitation of the US Congress, I attended a national prayer breakfast in America. Other than the USA, the only other country that Barrack Obama mentioned in his speech was Uganda, and for a very good reason. He said Uganda was a very good example because she had passed a law, the Anti-trafficking Act. But here we are. What is the real problem? Out there, we are being lauded as one of the best countries to be emulated, but our citizens are being trafficked all over. I think this is a question of failing to implement the very good laws that we make here. 

I was one of the Members of Parliament in 2009 who participated very actively in making that law; it was a Private Member’s Bill. I remember how diligently, together with even members of the American Embassy, we worked to make sure that law comes into existence. But today, I can bet you, another country will come and lift this law and they will go and use it and it will work in their country. What is wrong with Uganda?

I can understand why hon. Okupa was very angry yesterday. Most of us could not have the opportunity to express ourselves because two minutes is not enough to really come out very seriously on this matter. Permit me to say that as a country, we need to wake up; otherwise, this country is going to the dogs. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.29
MRS BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very serious matter and as you have properly guided, we should not trivialise it. Eighty-two of our own are in prison in China and 12 of them on death row; this is a very serious matter. When you talk to some of the relatives of these people, it seems Uganda is the only country which has not been to China to try and save its people. 

Recently, our colleagues in Kenya were faced with a similar situation of their girls being exported as sex slaves to various Asian countries. What the Parliament there did was to suspend the work of the organisations that deal in labour export, especially those people who export labour for domestic purposes, until an inquest in the matter is done to look into the workings of these organisations. 

We have been reading in the media that some of these organisations are linked to certain people with connections to powerful political offices. As a country, I think we need to emulate our colleagues in Kenya and put up an investigation into the work of most of these organisations that export labour. 

Secondly, last year this Parliament passed the Transfer of Convicts Act. We did not pass that law in vain. We passed it for situations like this, where some of our people are imprisoned in foreign countries. We could use these laws to transfer these convicts so that they are imprisoned here at home. 

I have communicated with some of these people in Chinese prisons - They have an opportunity to talk to their relatives once a month and they used this time to talk to me. They say it is only they who have not been fetched. Other countries are taking their people home. Even when a person commits a crime, it does not mean that person does not have a home to go back to. 

Finally, what else is there for Ugandans to export other than cocaine and sex? What else is there to export? I have evidence here – and I wrote to your office, Mr Speaker, with this evidence – that most of these people in Chinese prisons are graduates. When they are graduating, we tell them to go and employ themselves. They fall into hands of rich men here in Kampala who send them to business trips in China loaded with cocaine. We should investigate the airport. Why has Uganda become a conduit - (Member timed out.)

3.33
MS RUTH ACHENG (UPC, Woman Representative, Kole): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. It is very unfortunate that a woman’s sexuality has always remained a point of attack by men and yet that was not the purpose for which God created it. I say this because when these girls were trafficked, they were told that they were going to get good jobs for economic survival but it turned out to be sexual exploitation. Even here in Uganda, just go looking for a job, if you are unfortunate that it is a man who is the boss he will ask you for sex. Most of them - but not all of them - ask you for that. It is so unfortunate.

When there was war in Northern Uganda, the serious battlefield was raping women, using objects like bottles to abuse and exploit women sexually. What is wrong with men! What is wrong with men who came from that – (Interjections)– We are the mothers; I am sorry to say that but that is true. That is a fact. 

Secondly, the problem is how the law this Parliament passed is being implemented. In 2009, I was not in this Parliament but this Parliament passed the Trafficking in Persons Act. How is it being implemented? Have we taken an initiative to find out how it is going on? We have passed very good laws – I think we have passed all the laws governing human wellbeing - but when it gets to implementation, you realise that nothing good has been done about them. 

Mr Speaker, I would also like to talk about our education system. Our education system does not make our children who have finished their education job makers. They become job seekers. That is why they go to China and Malaysia looking for what to do. So, let us redesign our education system so that they are job creative, so that once a child finishes, say O’ level, someone already has something to do.

Finally, I want to call upon Government - I want to agree with the committee and I thank the members for these recommendations - to take immediate action to ensure that our children in Malaysia are rescued and brought back whether they are sick or not. We cannot just leave them there; we need to bring them back to reinstate them – (Member timed out.)

3.37
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee for producing this report. However, I think we are missing a point. The centre of the discussion seems to be focusing on stopping the trafficking. Supposing laws and systems are put in place but prostitution is allowed to prevail in Uganda and people instead move here to practice it, will that be good? Of course, not! So, the question is not trafficking. This is a moral question of prostitution –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the issue before the House is about trafficking. The rules allow me to ask you to go back to the topic before the House, which is human trafficking and forcing people into sex slavery. 

MR FUNGAROO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. Trafficking for whatever reason is bad. I understand and accept that, but for the case of prostitution, I would like to look into the laws of God, the books and our Constitution. 

Uganda’s motto is, “For God and my Country”. You also know that God does not permit prostitution. So, as we put in place laws to stop exploitation of Ugandans outside, we should also drive the point of condemning prostitution here at home. This will let Ugandans move out of here for good reasons and not just go there to be exploited.

We have a problem of using the wrong terminologies like sex workers, sex labour or prostitution, like hon. Fox Odoi said a while ago. That is okay, but we need to go back to our villages and talk to our cultural leaders, use these institutions to empower our people to respect morals and condemn prostitution in all terms.

There are also other things associated with this moral degeneration in Uganda. There are issues of lesbianism and homosexuality, for example, which are all evils associated with this problem. Therefore, I urge Ugandans to have a moral revival so that we conform to the meaning of our motto: “For God and my country.” Thank you very much.

3.39
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to thank the team that went to Malaysia and China. I also thank those who made the choice of who would lead this team. That was a perfect choice because the team did a very good job.

My contribution is about solutions. We have girls who are staying in their homes and enjoying the comfort of those homes. These girls are enticed, but who entices them to go out? That is the first question that comes to our mind. 

Secondly, we have labour export companies that have been licensed by this very Government and we know where they are. Yesterday, when hon. Okupa talked about our girls languishing and suffering in Iraq, he only fell short of also mentioning our young boys who are being sexually exploited from there. We have information to that effect.

That brings up the question of how we need to get concerned about our people’s lives once they go out. Surely, where there is a will, there is a way. Do we have the political will to fight trafficking of human beings? If we do not, then we cannot even implement the laws that we are making.

Yes, we are a force enough to fight human trafficking, with or without the laws. If we could only have designed messages – I used to be a radio DJ and I know how effective radio messages can work on changing the mindset of the communities. If we, as Members of Parliament and leaders, take up the effort to fight human trafficking by simply doing what we call mass sensitisation or even taking out radio messages through those stations licensed by Government, we can perform our moral responsibilities without necessarily first running to the law.

Finally, I would like to think that the Minister of Foreign Affairs owes us an explanation, especially on the plight of the people who are on the death row. You can take advantage of the international loopholes and negotiate that such sentences could even be served from Uganda. There are all those avenues. So, I still wonder whether they are legally competent enough or it is the lack of political will or it is about the money. Otherwise, I think there is something lacking and we can put right. (Member timed out.)

3.43
MS VICTORIA BUSINGE-RUSOKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First and foremost, I condemn, in the strongest terms, what is happening and tarnishing the image of Uganda abroad. 

What I want to bring out clearly is the fact that families, homes and parents are not playing their role. There is great evidence of moral decay around and beginning from as early as primary education level. A lot of research has shown that our children get to know about sex as early as primary 1 or 2. This means that these people find a fertile ground when deceiving our youth into these dangerous habits.

There is a syndrome that we must fight - the attitude that people have that they can earn a living from doing filthy work abroad; I mean the kyeyo syndrome, which is part of the cause of this. We have to rehabilitate and sensitise parents and our youth that humble beginnings demand that you start with the resources available to do agriculture in order to earn a living. That must be emphasised.

We are facing terrible embarrassment and there is evidence. Apart from those who are on death sentence, there are those who have died, there are those who have been strangled or have committed suicide because they think there is no survival and no hope of rescue. So, bringing these people back here without first going back to the ground to emphasise the role of a parent in Uganda – Religious leaders have played their part, but our homes are the first schools and centres of education that need to do much. 

It is my humble request that we give a timeframe for these recommendations to be implemented. It is alarming. The Act was passed in 2009; all we need to do now is to set a time limit to operationalise it and set our generation free.

I also feel that in case we succeed in rescuing these people and bringing them back to Uganda, we have to set up a rehabilitation plan for them. (Member timed out.)

3.46
MRS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in appreciating the Committee on Equal Opportunities and that of foreign affairs for their findings. 

Indeed, I request the Committee on Equal Opportunities to also go further and find out whether human trafficking is only to foreign countries. It is possible that it is also here in Uganda. There are very many girls who are trafficked from the villages to cities and towns in the guise of house girls but they end up sex slaves to either the head of the family or the male relatives in those families. All those cases go unnoticed. This calls for a further look into the Trafficking in Persons Act, 2009. Is it operational? If it is, do we need to strengthen it? What are the gaps that exist so that we fill those gaps and handle this human trafficking both to foreign countries and here in Uganda? 

It is indeed true that Government is responsible for the security and wellbeing of its people, and I would like to support my colleague that parents should play their role too. They should not be duped into saying that their children are taken to town or to foreign countries for a better living. It is the role of the parents to ensure that they tell or teach their children to know meaningful employment but not any employment that comes by -(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The point hon. Mutyabule is raising is very important. Parents need to be very careful in protecting their children. I would like to give you a case in point. In Amuru District, where I come from, there was a lady who was collected from Amuru. They went and convinced the parents that they were bringing the girl to study in Kampala and up to now, the girl has disappeared. The parents told me that she was taken outside the country for further studies. It is now two years and the parents do not know where the girl is. 

I would like to appeal to the delegation - and I would like to seek clarification from them on whether they tried to trace the background of the girls they got from Malaysia. I am very sure our parents may be happy that our girls – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you debating?

MR OLANYA: No. I am still seeking clarification. I am sure the parents may be happy that their girl has gone outside the country for further studies yet she is being forced into sexual slavery. This is the information that I wanted to give you, hon. Mutyabule. Thank you for giving way.

MRS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, honourable member. Indeed, even in my village, there are girls that are really trafficked to cities and one of them was brought here in Kampala and she ended up in Malaysia. The parents are trying to trace this girl. Just about a few months back, she called saying, “I am back” – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to draw this to a close. I am going to ask the minister to make a comment and then we close. One hour is over.

3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INDUSTRY (Mr James Mutende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to comment that I was a little touched by hon. Brian Mulimba. As the minister in charge of trade, I would like to clear the air that the economic postings from prostitution are not part of our inward remittances. We do not keep any records of export earnings from prostitution. 

When the ministry and government is promoting export of services, we know, for instance, that Ugandans in the Diaspora are doing a lot of work. We have doctors, teachers and all sorts of professionals out there who are doing different work and generating a lot of revenue for us as a country, but prostitutes are not one of them. I want to make that clear. 

Secondly, I would like to say that we are not giving this report thorough treatment. We are focusing very much on the sex part – the prostitution - and leaving out the positive side that the committee discovered out there. It was reported, for instance, that Uganda was one of the few consulates which have opened up in China - one out of only four African countries which have been successful. That is a plus. 

We have seen here that Uganda is among the top African countries receiving support and aid from China. We have seen that every year, there are 300 Ugandans training in China on both long and short courses ranging from three to six months. Thirty scholarships are offered to Uganda every year by the Chinese Government. So, there are very many positives. 

We also have a strategic alliance with a Chinese company here in our oil sector – CNOOC - which is coming in to work with us as Government. It is going to improve our revenue and our income base a lot. Government is moving aggressively into these markets. 

A member questioned what exports we can take to China. We are looking for coffee exports to market to China, very aggressively. In fact, Government supported a private person – a Ugandan - to go and set up a café in China. So, I would like say that this report has a lot more than prostitution. 

Mr Speaker, it is true that –(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving me this opportunity. Mr Speaker, the focus of the debate was about prostitution, about sex workers, exploitation and not to examine everything which was in the report. The focus was on that exploitation. So, I would like the honourable minister to just clarify on that area and to also help us. 

We have representatives in those foreign countries. I am sure if we hear about these things from Uganda here, then they must have also known about those bad practices. So, this is not mainly for you, minister in charge of trade, but it is for the Minister of Foreign Affairs. What are these people doing? Why can’t they really come up? 

I really need this clarification on exploitation of our people. These people were not taken as sex workers; they were taken as people who were supposed to be given jobs. Last year, I found one of the MPs trying to write names of beautiful girls and I asked, “Where do you take these beautiful girls?” -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you debating?

MS AOL: So, clarify. Thank you. 

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to commend the chairpersons of the two committees who presented a very detailed and elaborate report on the issue of human trafficking. This is a real tragedy for us, and it is a big problem in our country. It is right that this House addresses itself to it to see that all of us work together to stamp out and completely bring it to halt.

Hon. Okupa yesterday spoke fervently and assertively to say that Government is doing absolutely nothing about this problem. Honourable members, that is not true. Government is serious about this matter and is doing the following: In February this year, the Ministry of Internal Affairs set up an inter-ministerial committee - a national taskforce team - to specifically address this issue of human trafficking, especially taking young girls to prostitution. This committee is comprised of the following: 

•	The Ministry of Internal Affairs, which is the chair of this national taskforce; 

•	The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is a member. Their task is to make sure there is diplomatic engagement for the victims to be repatriated and assistance be extended to them and to support repatriation measures.

•	The Police, especially the investigation unit, are tasked with investigating issues and cases of human trafficking.

•	The Directorate of Public Prosecutions is involved in prosecution of cases that have been proven and brought before it. 

•	The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development mainstreams to counter human trafficking, to provide safety nets in labour export programmes and employment acts, which is in their mandate.

•	The Immigration Department is a member of this committee. Their job is to make sure our borders control travel documents and people who pass through to make sure those who are going are not being trafficked.

•	The Ministry of Justice provides legal advisory support initiatives.
 
•	The Ministry of Education has to counter human trafficking among students seeking education abroad.

•	ISO and ESO, under Office of the President, are assisting the committee to gather intelligence information regarding these cases of human trafficking and to bring them for prosecution -

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I stand on a point of order. I was saddened to see a whole minister in charge of a very important ministry, Ministry of Internal Affairs, reading from a prepared speech. Is it in order for him to do so? He is supposed to articulate the issues as they come.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is within the right of any member of this House to refer to notes prepared on subjects. In this case, the honourable minister is just making a constant reference to his notes.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, thank you for the wise ruling. In addition, I would like to refer hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi to page 11 of the report on Malaysia, where they mentioned the work of the inter-ministerial committee. I am elaborating who the members of this committee are. I am not reading a speech, I am reading a list. There is a difference between a statement and a list.

•	We have Interpol represented in the committee. Their job is to manage a databank on international crime and support on national investigations. 

•	We have the civil society organisations represented on the committee that are supporting the government initiative.

•	The International Organisation for Immigration is a member and they have played a crucial role in repatriation of the victims from wherever they have been. 

•	Lastly, there is the Ministry of Local Government. Many members talked about the need to talk to families and communities. The Ministry of Local Government is assisting to coordinate with community involvement against human trafficking.

Mr Speaker, I also wish to add that although UWOPA is not a member, they have been very useful to this committee. Hon. Ibi has always consulted us and given us very useful guidelines; I want to compliment her -

MS BAKO ABIA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What I want to tell the honourable minister is that there is a serious problem of trafficking using cyber. Now, we have cyber prostitution in place. There are young girls who are on Facebook, Twitter and the entire social media. They are getting contacts directly, and you know that sex is a very lucrative industry in the advanced world. They are even processing passports for these young girls under the guise of giving them employment in other places and not prostitution, but as soon they reach there they delve into this evil.
 
How are these organisations that you are listing going to help us attack this angle of trafficking using cyber? I want to inform you that next to you, in Sudan, families have broken up as a result of not even trafficking to the outside countries but women trafficking themselves to Sudan for economic opportunities. How are you helping us, your mothers from this side of the country, beginning with Koboko, coming to Arua, Yumbe, and Moyo?

MR JAMES BABA: I thank you for the information you have given. You are absolutely right; it is our responsibility to stop our young girls being –(Interruption) 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, honourable minister, for yielding the Floor. Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister, who in charge of internal affairs. We have flyers and telephone contacts of people that connect our girls to this kind of business. The committee has been in place - I do not know how long it has been in place or when it was put in place - and even to-date the law is in place. Can you tell us how many arrests or prosecutions have been made, for us to know that this committee or the law is being executed properly in order for us to know that we are progressing? We need to know there is goodwill.

Lastly, honourable minister, I would like to find out whether it is in your knowledge that there are also a category of people, purportedly Ugandans - they may not be Ugandans - in possession of Ugandan passports in China that have been categorised among the same group. I will be very grateful if I get clarification on those two issues. Thank you. 

MRS NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE: Mr Speaker, I am the Shadow Minister for Local Government and I also sit on Committee on Local Government and Public Service. Mr Minister, you have told us that through the Ministry of Local Government, you were sensitising Ugandans about the dangers of human trafficking. Can you tell me which particular programme under the Ministry of Local Government is targeting this item you talked about? I have been in local government as a civil servant but I have never come across any of these programmes you are talking about. 

Secondly, Mr Minister, could you clarify on how sophisticated drugs are successfully imported into Uganda for re-export? I do not think that Uganda has attained the level of sophistication to the extent that our people who are arrested in China have briefcases and ladies’ bags made out of cocaine. I do not think that Uganda has attained that level of sophistication. 

These people are arrested after successfully going through Entebbe Airport. Why is it that drug dealers can pass through Entebbe Airport undetected? How come that they are arrested at the next stopover without our Police at the airport detecting them? Isn’t it true that some of your men in uniform at Entebbe Airport connive with these drug dealers to smuggle drugs out of Uganda? Thank you.
 
MR JAMES BABA: Thank you, honourable members, for the information you have given. It is true that cyber technology is now being used to lure these girls into sex trade. However, at our level at the moment, there are physical addresses where the traffickers operate from, and I will read you some statistics of what has happened so far. It is just that the information you stood up to give interrupted the flow of my presentation, but I will try my best. 

Let me give the following statistics before I come to the issues raised by hon. Franca Akello and hon. Nambooze.  Since February this year, when this committee, the national taskforce, was formed - By the way, hon. Nambooze, the Ministry of Local Government sends a representative to this committee. It is not a programme in the Ministry of Local Government. It is for this officer to go back and see how the ministry can take it up in terms of community work. 

Since February, the number of victims repatriated from China, Malaysia, Zambia and India jointly handled with the International Organisation for Migration (IOM) is 14. The number of cases of human trafficking victims intercepted by immigration at borders especially in Entebbe and Busia are 54. The total number of complaints received by this taskforce and referred to the Police is 68. The number of victims who have come to report to this taskforce is 104. The number of trafficked cases currently under investigation is 28 and cases forwarded to court for prosecution are 11. Hon. Okupa is not here but we are working; Government is working. 

On the issue of Ugandan passports -(Interruption)

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, honourable minister. The other day I was reading on the internet that Bad Black is the most expensive woman on the African Continent to be bought. It is very clear that this Mzungu participated in prostitution. So, in order for us to discourage prostitution, why can’t we arrest him through the Ministry of Internal Affairs, because all the evidence is there? It is very clear that he bought this lady. Thank you. (Laughter) 

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I was giving information here on the Floor, I talked about the 7,000 visa applications per month. I seek clarification from the minister as to how they have dealt with this issue, because he is the one who told us that regarding human trafficking, 7,000 applications are received per month. So, how have they mitigated that? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up. 

MR JAMES BABA: I will wind up very quickly. Ugandan passports - First of all, it is a right for every Ugandan citizen to own a passport. At the moment, we are trying our best to issue a passport to whoever applies for it within ten days, but we are trying to reduce it further so that every Ugandan citizen who qualifies to have a passport gets one. 

The trouble is with those with criminal minds. They go out there and sell the passports for a fortune and then come to report to the embassy that their passports are lost, only to find that other nationals are using them. It is a big problem for us. Even when I was working in the embassies abroad, I used to get these challenges. So, we have to find a way, in collaboration with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, so that whoever loses a passport and there is police report, they must be charged four times the price of that passport. That may be a deterrent, but it is something I will discuss with my colleague in Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

Hon. Nambooze raised the issue of drug trafficking. Actually, the issue of human trafficking is combined with drug trafficking now, which is a serious problem to the extent that they are now using dead bodies to bring drugs into this country. However, we have taken note of the issue. We are capturing them and arresting them. 

These days, when we suspect a dead body being brought in through an entry point at Entebbe or wherever, we weigh it. We know, for example, that the body of a small person weighs about 54 kilogrammes. If it turns out to weigh 300 kilogrammes, then we know there is a problem. (Laughter) How can a human body weigh 500 kilograms in a coffin? When we open, we find the thing full of drugs. 

So, the trafficking of persons is now combined with drugs but our system is fully in control and in charge. We are aware of the matter and we want your collaboration. Please, report cases of trafficking and prostitution; do not sit on them. Sensitise our communities about protection of our girls and daughters so that they do not get into these terrible vices. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND CULTURE (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the minister on the issue of interventions which have been enhanced, mainly for those who are trying to go out. These days, many have come back to the ministry asking, “Can you, please, allow us to go?” These are people who are coming without visas and they have documents that show they have been invited for employment. So, the interventions are there both at the border and the airport and these people have been stopped. 

However, what I want to talk about, as a minister of gender, is the agencies. The agencies, which have been recommended for external employment, have not been mentioned anywhere as being among those that are trafficking persons. The agencies we have in the ministry have not been cited and in case we get any, their licences are withdrawn. The people who are trafficking the girls are individuals. 

I would like to share with you that when Brig. Angina was in China, I met with him. These people who were on the streets are being trafficked there by individuals. We are trying to see how we get these people; maybe we arrest them and they tell us where the others are, because it might be a group. So, these are not agencies that are trying to do this. The moment we get to know that these agencies are doing this, their licences are withdrawn.

Secondly, they are talking about counselling the survivors or the victims and maybe providing shelter for health services. I want to say that in the ministry, we have programmes for the youth and children where we take them for counselling, vocational training and so on. However, these are people whom we are bringing in now and who are totally different from these children. Some of them are HIV positive. Also, maybe because of the activities which they have been doing, you cannot integrate them with children. So, we have to liaise with Ministry of Finance to see if we can again construct a centre for these survivors - (Interruption)

MS BAKO ABIA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I would like to seek from you clarification. As a woman, you know that there are very many sengas who are advertising in the media both in print and on radios. They tell you they can manage your love affairs, they can structurally adjust certain body parts. As you go to revoke the licences of these people, we have men here who have lost their manhood to these people because they tell you of certain things that you think God was not able to do. What I am asking is, what is your ministry, together with the Ministry of Internal Affairs, doing about these people who disguise themselves-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you saying members of this House have lost something to this scam? (Laughter) You would have to withdraw if you cannot substantiate in terms of actual-

MS BAKO ABIA: Mr Speaker, what I am saying is that there are people out there, and the adverts are there in the papers, who say that they can do this and that, and this has come to the notice of all those people who read the media. As a result, I am telling you that there are people suffering - women and men alike. They go to these counselors and say, “my marriage is failing because of this and that” and these people claim that they provide a solution. The adverts are there and they are very unrealistic. These are people who are just cheating under the guise of - they call themselves traditional practitioners. 

Therefore, I am asking, how are you helping us because in a way, this is one of the ways of promoting this? Some of these have been discovered as brothels, if you ask your IGP.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, no member of this House has lost any capacity arising from this scam? (Laughter)

MR JAMES BABA: Also Sir, the issues of manhood whether, enlargement or downsizing, is not a matter for Ministry of Internal Affairs; I am sorry. (Laughter)

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister. I am just seeking a small clarification. We are talking of Ugandans being wrongfully taken abroad, but here in this country, there are people who are being brought in. If you visit some of the work places like Mukwano and other Asian places, you find a category of people who may not even have work permits. Some of them are too young to even be considered employed and it is a shame. 

What is the Ministry of Gender and that of internal affairs doing to check this? While we fight for the rights of our people, we should also fight for the universal rights of others. I thank you.

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did my survey and in Tororo a certain agency registered 600 youth. In Iganga, they registered 700. In Mayuge, they registered 400. Since the minister is telling us that in the ministry there are certain agencies which at least the ministry is aware of and which have licences, we need her to clarify and give us information concerning these agencies. We can then inform our people, if these agencies are different from the ones which the minister has given, that when those people go to them they should not register. Thank you.

MS NAKADAMA: Thank you, honourable members. Maybe I should first complete what I was requesting Parliament to support me with. I was talking about the vocational centres where we need to bring these people for vocational training and maybe health services and rehabilitation. We will need your support if we bring such information or a paper here, so that a rehabilitation centre is constructed. 

One of the points of clarification was for Ministry of Internal Affairs. The second one I think is also about Ministry of Internal Affairs. There is no way Ministry of Gender can start arresting people who are found in companies working; it is Ministry of Internal Affairs in charge of work permits and not Ministry of Gender. I think the minister has elaborated on that. In case there are other cases, they can be handled.

About the agencies, my colleague from Iganga, I do not think the numbers you are talking about are correct. I have the assurance of the people in Mayuge and it is not 400 like you are saying right now. We have about 100 people who have been registered for external employment. I am aware of that and it is an agency, which is registered by Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

In case there are other people who have been registered by other organisations that we do not know, we request you to mention them so that we can know. Then on the agencies which are registering people, I will maybe bring here their names so that Members can get to know them. (Applause) [MS BAKO: “What about the sengas.”] No, no, no, I cannot comment on the “sengas” because I think it falls under Ministry of Health. (Laughter)

DR RICHARD NDUHUURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank my colleague for giving way. The information I wish to give you is that the Ministry of Health is in a very advanced stage of bringing to this House a bill which we have called, “The Indigenous and Complementary Medical Practitioners Bill”. The purpose of this bill is to regulate that sub-sector. We know that there are complementary medical practitioners who are doing well, but we also know that there are quacks. So, we must have a law to regulate the herbalists, the complementary medical practitioners and to clearly define them as distinct from the quacks. So, this bill will come here and I invite you to give your input so that we have the sub-sector regulated. Thank you.

MR MAJEGERE WAIRA: Mr Speaker, I had asked the Minister of Internal Affairs to tell us the action he is taking on people who abet prostitution like in the case of “Bad Black” but he has not commented. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not a procedural question. Honourable members, you will recall that this subject was brought to the fore by a statement of urgent public importance raised by hon. Brig. Charles Angina on July 5 2012. This followed another petition made by hon. Elijah Okupa on February 8 2012. Another petition was sent to the equal opportunities committee on the same subject matter. That is why these reports are before us. We have had this discussion for a long time now – two hours plus what we discussed yesterday brings it to almost two and half hours. 

I, therefore, propose that since these reports have other aspects contained in them beyond the trafficking in persons and converting them into prostitutes, I put the question to the adoption of these reports to that extent. In which case, whatever has not been discussed, we will find an opportunity to do it at an appropriate time. So, I put the question on the motion for the first report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question on the motion for the second report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that at the beginning of this meeting, we stood over the issue of the statement on Foot and Mouth Disease. This will be the appropriate time for the minister to proceed. But in the VIP Gallery we have Mr Yahaya Kiyingi, a Liberal Democrat and parliamentary candidate for the Tottenham Constituency in the United Kingdom. He is here for a benchmarking visit. Please join me in welcoming him. You are welcome. (Applause)

STATEMENT ON FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE

4.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Some time last week, hon. Baryomunsi and other Members raised the issue of the status of animal health in the country, specifically the Foot and Mouth Disease and associated economic consequences to our farming communities. During that discussion, several Members raised issues to do with Lumpy Skin and East Coast Fever. I wish to report to this House that Uganda is currently affected by Foot and Mouth Disease, Lumpy Skin Disease and East Coast Fever at a higher level than usual. 

Whereas Foot and Mouth Disease was suppressed recently, new attacks have come from a neighbouring country in Kagera Region. Lumpy Skin Disease has spread wide in south west and central Uganda as it was reported here. There have been reported serious incidences of East Coast Fever on farms and it is on rampage. This is as a result of tick resistance, poor quality acaricides and absence of vaccines in the country to deal with the problem. The ministry has taken steps to contain the situation using treatment control and vaccination procedures where relevant.

Foot and Mouth Disease is endemic to sub-Saharan Africa, having been introduced as early as 1780. It has been occurring in Uganda for over 100 years with serious socio-economic consequences. It is a highly contagious, economically devastating disease of cloven hoofed animals. It is caused by a virus which affects over 70 species of mammals all over the world. In Uganda, it affects domestic animals, including cattle, pigs, sheep and goats as well as wild animals like buffaloes, warthogs and antelopes. 

Foot and Mouth Disease causes very significant direct and indirect losses. Direct losses relate to the loss in performance of animals due to damage by the virus. They include deaths, lowered milk production and meat damage, abortions, infertility, reduced growth rate and late maturity. Indirect losses relate to control measures which include the following:

Cost of control activities like vaccinations, treatment for secondary and bacterial infections and enforcing quarantine.

Restricted trade; locally, heavy losses are incurred across the entire value chain when the primary commodities like milk, meat and hides and skins are not available for the market, including processing (value addition) and export. At international level, our animal products are denied access to the market even if the disease may be restricted to small parts of the country.

Loss of draught power in places where animals are used for cultivation.

Discouraging investment in high value but highly susceptible animals like dairy breeds and exotic pigs. Where Foot and Mouth Disease is endemic, growth in dairy and pig industries is heavily constrained.
 
Loss of revenue during quarantine periods; farmers lose incomes and correspondingly Government revenue earnings drop. We should not forget the stress and conflicts resulting from efforts to control disease as many people are opposed to quarantines. Both direct and indirect losses translate into serious socio-economic hardships especially in areas predominantly dependant on livestock for their livelihood. 

Current status in the country

The disease is currently affecting the districts of Rakai, Ntungamo, Isingiro, Kiruhura, Alebtong, Amuria and Kaberamaido. The outbreaks in the districts of Rakai, Ntungamo and Isingiro are an extension from the Kagera region in Tanzania and they were first reported on 2 June 2012 in border villages following illegal importation of FMD affected cattle. 

The Kiruhura case is a continuation of the previous outbreak reported around Lake Mburo National Park in February 2012. This one is generally getting suppressed. Similarly, there are clinical cases of FMD in the districts of Alebtong and Amuria, where remnants of the outbreak were reported in January, February and March 2012. At the time, affected districts included: Nakasongola, Amuria, Kaberamaido, Alebtong, Nwoya and Adjumani. It should be noted that an outbreak reported in the district does not mean that the entire district is affected, but that some cases have been detected in that district. Irrespective of the magnitude of the outbreak, each one is very significant because of the speed at which the disease can spread.

Government Response

Vaccinations 

It will be recalled that MAAIF took delivery of 460,000 doses of FMD vaccine at the beginning of the year and that was used to fight outbreaks which at that time affected the districts I have mentioned above. So far, the districts of Nakasongola, Kaberamaido, Nwoya and Adjumani have reported containment of the disease and they are free. Others have reported good progress in that direction. 

Ring vaccinations were carried out around the affected sub-counties because of the shortage of the vaccine to carry out blanket vaccination in all affected districts. This may explain why some remnants of the disease can be spotted. Although such progress is reported, it is too early to pronounce full control of the disease in these areas because of the nature of the FMD virus that can stay dormant in recovered animals for over six months and get transmitted to other animals and thereby setting up fresh outbreaks. That is why when we get reports of recovery, we take time to lift quarantines. We start with partial quarantine as you observe.

All the vaccines received are used up and we have applied for a supplementary budget for more procurement to cover and safeguard against new outbreaks. 

Quarantine restrictions

All affected areas are quarantined for at least six months from the date of the last cases because of the nature of the disease. Movement of animals into, through and out of the quarantine areas is prohibited by law.

Disease Investigation

Investigation points to illicit trade involving a racket of people living in border areas. There is need to break the racket and we are working together with the Ministry of Internal Affairs to deal with some of these people who are making abnormal profits and causing us a lot of trouble.  

The Nature of the virus

The virus has a very wide host range which allows it so stay in circulation. The rich wildlife in Uganda supports the virus as reservoirs. For instance, in Lake Mburo, the buffaloes are permanent reservoirs and we are now actually curving out those sub-counties to make sure that we ring vaccinate them every six months as a precaution to create a buffer zone to safeguard the entire country.

The virus is known to spread easily through all bodily discharges including the breath, faeces, urine, milk, meat blood, semen, tears, saliva etcetera. It survives outside the body on contaminated objects for long depending on the weather. Contaminated materials like vehicles and beddings used on the floor of the vehicles can spread the condition to new areas without physical movement of the livestock.

The affected animals discharge the virus long before the clinical signs show up. Therefore, animals which look normal may spread the disease before showing signs. That is why they are quarantined for a long time and we do not allow them to go to the market place. Animals that cure continue to discharge the virus for long and can transfer infections to other animals up to a period of six months.

High cost but low immunity duration vaccine

Unlike other vaccines like Rinderpest vaccine which provide life time immunity to a vaccinated animal, the existing FMD vaccines impart immunity for only six months. This makes vaccination a very expensive option because sustaining the immunity of the herd requires two vaccinations per year. Considering that we have 13 million head of cattle and almost 14 million goats, about 10 million pigs and 4.5 million sheep, if we are to apply the vaccine you can imagine how serious it can be.

Marketing systems

The current marketing and transportation systems promote mixing up of animals intended for different destinations and purposes. Animals that are not sold in the market return home with a high risk of introducing disease. 

Special customary use of animals

This includes paying dowry and other rituals. Movement of animals associated with some customs cause disease resistance to quarantine. 

Resistance to quarantine

A special constraint is resistance to quarantine restrictions. We have encountered resistance to quarantines and some veterinary personnel have expressed fear for their jobs or lives. This is unhealthy because a single concealment may lead to a new wave of disease. 

The way forward

Short-term Intervention

The government has applied quarantine restrictions which shall always be declared when there is an outbreak. The main costs arise from enforcement of the quarantine restriction.

Vaccination

By policy, FMD vaccine is free and compulsory, but because we do not get enough vaccine, we do it scientifically. We deal with the affected areas, high risk areas and transit routes. If you notice, the pattern of the disease is more or less known: from Kagera to Rakai all the way through all the districts to South Sudan where these traffickers use routes to take animals. That is where we have a lot of problems. So, when we get a few doses, we apply them scientifically, and that is how we have been managing to ensure that our national herd is protected.

Treatment of affected animals for secondary and bacterial infections with antibiotics

Long-term interventions

Well distributed water facilities to avoid unnecessary livestock movement and accumulation of animals in few points.  

Fence farms to limit mixing up of animals from different sources. This is very endemic in communal grazing cultures. 

Marketing systems should be improved to ensure one way movement of animals from source to destination without mixing up animals for different destinations and purposes or returning unsold animals from markets to the farm. The current design of livestock markets built by Ministry of Agriculture takes care of these concerns. We ensure that when animals are brought, they are separated. The cows are put in their own area, sheep in their own area, chicken in their own area, and we ensure that there is also quarantine when an animal is cited sick; such an animal is not allowed to go home. In future, we want to encourage everybody if you are taking breeding animals, it should be from farm to farm rather than from the farm to the market and then to the farm because that transit route to the market exposes the animals to the risk of contamination. 

Slaughtering animals close to farms: Slaughter places to be constructed close to source thus limiting unnecessary livestock movement.

Improving reporting mechanisms for quick response and one chain of command in livestock regulatory system, which the ministry is operationalising. We have equipped our veterinary officers with gadgets to inform and create early warnings to the ministry headquarters for any outbreaks. 

Ensuring safe disposal of contaminated animals’ excretion; urine, faeces, cow dung, blood etcetera, and in contact materials. All these interventions have been provided for in the ministry’s development strategy and investment plan. When funds improve, they will all be implemented.

The ministry has mapped Uganda into livestock production zones and we shall be addressing FMD control by regular vaccination in high risk areas namely, Kagera region, Lake Mburo National Park and transit routes. We have re-introduced agricultural police to reduce movement of animal products in affected areas and also, to help enforcing veterinary laws and regulations.

The other disease that was reported in this House was Lumpy Skin. Lumpy Skin is a highly contagious viral disease affecting cattle. It is one of the major constraints affecting the development of the livestock industry in the country. It is not a notifiable disease and it is being dealt with privately by the farmers. 

The current situation

The country has been experiencing outbreaks of Lumpy Skin Disease over the years. Since 2010, Lumpy Skin Disease outbreaks were reported in the districts of Kaberamaido, Kalangala, Kasese, Amuru, Busia, Kiruhura, Kotido, Sembabule, Gomba and Lyantonde. Field surveys show that there is under reporting of the problem and the disease is in most parts of South West and Central Uganda.

Below is a table showing the outbreak in September 2011; we had it in Amuru. In February, we had it in Busia; in April, we had it in Kiruhura; and in May, we had it in Kotido, Kasese, Matete, Sembabule, Gomba and Lyantonde.

Control measures

The control of Lumpy Skin follows an integrated approach involving control of biting insects, vaccination and animal movement control. The use of acaricides with insecticidal properties is encouraged to kill the insects. 

Action taken by Government

By policy, the treatment of the disease is a responsibility of the private sector and local authorities. Government is not providing for the procurement of the vaccine and insecticides. Therefore, the sources of Lumpy Skin vaccines are the private veterinary pharmaceutical companies in the country. There is a big challenge because the private sector sourced vaccines are expensive and supplied in limited quantities. Therefore, only farmers with high grade animals can afford the vaccine. Under such a situation, most farmers with local cattle do not afford the vaccine leading to the disease being perpetuated in the local herd which acts as a reservoir for infection.

Way forward

Considering the chronic and contagious nature of the disease in this region, actually not Uganda alone, the ministry is of the view that Lumpy Skin Disease should be classified as a listed disease so that Government can intervene in its prevention and control. We have accordingly prepared a Cabinet paper and we are moving towards that direction. 

East Coast Fever

East Coast Fever is a tick borne disease of cattle. It occurs in all parts of Uganda except in very high mountainous range areas. It is estimated that 20 to 30 percent of calves die of ECF in indigenous animals if not treated, but kills 100 percent of the exotic cattle if not treated. The cost of treating infected animals is very high yet the recovery rate is very low. The country loses a lot of genetic materials and some farmers are getting discouraged from stocking high grade cattle for fear of losing them due to ECF.
 
The control of ECF is by application of acaricides on cattle, to control ticks through dipping, spraying and pour on formulations. When animals are already infected, treatment using Butalex and other antibiotics is recommended, but the cost of treatment for adult animals is in the range of Shs 100,000 to Shs 150,000. Vaccination of the cattle is recommended because once a cow suffers and cures, it develops permanent immunity throughout its life.

The current problem

The challenge we have is tick resistance. Tick resistance to acaricides is mainly due to adulterated acaricides, poor quality and under dose usage; poor spraying and dipping procedures. It is also compounded by failure by local governments to enforce tick control regulations. Some farmers do not spray or dip their livestock and their farms remain breeding centres for ticks which grossly affect the entire farming community.

Shortage of ECF vaccine

The discontinuation of importation of ECF vaccine by National Drug Authority has made matters worse, yet there is no evidence that previous use has been associated with any problem. Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda and Burundi are using this vaccine and have addressed this challenge and contained the scourge.

Way forward

The Ministry of Agriculture is engaging National Drug Authority through Ministry of Health to allow importation of the vaccine so as to make it available to the farmers. Our scientists are carrying out a research on tick resistance to acaricides and the findings will help us deal with the specific problem.

The ministry is engaging local governments to intensify the fight against ticks and enforcement of laws and regulations. The irony of it is that this vaccine - our scientists actually contributed to the invention of this vaccine, but our neighbours have enjoyed its use and we have suffered this problem. So, the issue raised by hon. Baryomunsi was correct, but we are trying to address it with sister ministries so that we can stop this scourge. I thank you very much for listening to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the statement from the minister addresses most of the issues that were raised, but this statement attracts a debate. So, we will limit the debate to 35 minutes, but before we go into the debate, there is a very short statement that has got to be made by the Minister of State for Regional Cooperation.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR REGIONAL COOPERATION (Mr Asuman Kiyingi): Thank you, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, much as the statement is very important, in accordance with our Rules of Procedure, we are entitled to copies to be distributed before the minister can articulate those points.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, first listen to the statement. He is going to provide copies. 

MR ASUMAN KIYINGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The copies will be made available. 

His Excellency John Atta Mills, President of Ghana, suddenly died on Tuesday at the 37 Military Hospital in the capital, Accra - five months short of finishing his first term - having been elected to the presidency in 2008. He was 68 years old. The Ghanaian Parliament convened hours later and swore in his Vice-President, John Dramani Mahama as the new President of the Republic of Ghana.

It is with a heavy heart and deep sorrow that Uganda learnt of this sudden and untimely death of the President of the Republic of Ghana; the first of a serving  president in Ghana’s 55 years as an Independent nation. Government and indeed the people of Uganda are deeply saddened by this news. We offer unreserved heartfelt condolences to the government and people of Ghana, and to the late President’s family. 

Uganda will remember President Atta Mills as a committed Pan-Africanist who dedicated his life to the service of his country, the West African region and indeed the African Continent. 

During his term of office, the President worked tirelessly for the strengthening of the cordial and fraternal relations existing between Uganda and Ghana in all fields. I, therefore, wish on behalf of the Government of Uganda, in my capacity as acting Minister of Foreign Affairs, to assure the government and people of Ghana of our support at this time of national mourning given the massive outpouring of grief in Ghana now, and to reiterate our commitment and continued fraternal bilateral relations.

May I now request the honourable members to rise and observe a moment of silence in honour of the deceased President?   

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: May we now under the direction of the Speaker of the House rise for a moment of silence -(Laughter)- in recognition of the late President Atta Mills.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Certainly, as a House, we record our deep condolences to the people of the Republic of Ghana for the loss of a President. The loss of a sitting President is something which can upset the flow of management of the affairs of a country. It happened in Malawi in April. It has happened now in Ghana. We join the people of Ghana, the people of Africa, and the whole world, in mourning this loss. 

Okay, can we now go to the other issue of the debate on the minister’s statement on Foot and Mouth Disease? That is the statement. This statement attracts debate. 

5.02
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the challenges the Ministry of Agriculture is facing, and also the political challenge which the honourable minister is facing as head of the animal industry sub-sector. When I was shadow minister for Agriculture about two and a half years back, we had 11 million cattle in this country. I do not know the current statistics. But one of the biggest challenges the ministry faces is the policy vacuum. 

The minister is citing here, according to this FMD statement, that there is no comprehensive agriculture policy for fast-tracking some of these things. Why do I say this? Year in, year out, when there is an outbreak, especially of FMD, the minister comes to the committee and to the Floor of this House complaining about shortage of funding. Why does this arise? Because we do not have a comprehensive document to fast-track progress.

If we are talking about an increment of let’s say one million extra cows in a span of two and a half years, we are talking about close to 12 million animals. FMD, according to the minister’s statement, requires two vaccinations in a year. Honestly, as a country, with a disease which has lived with us since 1780, we cannot afford two vaccinations? That is very unfortunate. 

If you critically examine this statement, you realise that the minister is challenged because he does not have an operational framework. That should have been embedded in a policy actualised by law. This is lacking. So, how do we help you? For instance, you are talking about these two vaccinations, which are supposed to be free and compulsory. If an FMD attacks the cattle, then goes on to the goats, sheep and that kind of trend; then this other Lumpy Skin business comes in and then another disease comes, how many supplementary budgets are you going to bring? And you are saying these are diseases that even affect the buffaloes? What is here to show that you are interacting with probably the Ministry of Tourism to handle and contain the situation? (Member timed out.)

5.05
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (FDC, Samia Bugwe South, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I commend the report from the minister. I come from the border. One of the dilemnas we have had in Busia is that you find communities on the Kenyan side which are almost the same clans with those ones of Uganda and they have communal grazing.

Kenya has a very good veterinary policy and Uganda has almost failed to gazette where the veterinary policy falls. We have had a problem. The minister in his report comments on fencing sometimes to avoid spread of diseases. But the problem we are having as communal communities around the grazing areas is sensitisation of the mass. People do not even have their own land; they graze as a community. 

So, we request the ministry to come up with a system to provide these drugs. Recently, we had a problem of a very resistant tick. We tried to spray with drugs from private sources, but the tick did not die. We had to literary pluck them off from the animals. I made an experiment and applied some paraffin on it to see how long it would take before it died. The thing persisted for almost five minutes. I was very surprised by their resistance. 

When I visited the District Veterinary Officer, he told me that that tick is still under research. So, I was wondering how long the research will take before we can get drugs; how long are our animals going to suffer with the tick? The ministry has to address this problem urgently.

The second thing is about quarantine. Busia is a border point, but there is only one quarantine officer who is based in Malaba. Any animal going from Uganda to Kenya goes through a long process before being cleared to cross over to Kenya. So, we also wonder, how long does it take for an animal to be cleared from Kenya into Uganda? This might force people to manoeuvre to smuggle in their animals because the process is too long. The personnel are not there; you have to engage a person from Malaba who would take a whole day to get to Busia. The minister has to address that problem and have staff who are concerned basically with the issue of quarantine, stationed at the border points to give services. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from the honourable member for Ntungamo. And honourable members do not be disturbed when I refer to you by the constituency or the group you represent. Actually, that is what the Rules command me to do; I am not supposed to call you by your names. They say, “Where every other Member shall be referred to as honourable together with the name of his or her constituency or the group or body represented by the Member…” So, when I refer you by your constituency, you do not have to tell me your name, I know what I am doing.

5.09
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the minister for the statement. However, there are some shortcomings which I would like to express so that he can take action. In the short-term measures, the minister told us that they can put up quarantine for six months. Our people depend mainly on animal products, that is, milk and selling the real animals. Next month, the universities are opening and the secondary and primary school term is ending. That means the children are coming back home for only one month and then they will be going back to school. So, I am wondering what the parents are going to do when the children are going back to school. 

The minister also mentioned that at the beginning of 2012, they brought in vaccines for FMD worth 460,000 doses. The minister knows that this kind of dose cannot even be sufficient for a quarter or one percent of the animals in Ankole or in my district. He even went on to say that they are free. I want to assure you honourable minister that people pay for these vaccines when they are available. We pay Shs 3,500 per animal and this is very expensive. But they are willing to pay if it was available. The unfortunate thing is that it is not even available. So, this short-term measure is not going to help us, honourable minister.(Member timed out.)

5.12
MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Of course, I sympathise with my brother, the minister, because the entire agriculture sector is in a crisis, and I think we should start with the budget. The backbone of the economy is agriculture, but look at the allocation given to it. It is 3.4 percent. This is the beginning of the problem. Now, the minister is in a crisis and he says he is coming for a supplementary. How long will you continue coming for supplementary? You are in a crisis; you told us there is a resistant tick - my sister Christine has talked about a policy. Even if we had a policy in place; there are many areas where we have policies in this country clearly laid down, but the enforcement is not there. 

We have talked about the local governments; but what money do they have? You look at NAADS and the traditional agriculture extension staff; they are in a crisis. They do not know who is who. The NAADS people will tell you they do not have the money and that is not their mandate. 

Really, honourable minister, there is more than catches the eye. There is a problem and we need to sit down and restructure the agricultural sector of this country. Look at the stock farms; we are talking about people using an underdose, an overdose, poor spraying – people had somewhere to run to, like the Kyembogo Farm in Fort Portal. But it is no longer there. There is nothing you can talk about in terms of agriculture in this country now. We may overcome this, but still another problem will arise. 

Mr Speaker, I think we need to take a stand as Parliament on the budgeting. What can 3.2 percent do? The ministry is just being polite not to expose Government, but the minister’s hands are tied. Let us do it together as Parliament. The stock farms are no more; the ranches are no more. Private people have even taken the land – how do you leave the vaccination to the private sector? What stake do they have in it? It should be Government to do that and it should be done routinely. But now we are managing the problem in a crisis manner. 

The people in the local governments do not have anything. The veterinary officers are handicapped; they do not have motorcycles; they do not have vehicles. (Member timed out.)

5.15
MR WILLIAM KWEMARA (NRM, Kyaka County, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First, let me commend the minister for giving us that update and for the responses and strategies. However, allow me to make two observations. In these strategies, there is one component that is lacking; that is the community education component to be implemented by the extension workers. 

Like hon. Kagwera has pointed out, we have got a challenge of extension workers. My constituencies have got two sub-counties affected by the Foot and Mouth Disease. But in all these two sub-counties, we do not have a single veterinary officer or even an assistant. I, therefore, beg that you liaise with the Ministry of Public Service and consider this as something which is very important. Otherwise, all these efforts will yield nothing if you do not have people on the ground to implement your strategies. 

Secondly, there is the issue of the rangelands that are adjacent to wildlife reserves. You will agree with me that in the epidemiological model of disease control, you deal with the root cause. Wild animals are one of the root causes, actually a major root cause, of some of these diseases. We are advising farmers to fence off their lands. 

Experience has it that the type of fencing that we are using for animals cannot ward off most of the wild animals. For instance, antelopes, kobs, wild beasts, will go through barbed wires and get into somebody’s farm.

I have a case in point where one of our farmers lost over 15 head of cattle because of a type of fever called the Malignant Catarrhal Fever, which is from wild animals. I think very soon, I might have to bring a petition. 

However, it is an issue that we have to look at seriously simply because the environment where we have those rangelands is the same environment where we have the national parks and reserves. Take an example of Mburo, Katonga Game Reserve, and Queen Elizabeth National Park, we have these diseases there. Thank you so much.

5.18
MR MICAH LOLEM (NRM, Upe County, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to appreciate the minister. He is not the type of minister who, when you visit him in his office, he asks you to go and pick some mineral water as you wait for him. 

My question is, what measures has your ministry put in place to avoid – in your statement, you are trying to lament; that you lack vaccines. Now, what measures has the ministry put in place so that you stop lamenting every time problems come. 

You mentioned about Amuria as one of the affected districts. Karamoja borders Amuria, what plans do you have for Karamoja because that is the route in and out? 

The other matter you talked about is distribution of water. When sick animals move from place to place, they spread diseases. Is Karamoja in your plan in the distribution of these resources so as to avoid movement of animals from place to place? Because when they move from place to place, they spread diseases. So, what measures do you have for Karamoja in your long-term project?   

5.20
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the minister for this paper, and I wish to especially thank him for re-introducing the agriculture police on the roads to ensure that they control the movement of animals. But I would also want to warn him that like many of our policemen on the roads, they hardly do their work because they know how to be compromised as they are watching animals pass on the road, and they know how to talk to the lorry drivers of these animals. So, I would like him to add an additional measure to ensure that our agriculture police do not behave like the Police whose behaviour we know on our roads. 

Secondly, I would like to talk about a very important loss to our health. We are talking about animals dying, but they also infect our people. Our people eat contaminated meat, almost all the time, because the people who inspect our meat are compromised. And in our villages, we hardly have inspectors of meat. So, people eat contaminated meat, either contaminated by the disease or contaminated by the drugs that have been injected into the animals. That is a very dangerous health issue to our people who consume meat in these districts. 

I am also concerned about the poor quality of acaricides. What are we doing as a country? Uganda has always wanted to export quality meat. Not only do we have poor quality acaricides, but we also have adulterated acaricides. What is the national bureau of standards doing? Who is inspecting these drugs when we import them? We know of course that even the medicine we take from our private practitioners also has the same quality concerns. So, may I ask the minister to also look at that area to see what we as a country are doing when we import these drugs? 

Finally, I think it is not proper that we leave the private sector to be in charge of our national herd. The private sector is a business; it is a money-making sector and I think that is why we have these adulterated acaricides you are talking about.  So, can I ask the minister to ensure that we look into this? We should not privatise the importation of the drugs that come into the country for the protection of our animals. We want to export quality meat and quality milk and we know the private sector is not perfect at that. They are interested in money-making and do not have national concerns at heart.

5.23
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Allow me thank the minister for the statement. In the way forward provided, the minister says, MAAIF is engaging National Drug Authority through Ministry of Health to allow importation of vaccines and to make it available. 

I want to appeal to Government to get serious. When it comes to certain issues, we should stop dilly-dallying. Saying we are engaging, when animals are dying, is not being fair. NDA sits in Kampala; Ministry of Agriculture sits in Kampala and Entebbe; Ministry of Health is in Kampala. What engagements are you involved in that up to now you have not got that clearance? 

MR BALYEJJUSA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. The information I want to give to my colleague is that there are areas, especially in the cattle corridor, which are having situations that are equally devastating to the lives of the cattle. For instance, in Buyende District, the situation of Foot and Mouth Disease is exacerbated by the acute shortage of water for drinking for animals.  

Honourable minister, we have valley dams, which the ministry promised to de-silt in the constituency of Budiope East. I am wondering what interventions the ministry has to address that. That is the information I had. Thank you.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, colleague, for the information. Mr Speaker, I was dismayed to hear that Shs 9 billion was returned to the Consolidated Fund when we don’t have drugs and vaccines. We are abrogating our duties by saying it is private individuals or investors who are mandated to import or procure these drugs. I feel this is not fair. 

If at all our predecessors erred in some way, you bring a policy, be it next week, and we amend it, other than keeping on lamenting when we are losing out. Thank you so much. 

5.26
MS BEATRICE MPAIRWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, Minister, for the statement. This statement is almost a lamentation by the minister. For example, he said Rwanda, Tanzania and other countries like Burundi have been able to manage this disease. We know very well that Rwanda is a follower of Uganda - born yesterday. Why is it that the Uganda Government has failed to manage this disease?

Secondly, much of our community in Uganda depends on agriculture and most of us here Members of Parliament are products of agriculture. However, you realise that our Government has not shown commitment to help our communities curb this disease so that they can be able to earn a living. Surprisingly also, the minister said that there is still research going on and that the disease has been here for 100 years. I wonder what kind of research has taken 100 years. 

I think the minister also forgot one important thing that is affecting these animals. This is the swine flu in the piggery sector. In the circumstances, I would like to request that we come up with a strategic plan to help our communities as a way of alleviating poverty. Thank you.

5.28
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Kindly, allow me to also thank the minister for presenting this report. Yes, he was supposed to talk about FMD alone, but he was kind enough to include other diseases. I think the minister has realised that the problem is much bigger than FMD.

The issue of animal disease control in its totality is really a very big problem to this country. I am the vice-chairman of the National Union of Meat Producers. I would like to inform you that we had started exporting meat but because of the problem of diseases, internationally our meat cannot be accepted because it is not consumable by the potential buyers. The way the minister put it shows that he was very careful. I think being a Cabinet minister he did not want to antagonize government. So, as Parliament we need to help him.

One of the issues that we see as farmers is that the animal industry is submerged into the big ministry of MAAIF. I think it is high time this Parliament came up with a resolution to separate these ministries. Imagine the President has come up with an idea of six cows per family. As of now, we have about 12 million heads of cattle without counting the birds, pigs and others. If we get six cows per family, the national herd will really be very big! You cannot run it under another ministry.

Two, on the issue quarantine, I would like to say that our farmers are not happy. I would like to agree with the member who talked about sensitizing farmers –(Member timed out.)

5.32
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the effort that his ministry is putting in place to address the foot and mouth disease. 

On page 2, the minister says that people are sometimes opposed to quarantines. That is true because they usually have reasons. This is sometimes due to the fact that at times when outbreaks occur, the ministry takes long to respond and of course people lose a lot especially those who engage in trade. The other reasons could relate to the few staff on the ground. In my district, for example, there is only one veterinary officer and moving throughout the district is not an easy job.

The minister has told us that this foot and mouth disease can stay dormant in recovered animals for long. In that regard, I would like to find out from the minister whether there is need to have a budget review. With human beings, when a person falls sick and they undergo treatment, the doctor would ask that person to go for a review after sometime. So, I do not know why that is not being done to the animals to stop them from re-infecting themselves or other animals.

On page 5, the minister has talked about the areas that his ministry has mapped and he has listed them. I am wondering why he does not talk about the cattle corridor, because this corridor is equally prone. Whereas we are talking about western Uganda, the rest of the cattle corridor is equally prone to any cattle disease outbreak. I imagine that the minister should have mentioned those places in terms of what he has planned for them. (Member timed out.)

5.34
MS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Allow me to add my voice to the voices of my colleagues in thanking the minister for delivering this report to the House. 

I want to note that the minister has clearly stated that FMD has been around for 100 years. When I continue to read through the report, especially page 1, the minister uses very strong words – “FMD is highly contagious and has serious socio-economic consequences.” He also said that it is an economically devastating disease. These strong statements need to be equated to the action being taken and the plans being drawn.

When you look at the actions and the plans, you realise that they are lacking in many areas. The minister having given us the fact that FMD has been around for the last 100 years is now actually telling us that the vaccine that is available can only ensure immunity for six months. However, when you look at the research areas, you will still see that the minister is only concentrating on tick resistance; there is nothing to do with the FDM virus. I would like to request the minister to advocate for extensive research into a vaccine that has a longer immunity period for the animals. 

Mr Speaker, I also would like to inform this House that apart from failure to export our beef, we are again failing to export our cow horn products. We are trying to advocate for small scale industries in Uganda and one of the ventures we have gone into is making cow horn products, which are quite marketable on the world market. However, today several countries are rejecting our products because of the various diseases we have in our cattle. 

Mr Speaker, I just want to request the minister to ensure more serious action. I also want to add my voice to that of the honourable colleagues that Government comes in to take on this responsibility instead of leaving it in the hands of private dealers. Thank you. 

5.38
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. On page 2, the minister submitted that they bought 460,000 vaccines. This is against the 13,000,000 cows in Uganda. This is abnormal in a normal situation. 

On page 3, the minister admits that the vaccines received were used up and he applied for a supplementary. This is also terrible. I think what the minister should have told us is that his so-called ministry is a mere department in the ministry and he is suppressed; he has no funds to allow him to plan. He is just being reactive – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is not a so-called ministry; it is a ministry.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: The ministry has no budget to allow him to plan and be proactive. He is just really being reactive. We cannot go on like this. This is abnormal. We are fire-fighting and this is not acceptable at all. We cannot allow to be controlled by nature. Man should be able to control nature. By being reactive every time, we are just being controlled by nature and that should not be acceptable. 

Mr Speaker, you are aware of the importance of cows, and I want to appeal to all members that let us support the minister to have a budget instead of depending mostly on supplementaries. We should give him enough funds to be able to sufficiently and routinely vaccinate cows every six months as he has stated, like other countries are doing. This will be able to control diseases. 

I support what you said, that slaughter houses should be scattered all over the country where the cows are. This is double-edged. First of all, it will control diseases and secondly, it will create employment for our people. I have been working on these slaughter houses and if it can be supported, it will control diseases and it will create employment for our people in the rural areas and it will clean this city. The city is terrible because of the stench that comes from these abattoirs. Therefore, I support what the minister said but – (Member timed out.)

5.41
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. I know it is difficult for you to really bite the finger that feeds you, but on this one, this government should give priority to the sectors that really benefit and will generate income for this country. Every year, the bulk of the budget goes to roads, energy, education, defence; list them. We are crying about health and agriculture. 

A healthy nation would work for itself and it would save people from the burden of dependence. Even we would be relived of the stress. So, it is a question of funding for this ministry. You have to really bring a plan before you begin even asking for funding, and your activities should match with the funds. Otherwise, we cannot continue having the dismal percentage going to the Ministry of Agriculture where the majority of the country would benefit from. 

This issue of abattoirs that you are talking about is a very good issue, if they were upcountry away from the madness of the city. However, if you went to every district represented in this House and you visited even one slaughter house, tomorrow we would not be eating meat because they are in a deplorable situation. How do you intend to see that we have abattoirs upcountry when even the funding is caught up in traffic somewhere? What do we do in this situation?

There is the issue of quarantine. You declare quarantines and then people sit with their animals at home. What do we expect the locals to do? Do you know what they are doing in Kaberamaido? They are slaughtering cows and selling it in buveeras of half kilos and they measure with their hands. It is as bad as that. They call them poison or aspirin, and people are eating meat and they are selling off cows outside the town. So, how will you call a quarantine? You are not treating the animals; you are not giving any panadol to the cows. What do we do with our locals?

There is this issue of the environmental police. We passed a budget in this House last financial year for the environmental police. Up to now as we speak, I do not know how many we have and what they are doing because dumping of soil in the wetlands has continued. They have continued cutting our trees. How will these environmental police function if even the traffic police we have are trying their best, but you know what Kitu Kidogo means to the community –(Member timed out.)

5.44
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity that you have given me. Kapchorwa is a mountainous district. The temperatures some years back were very low and we used not to hear of East Coast fever. I want to inform the minister that right now, because of climate change, many animals in Kapchorwa are dying of East Coast fever. 

Because of shortage of land, most farmers have resorted to keeping few animals in their homesteads. We have resorted to exotic animals, which are very vulnerable to East Coast fever. Our main problem is vaccines. I have never seen the ministry sending any vaccines to Kapchorwa. We get our vaccines from Kenya and normally, we get them at a very high price. So, I call upon Government to look into the issue of Kapchorwa because really losing an exotic animal is not something small - (Interruption)

MR KIYINGI BBOSA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. The information I have is in line with the need for the vaccines. For 100 years, we have suffered this much. Why don’t we think about having research done so that we can have the vaccines manufactured here in Uganda, so that we do not depend on imports? That is the information I have. Thank you. 

MS CHEMUTAI: Thank you for that information. I would like also to add that some years back, we used to have routine dipping of animals. Some cattle dips were established in every sub county and this used to help us so much. I wish the government would revamp that. (Interruption)

MS AKELLO: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I want to give you is about routine animal dipping. Before our animals in Acholi were eaten by the NRM and raided by our good neighbours in Karamoja, we used to see animal dips in almost every sub county. I am really wondering what happened to this facility here. The minister should think about getting us back to those facilities.

MS CHEMUTAI: Thank you for that information. I also request the government to supply the insecticides at subsidised prices to all the districts. Thank you.

5.48
MR FOX ODOI (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I promise I will not spend more than two minutes. 

The honourable minister has come to this House and basically said he has a national stock of about 41 million domestic cloven-hoofed animals that are at risk of diseases. They are broken down as follows: 13 million cows; 14 million goats; 4.5 million sheep; 10 million swine. What does he have to protect these animals against disease outbreak? Four hundred and sixty thousand vials of vaccines. 

He has also told us to apply this vaccination two times a year to a single animal. That basically means that he has capacity to protect only 230,000 animals in a complete 12-month period. Two hundred and thirty thousand from a big stock of 41 million - what are we talking about here? We are talking about three or four small farms in my part of the world. 

This is a minister who needs our assistance. We must take a position that we must invest money in the protection of these animals. We must put our money where our mouth is. This country for a long time has depended on agriculture for purposes of feeding our own people and earning money. So, you have an economy that is still subsistent because if you cannot export our animal produce, we shall only use them for purposes of subsistence.

We have a President who is daily giving out animals, instructing NAADS to give out sheep, goats and swine but after giving them to the farmers, you cannot protect them. So, what are you doing? You are only wasting time. I got up to say we must stop wasting time, which is what we are doing now. I thank you.

5.48
MR AMOS MANDERA (NRM, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Although there are some gaps being mentioned, allow me to take this opportunity to thank the minister. First of all, he is among the best ministers who always goes down to the field and interacts with farmers. There are some ministers even if they are called upon by local leaders or MPs to go down to the field, they just delegate. The other day we were in Soroti, we met this honourable minister in Soroti; when we were in Hoima, we met him in the field and the other day he was in Rakai. So, I must thank the minister for the efforts put in.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, allow me to comment on the insecurity of the extension workers. Some years back, we had restructuring and the production staff expected also to undergo the same but up to now they do not know their fate. Some time back, His Excellency the President tried to discourage the service providers under NAADS; he said the work must be taken over by the extension staff. Up to now, nothing has taken place. So, this may bring about the reluctance of extension staff to work effectively. 

I propose that the ministry be allocated more funds to sensitise the farmers because we realised some farmers do not vaccinate their animals because of the negative attitude they have. At one time, some animals had their tails chopped off and this prompted some farmers to desist from vaccinating their animals. So, I suggest that we allocate more funds such that the ministry can sensitise farmers on vaccination.

I also suggest that we empower the sub counties to come up with by-laws to penalise those who refuse to vaccinate the animals deliberately. Like the minister said, the disease has been in the country for many years and being a viral disease, it is very hard to control. (Member timed out)

5.54
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Uganda in the past had the best organised veterinary extension services. The disease situation was under control. So, what happened? Things have gone on deteriorating as we see. We actually need to reorganise ourselves. We may do a lot of talking but as long as we do not agree that there is a problem, and we decide to sit under a tree and see how we have moved from the past and see where a mistake has happened and then decide how to do corrective measures, we may have to keep lamenting.

The animal diseases in Uganda are manageable for as long as we know what to do and we have the requirements at hand. I have said that Uganda had a well organised veterinary service. It was well facilitated. Any disease incident would immediately be managed; it would not be given a chance to proceed anywhere. We know what was happening. The problem is, why aren’t we doing what was being done before?

This Parliament passed the recommendation by the committee on agriculture that there must be an emergency disease control fund in the ministry so that whenever a disease has been cited, the ministry should move. This fund has never been established. Ministry of Finance I think does not want to listen to what Parliament proposes. That is why the minister will always come up here and ask to be helped, and by the way it is Parliament that has been helping the ministry. Whenever there is a problem, the ministry asks -(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, some of our own members have also lost cattle. The hon. Yaguma has lost 17 cows and he is grieving in the House. So, honourable minister, when you make these responses, be sensitive to the concerns of the members, including the hon. Yaguma.
   
5.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First and foremost, we are not lamenting. I am only explaining the circumstances and what we are trying to do. 

Secondly, I would like members to look at farming as a business. If you expect everything from Government, then we shall work for farmers alone. If you look at my paper, there is what we refer to as “listed diseases”. These listed diseases are those which we classify as epidemic, which Government should deal with.
 
When it comes to FMD, we have not had sufficient funds to deal with the disease effectively but we also have challenges, which I highlighted here. We need to share them with you, especially the challenge of people resisting quarantine restrictions. 

Hon. Abia talked about shortage of funds. There have not been enough funds not only for the agriculture sector but also for many sectors. As I mentioned, we shall deal with this when we have enough money.   
 
Hon. Naomi Kabasharira raised a serious issue about what should be done in a situation where there is quarantine for six months since animal products are not being sold and parents have no school fees. This is quite a problem because the disease is viral and the only way to control it is restriction and vaccination. We apply all those. When you open up and take animals out of quarantine, you spread diseases and that is how the problems come.   

As for hon. Sempijja, who is also a prominent farmer, one of the challenges we have is that some farmers are the ones causing problems. In fact, we do not need all the money to vaccinate against FMD. We need just enough money to ring-vaccinate –(Interjections)- Can I be protected, Mr Speaker. What is true is that under ideal conditions, we should be vaccinating the whole herd but in the circumstances where we are, we need enough vaccines to deal with the affected areas, to create zones. 

The following are the interventions we are going to make: we are working with the Uganda Wildlife Authority where we have written a project involving some of our farmers including hon. Sempijja. The ministry is proposing to fence off national parks because they are reservoirs. They have done it in Botswana and in other countries. So, we would like to make a reservoir along the national parks. We want to continuously vaccinate areas near these high risk areas so that we can create a buffer zone.
 
As for the East Coast fever; during the research for acaracides, people were mixing FMD and ECF. Foot and mouth disease is known and it has now been brought to the attention of the World Animal Health Organisation and is being funded by the UN. The UN is researching to get rid of FMD out of this world like we have done for Rinderpest. So, it is no longer a matter for Uganda alone. 

For ECF, we have zoned the country and we are carrying out research to find out which ticks are responding to which drugs, so that we can recommend to farmers which acaracides to use per specific area. 

It is not true that I have not mentioned anything about the cattle corridors. All the districts mentioned are in the cattle corridor. It is also not true that I have neglected Karamoja. I have personally been to Amudat. Honourable members, when I was there you were not there; I delivered acaracides to deal with Tsetse flies and ticks and some of your colleagues took these vaccines. 

The plans we have for Moroto – It is very unfortunate that Karamoja region, which has received affirmative action, is the one raising this issue. Most of the vaccines that other farmers are buying were given free of charge as affirmative action in Karamoja and eastern Uganda, including parts of northern Uganda. This was on account of the effects of the war. So, we are not leaving out any district, even those which are not in the cattle corridor. We are effectively dealing with animal husbandry.
 
Those who raised the issue of extension services, I agree with you that we made a mistake but Government has reversed it. We are merging extension with service providers because the assumption that farmers would demand for services was wrong. So, we are now on course and we have worked very well with some members of the agriculture committee. Government is embracing the revival of a serious extension service to deal with this problem. 

Hon. Fred Mwesigye is referring to us as a department. I really have no comment on that. What I can say is that we are educating farmers and strengthening farmer groups to deal with this problem.

The issue of understaffing is also correct. It was a mistake arising out of an assumption by privatising agricultural services. However, recent research and discovery by Government shows that we need to have extension services –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, I need protection from hon. Nambooze. (Laughter)

With those few remarks, I would like to thank honourable members for raising issues. Those I have not answered will be responded to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we made an agreement that during this one month of fasting for our Muslim colleagues, we would end by 6.00 O’clock. We had also pushed the other matters of national importance towards the end of the sitting. I have two which I have recorded. The hon. Mawanda and the honourable member for Luuka District have some short statements for information and then we conclude this sitting.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence; the Committee of National Economy has very sensitive -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will deal with that tomorrow, Mr Chairman.

MR MUKITALE: Are we are sitting tomorrow?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, we are sitting.

MR MUKITALE: When we are burying?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are sitting tomorrow. That is what we have discussed and agreed.

6.07
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Now that the Minister of State for Finance is around, I would like to seek clarification from him. Yesterday, the Minister in charge of Regional Co-operation made a statement on the Floor of Parliament that the campaigns for the post of Secretary General for OIC are going on very well. However, according to information I have, we have not yet paid our subscription and there is no way we can continue with our campaigns when we have not paid up. So, can the Minister of Finance clarify to us whether the payment has been made or not. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Leader of Government Business, please pass on this particular request. The statement was made here yesterday that everything was in order but it turns out that these subscriptions have not been paid, which affects our candidature. Please raise that with the concerned.

6.08
MS EVELYN KABUULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the Minister of Education on a matter of national concern regarding the search process for the Vice-Chancellor of Makerere University.

In 2009, the Minister of State for Higher Education halted the search process and directed that the acting vice-chancellor be put in place by the council. In 2012, the current Minister of Education directed that the search process goes on, but the Solicitor-General, on 13th May this year, directed that the candidates should not include the sitting members. This meant the acting vice-chancellor and deputy should not be candidates;  if they also wanted to be candidates, they would have to step down.

Currently, we have seven candidates including the current acting vice-chancellor. I understand there is a petition by the candidates to the secretary for the search committee to halt the search process. So, I would like clarification from the Ministry of Education as to what the situation is, because we might be wasting taxpayers’ money to continue with the search process yet we might have a court case by the rest of the candidates. This is clarification sought from the Ministry of Education.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, in the absence of the Minister of Education, Leader of Government Business, if you have some response -

GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, I will just refer the matter to the Minister of Education. It is a technical matter and I may not indulge in that, so I will convey the concerns to the minister who has to come and reply tomorrow since we are sitting.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Because this matter has been in the press almost everyday we need to find a way of helping people take decisions.

6.10
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last week on the Floor of the House, I tried to revive the demand that this House gets true information about news that Government is intending to sell off Uganda Museum and the land attached to it. The minister in charge did not give us any answer but only denied the news, saying that it was not true. Today, the Observer newspaper on its front page has disclosed that there are arrangements for the Government of Uganda to sell Uganda Museum land including Kitante School so that they can establish the East African Trade Centre.

Uganda Museum means a great deal to the people of Uganda. It is the national cultural heritage. It is also a UNESCO cultural centre, protected internationally. So we are worried that the government is reluctant to produce this information up to now. We would like to be informed on what is happening.

Finally, I have taken trouble to dig through the information related to the Hansard of 16th March this year. I rose up on the Floor of the House to seek to know why up to now the Government of Uganda has not produced reports pertaining to the fires that gutted important places like Kasubi Tombs, Budo Junior, Kibwetere Church etc. The honourable government ministers “irresponsible” have kept mum and they have never come put to tell us what is happening. 

As if that was not enough, I would like to quote specifically the contents of what the Rt Hon. Prime Minister said when I rose up to seek for this information. He said - and this was the Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi: “I think the Ministry of Internal Affairs should be responsible. However, I will take it up myself to make sure that the reports are produced.” Since that statement, we have not received anything. Is Government still in charge? Why don’t we get the reports? Public money was spent on those inquiries and you are keeping quiet; what are you up to? We need the reports now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Leader of Government Business, you will recall that these matters were raised and the issue of whether the sale of the museum was a rumour or not did not receive a formal statement from the ministry. Now that it keeps popping up, to put this matter to finally rest, we will ask for a statement from the Minister in charge of Tourism to explain to the House so that these rumours are dispelled.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just rose to seek some guidance because on either Monday or Tuesday it was resolved that there would be no sitting tomorrow since we are going for the burial of our fallen colleague. Did I hear you say we are meeting tomorrow?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was going to come to that. We had a meeting just before I came to the House consulting with the Speaker and everybody because there is a lot of business. We can also sit here together in fellowship with the people who will go for the burial. Those of us who can stay can do so. The Speaker will be there herself, so she has asked me to stay since there is a lot of business to be transacted. 

Let the House go on and we keep in memory what is going on there -(Interjections)- Please, that is what we discussed and those were my instructions and my responsibility now is to adjourn the House.

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, Parliament in its own wisdom has provided two vehicles tomorrow for members to travel for burial. It is a requirement that when you are not present in this House or you want to go to attend to other business other than the business of this House, you should seek leave of the Speaker. Are you trying to tell us, therefore, that for those of us who would like to travel tomorrow we should write to you this evening seeking permission to travel tomorrow? 

Secondly, is it not self-defeating that with the provision of transport by this institution for members to go for burial, we turn around and again encourage members to stay here for business? Is that correct?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, these are not my instructions. We had a meeting before I came to the House. The two buses provided cannot take 386 Members of Parliament. It is also certain that not all the Members of Parliament will be in Katakwi tomorrow. I was requested by the Speaker to stay and conduct business tomorrow. Those were my instructions. So, this House stands adjourned to tomorrow, 2.00 o’clock.

(The House rose at 6.17 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 26 July 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)  

